O children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by means of which its conclusion has been reached through me and through whose expositions and through whose descriptions to me it has become clear that you will achieve the object of this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, namely surgery.
For the operation with the hand is almost unknown in our region and in our time, having been completely deprived of its science and its art has decayed; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they have altered and have led to error and confusion, so that the understanding of it is obscured and its power diminished.
And it has been revealed to me that I shall revive it by arranging this treatise in the following manner: according to the way of exposition and description and abbreviation; and so that we may come to an understanding of the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the art as they are through addition of description, and also through preparation, which is necessary.
The reason why a good artist is not found in our time who can use his hand is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was known to Galen, who understood the members of animals and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and the number of these, and the course of them.
And because of this, Hippocrates says that his name is great, although he was small in stature, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not educated in what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error and cause men to die, as I have seen many such people do, for some of them are trained in this science but forget it and do not follow its precepts.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out and the woman died in his arms.
And I saw another doctor who was called to a man who had a stone in his bladder, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And I called upon him to extract it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he set a broken bone in the thigh of a black man; and through his ignorance, the doctor extracted the broken bone above the plague with powdery substances and bound it with strong binding, and did not leave any opening for exhalation.
And then he died according to his desire, and then he was buried, and then he was allowed to lie for several days, and command was given that he be disentombed; and they found the thigh and leg swollen with an abscess, and it came to perdition.
And I was called to him, and I made arrangements to disentomb him, and tranquillity was achieved and he was cured of his pains.
But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it and the corruption did not cease to spread in the member until the man died.
And I saw another doctor who opened a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated after several days, so that the malice of the ulcer increased through the lord of the house.
The reason for this is that the black cautery is pure of melancholic humour, so it does not allow anything to come to it except from a member which suffers from it.
And because of this, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one in which the operation is associated with health, and another in which there is danger in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already mentioned this in every place in this book where there is error and fear, so that it is necessary for you to be careful about this and leave it alone, so that the foolish may not stumble upon it and dishonour you.
And now take up your weapons with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with gentleness and firmness.
And use the best way through the grace of God to bring about health and glorious success, and vanquish terrible diseases of difficult cure, and put away your fears of that which causes you terror, so that apprehension in your faith and in your name does not overcome you: for thus shall there remain to your glory, and more beyond the world and into eternity to your sanctities.
Galen already said in some of his writings: does not heal diseases badly, for bad doctors are not named.”
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered from the head, on the forms of the instruments and on the tools of cauteries, and about what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on cautery and piercing, and about cupping, and about plagues, and about extraction of thorns and similar things, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The fifth chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on cure of dislocation and of similar things; a chapter ordered from the head, on the forms of the instruments.
First I will say about the qualities of the materials for cauterization and the damage it can do, and in what conditions cauterization is prohibited.
Therefore I say that the discussion of the qualities of the materials for cauterization and the damage it can do is a long and prolix subject, subtle in its science and secret in its nature; many wise people have spoken about it at length and disagreed on it, and I will be content with a little of their words, fearing to be too verbose.
And therefore I say that cauterization generally affects all parts of the body universally, whether they are made of matter or not, except for two parts which are parts without matter.
In the dry and cold body made of matter there is disagreement; some say that cauterization benefits it, while others disagree and say that cauterization is not convenient for a malady which is due to quality and dryness, because fire has the qualities of heat and dryness, and cauterizing such a malady makes it worse.
And he disagrees with him who says the contrary, that cauterization benefits all cold and dry maladies in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you will find the body of man to be wetter.
And I say this according to experience, which I have observed many times myself.
But nevertheless it is not enough just to say this, but one must also have experience in the subject of cauterization through long practice, and know the diversity of men's natures and the dispositions of their maladies, as well as their causes and the influences of time upon them.
But in the other diseases there should be no fear, and especially in moist and hot maladies, for all doctors have agreed on these, and they do not disagree on the benefit of cauterization in them.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing by cauterization with fire, and its goodness, is this: cauterization with a burning medicine is better than cauterization with hot fire, because fire is simple, and its action does not reach any other member except the one which is cauterized, and it does not affect another member which is next to it unless by a little damage.
But the action of a burning medicine reaches into other members near it and makes a difficult disease come about in them and brings about great harm.
But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless it is allowed to be excessive. And it is known to us through experience and long study of this art that the truth of the causes is demonstrated philosophically, which would be acute in your minds if it were not for the length of my words.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which cauterization should be done, and they pause, deeming the best time to be in spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient in all times, for the accidental damage caused by time is submerged in the benefit of what is brought about by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary wounds, severe and festering, which do not tolerate delay for fear of greater harm coming from them.
And let not your minds doubt this, O sons, for that is not believed except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is a consequence of that malady which is healed by cauterization that it does not return with every passing time.
And the cause is not as they think it is; for cauterization is only in the place of medicine which alters the nature and dries up the moisture which causes pain.
But cauterization has an excess of virtue over medicine by virtue of the excellence and goodness of its action, and the greatness of him who does it.
And it is possible that the malady may return at some time, according to the nature of the patient and the location of the malady, and the virtue of cauterization, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses in him, and what comes upon him through food and similar causes; but if the malady in which cauterization was performed is a subtle malady in a part with few excesses and moisture, like toothache or its like, it is possible that the pain will not return in that part, although this may happen in other parts.
And it is a vulgar saying that cauterization is the last resort of medicine; and it is a direct saying, not in the sense that they understand it, for they believe that there is no cure which benefits through medicine or any other cause except cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention of cauterization being the last resort of medicine is only when we have administered other methods of curing in some maladies, and those medicines did not confer it, but at the end of the cure we administer cauterization, and it benefits that. And so from here on, let cauterization not be the last resort of medicine according to the understanding of the vulgar and foolish doctors.
And they said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the location of cauterization does not matter, except when it is absolutely true; for I have already proved and shown that this is not true, for it only matters in some bodies and not others, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, as they say; but nevertheless when you do cauterization with fire with gold, it is not clear to you, for it is heated according to the amount you desire by the heat of the gold, and when you put fire upon it some plates are made so that the artisan can control the heat.
And for this reason cauterization with iron should be done more gently and more closely according to the correctness of its action.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within the feet, so that if anyone asks about it, we will know what to say about it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers moisture and coldness on the serval accident of which there are two causes; it is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called rhinitis, of the head to the parts of the ears and of the eyes, and of sleep, and of toothache, and of the gullet, and universally of all maladies that come from coldness, like paralysis, stroke, and their likes in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that first you should command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine for a cleansing of the head, for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
And then command that he have his head shaved with a razor, and let him lie between your knees on a heated bed, and let him rest his hands upon his feet.
And then place the sole of your palm near the top of their nose between your fingertips. But when you reach the middle part of that location, mark it with a tent and then ignite an olive-oil cautery, which has this form:
And then place that on the marked location, in such a way that it descents, with your hand being gradually constricted, and you keep revolving it.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the location, and if you see any amount of bone being uncovered, as much as a grain of err, then lift your hand, and if not return your hand with that iron, with another one, if it is cold, within so that it can be seen by the bone that I have told you about.
And then take a little bit of salt and dissolve it on the location and let it for three days.
And then place over it a bandage soaked in vinegar and leave that over it until the fire's scar is destroyed. And then treat the location with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
And they say that as much as the wound opens up, so much the better, because it is more healthy and healing.
And they said that among them that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held so that some part of the thickness of the bone is burnt.
And then it should be cut that which is attached to the bone, and then it should be treated.
And others said that the cautery should reach the end, so that it burns strongly into the bone until the bone melts, and this is the form of the small alpecat in size: And they estimate from that location to breathe out the vapor of the head.
And let the wound be open for a long time, and then treat it so that it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in some men according to a way of fear; and let that be, it is better for health when it is, because the head is deprived of feeling due to solution of continuity in it, and especially when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
And the first type of cautery is more safe and better for me; and using that, and with that action, it is healthier.
Chapter according to.
Of cauterization of the head.
When in every case chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the head, and it is prolonged in the patient, and he uses scarification and cupping, and caput purges, and poultices, and fomentations, and cataplasms, and similar things, and especially if he has been cauterized with a cautery which does not help him for any of those causes, then consider that if the patient' head is of strong constitution by nature; and it is not fragile, and finds great pain from frequent heat, then cauterize it with another cautery after that one a little. And then cauterize that on the crown of his head with a cautery so that the tendon is cut. The tendon is cut and the amount that we have estimated is uncovered, and cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head in the location which is called the vein — and it is that location in which the cupping-glass is applied. And loosen your hand in that way and do not uncover the bone because with that the patient feels much greater pain than from any other cauterizations of the head.
And I will show you this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which they cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form:
Chapter third.
Of cauterization of recent not-ancient wound.
When suddenly in the front part of the head there is a dull pain, or pain extends into the eye, let the head be evacuated with cleansing medicines, and let the other treatment which I have described in the previous chapters be administered; and if this does not help, cauterization of that location can be performed in two ways: either by cauterization with an acute medicine burning, or by iron.
But the cauterization with an acute medicine burning is that you take a piece of wool, and you scorch it and apply the ends of it to both sides of the head. And then cut the location of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it penetrates below the tendon and is hidden.
And then press on it with a bandage so that there is strong constriction, and leave it in place for the space of three hours; and then loosen the bandage and treat it with an ointment that I will describe later, and leave the wound uncovered for two or three days, and then place a bandage over it which has been soaked in vinegar so that the location feels heat.
And then treat that with an ointment so that it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise of burning medicines.
But the cauterization with iron according to this way: ignite a cautery, of which this is the form:
and it is called close-nailed, for the head of it is thus with a shape of a nail in which there is some curvature and in the middle part of it there is a small protuberance.
And then place it on the location of the pain and rotate your hand — so that the arteriol which is underneath is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
And if the amount of it that is burnt by the thickness of the tendon as much as the width of the finger, and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burnt which is underneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then wet the area with salt water and place that on the location, and leave it for three days; and then place a bandage moistened in vinegar, and then treat it with an ointment so that it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the end of the scalpel according to cauterization, and beware of cutting of artery in this recent not-ancient wound.
Chapter fourth.
Of cauterization of ancient wound.
When you are treating a wound with what we have said about the treatment beforehand, and what we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the disease does not suffice to it which we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then whenever you ignite the cautery scalpel so that it becomes white, mark over the location of the pain with a line of length of which is the width of the finger, or however much; and loosening your hand by a little way and rotating it you penetrate the artery underneath and go inside the bone.
However it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jaw which is bitten due to chewing and that the nerve underneath is not burned and that there is no spasm.
And if it is on the care and guarding of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is unskilled; and let the operation be performed at the beginning.
And you will come to remember the regimen of the accidental flow of blood from the artery according to your own way, in your own place for this free.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerating it, cauterize him in the middle of his head as we have described before, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with a two-pointed cautery, this is a better cauterization and it confers more power.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear from inflammation and it is treated with caustic substances and with the other cure that has been mentioned in the division, and if the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called 'punta', of which this is its form:
And the pointed part is first ignited and then passed over all of the ear as it rotates, or around any part that hurts. Pass the cautery from the root of the ear slowly and little by little so that you feel it heating up the place with touch.
And if the cautery is made in both ears and it helps, then cure the places inside until they are healed.
Chapter 6.
On the cauterization of torture.
Torture which is cured with cauterization and is not just from the humors that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterizing the humor which comes from dryness or from nerve spasm.
When you cure that type of torture with hot irons and bloodletting and poultices, and your cure does not work, then cover the patient's body with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below his temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for softening does not come except to the part that is healed.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the outer part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and another at the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger's nail. And place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the half of the tip of the codine is burnt away.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of scalpel whose shape is like a table. But it is better to make it a little finer, and cover its superficial roughness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is before processed until it is healed.
Chapter 7.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with that which we have said and your medicine does not work and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said before; and with cautery in the neck. And the manner of the cauterization is done according to what is above said.
And he has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is better later; and then let him be cured with that which processes.
Chapter 8.
On the cauterization of oblivion caused by phlegm.
Give the patient in the beginning large hot irons and purging pills as a serving servant.
And then scrape all of the patient' head and place on his neck an ointment of cedar described in the treatise on ointments.
And give that some times, for that is the manner of cauterization. And do that according to the order which I have said before.
And if he is healed by those, then it is good; and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the highest part of his head down to the lowest part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a fingernail, and then cure the cautery with that which it processes.
But if you see an increase and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cautery in the middle of his head; and if you see a greater increase, then cauterize him over both horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to its given shape.
Chapter 9.
On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the whole body.
Give the patient a purging of the head with hot irons and with that which we have said; and then scrape his head, and then cauterize him with cautery in the middle of his head, and with cautery on all the horns of his head, and with cautery on the back part of his neck, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of his neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body's parasites and they tolerate it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, and finally with cautery until he feels the burning of the tip of the cautery, and lift up your hand. And then cure that until it is healed; and let this be the cautery olive-colored.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic should not be cauterized except that epilepsy is through phlegm.
And therefore, when you cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have described in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if he is an infant who does not suffer medicines, then administer healing poultices and masticators made by the servant cleansing, before that for several days with the benefit of foods.
And then scrape the head of him; and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of his head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back part of his head, and over each horn of his head he should be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said, in having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
And let the cautery be olive-colored according to what is before said.
But if he is an infant, then place the cautery thinly according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is cold, then give him something that cleanses his brain according to what has been said before in the division.
And then scrape the head of him; and then make a decently made bandage of linen and place that on his head, and then place your hand over it.
And let the patient be seated and have his body held upright.
And then give him a poultice; and it is worthy of being rubbed by an old sheep. And warm that over the fire by a gradual heating to a measured temperature, which the patient can bear when it is applied to him. And apply that in the middle of the head, in the circle, and let it be rubbed in until it is absorbed.
And do this to the patient once a week, with the other treatment continuing until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small punctures according to the nature of the malady, but have your hand ready with a cautery iron like this: this is a special kind of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
Then apply that plaster, soaked in wine or in grease from suet.
Chapter 12.
Of cauterization with water descending into the eye.
When you have discovered the beginning of water in the eye from the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink which will cleanse his head, and guard against all moisture.
And let him sweat in a bath for several days.
Then order him to wash his head and cauterize that in the middle of the head; and cauterize that with two cauteries over the temples if it is the beginning of water in both eyes, or on one side if it is just one eye.
Puncture with a cautery all the veins and small vessels which are beneath the eyebrow; and let the cauteries be in that length at the width of the temples.
And beware of bleeding when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is available to you.
And he will come with wisdom which is in extraction of the small vessels and with incision of those and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized under two bones with two recently produced cauteries.
Chapter 13.
Of cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the eyes are ancient habitually and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous moistness, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water coming into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries over the temples, and with two cauteries under two bones. And if there is an indication of addition, then cauterize that in every part of the lid of the eye over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of cauterization of nose fetor.
When you treat him with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not benefit him, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head and cauterize that with a cautery made of olive oil. Then cauterize that with a cautery made of cloves with two cauteries over the two eyebrows below the hair, a little one.
And beware of the small vessel so that you do not scorch it.
And here is the form of the cautery made with cloves:
Chapter 15.
Of cauterization for softening of eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or by moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and here is its form:
And if you wish, cauterize that over the two eyebrows a little one with two cauteries all along it, and let them be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much with your hand holding the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter 16.
Of cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs are turned to the inside and close the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are turned to the inside so that they close the eye, then there is cauterization according to two manners, either cauterization with fire or cauterization with a medicine which burns.
If cauterization is with fire, order the patient to look down at that which he sees his hairs, so that they are prolonged and curled; and if it closes it, then you tighten the eye with a bandage so that it does not weep while the hairs grow.
Then when they are born and curled, then place the head of the patient into the water, and properly mark over the eyelid of the eyes with a tent, with a mark which is according to the shape of a dead leaf, and let that be the beginning of the mark close to the hairs.
Then apply a poultice soaked in white vinegar or in poultice of poppies on the eye.
Then ignite the cautery, of which here is its form:
Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in many turns, until all the surface of the vein is burnt which is as if it were a leaf of myrrh, all apparently apparent.
And the sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it elevated from the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and lay him for three days, then apply a poultice with suet on it until the scar is healed. Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
But if it returns for some cause and the eyelid is softened, then do another cautery over that all again as you have done at first.
But if the hairs are under the eyelid, then cauterize that so that it is elevated to its natural location and is curled and the hairs do not close the eye.
But the cautery with medicine which burns is that you order the patient to look at the hairs so that they are prolonged and curled, and then let there be made of linen cloth the shape of a leaf of myrrh.
Then take of soap congealed and of quicklime half an ounce. And: Take that and mix it, and stir those ingredients together, and make that into an ointment so that it is not cold; then spread that over the linen which is made as said with the shape of a leaf of myrrh, and apply that on one eye or both; then place underneath the eye a poultice soaked in white vinegar, and let the head of the patient be turned to the side.
And place that on the medicine and press it a little, but do not weep while the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is in him as with fire.
And therefore when you perceive that the biting has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash it with water; then consider if there is any change in the eyelid which was washed after it was bitten, or whether the cautery was on the location where the medicine did not take effect and did not darken, for then let this be, and tighten the eye.
Then apply a poultice with suet on it until the vein of the compression is eradicated, and treat that with ointment of dafinikon or another so that it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, during your operation, to be vigilant and ensure that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes soft in a few days due to a pustule, then reapply your medicine to that spot where the eyelid became soft, and do so as you did at first, and gradually draw it inward until it is healed.
And this is the formula for myrrh.
And know that men's eyes are different in size and shape, so you must adjust your incision accordingly.
And do not hide the path of rectitude from one who is taught in this craft.
Chapter XVII.
Of cautery for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you are treating a fistula and have followed what we have said in the sections on diseases and do not trust your treatment, then you must cauterize it as follows: instruct the patient to hold his head steady, and have someone else hold his head in such a way that he does not move or shake his head.
Then place cotton wool soaked in honey or in the pulp of poppies over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the formula:
Which should be hollow, like a reed or a quill pen, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it can be drawn out from the other end. And if you want, it can exit in the same way as it entered.
However, the hollow one is better suited for your purpose.
And then press the fistula if it is open and draw out from it pus and exudate to dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus.
And then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, over the eye, holding your hand a little away from the cautery so that it does not move or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery at the corner of the eye and scorch it there.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery you feel warmth enter into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more as needed; and leave it there for three days, and then place cotton wool over it and gradually draw it inward until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then place a corrosive medicine over the open wound so that the bone is exposed and scrape away at it according to what is described in that chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some people say: enter into the fistula and pierce it, then place in that wound molten lead; and hold your hand steady so that the patient does not move and the molten lead does not enter the eye of the patient; and see to it that you pause over the eye of the patient cotton wool soaked in honey or water, for the lead will attach itself to the fistula and heal it with a marvelously effective cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to insert a trocar into the nostril and draw out the fistula to the nose according to its proper location.
Chapter XVIII.
Of cauterizing the slit of the nose.
Many times slits occur in the lips and especially in children's lips.
So when you are treating those slits according to what we have said in the sections and your treatment does not work, then ignite a small cautery knife as follows:
And let its shape be according to the thinness of a small blade.
Then place it carefully into those slits so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the slits.
And then heal that with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an abscess and then swelling, and then it bursts and then becomes old, and the swelling goes away and a fistula is made, and if you are treating that and your treatment does not work, then see to it that you ignite cauteries according to how much has been received in the fistula, and then place that ignited over the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron ignited reaches the bottom of it, and do this once or twice; and then heal that with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
And so if the pus has been drained and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and scrape away rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
Of cauterizing teeth and of softening ulcers.
When ulcers are softened by moisture and the teeth are shaken, and you treat those with medicines and your treatment does not work, then have the patient hold his head still, and ignite the cautery whose shape will come next, in such a way that you place the cotton wool over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery firmly, and hold your hand a little away so that the patient feels the heat of the fire on the root of the tooth from which the cautery is coming.
And then lift up your hand and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, for the shaken tooth is firmed up and the softened gum strengthened and the corrupted moisture dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterizing toothache.
When toothache is from coldness, or in it is swollen or decayed, or your treatment with medicine does not work, then cauterize that in two ways: either cauterize it with cow' hide or fire.
Cauterizing with cowhide is that you take cowhide and soak it in cow' s dung, and then take a piece of it and wrap it around the end of the thread, and then immerse that in hot dung and place it over the painful tooth firmly until it is numbed.
And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, soak wool or thread in the dung, and place that over the painful tooth, and place the ignited iron over it so that the iron reaches the bottom of its cavity.
But cauterizing with fire is that you take a piece of iron or of steel and let it be in the heart of the fire until some thickness is formed there and the heat does not reach the patient' s mouth.
And then ignite the cautery whose shape will come, and place it over the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is numbed; and do this several times because the pain will be numbed for a while or on that day or on another day.
And see to it that because of the cautery the patient fills his mouth with good breath and holds it for an hour, then spit it out; and this is the way of cauterization.
And cauterize with heat to the limit of what you are able.
This is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22:
Of cauterization of hernia.
When hernia is caused by phlegm and cold humors that are not easily healed through digestion of medicines, and you see the digestion of these slowly, then you should light the cautery according to its shape, having two ends open so that smoke comes out from one end and enters into the hernia at the other end.
And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the hernia, and then let it be for three days and place a cotton pad soaked in vinegar over it until what the fire has burnt is healed.
Then treat this with ointment and bandages and swabs until it is healed.
Chapter 23:
Of cauterization of throat and constriction of voice.
When humidity comes upon the larynx of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that according to the root of the glottis in the depressed place.
And beware that you do not bring the cautery to the glottis nor burn it from its corde, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery according to the junction of the throat at the last vertebra of it. And let the cautery for this be a nail, following the previous manner.
Then treat that with what has been said before until it is healed.
Chapter 24:
Of cauterization of illness in the lung and of cough.
When cough and illness in the lung are caused by cold humors that infiltrate, and the patient does not have fever nor tuberculosis, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula at the depressed places of the chest; and with another cautery in the middle place of the foot between the two nipples; and let the cautery be a nail according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be punctured with the cautery that is called puncture, the form of which is described in the puncturing of earache.
And let there be punctures within them; and then treat that with what has been said before until it is healed.
And when the cautery has three points, for cauterization there can be up to three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25:
Of cauterization of tic douloureux.
When the joint of the jaw is dislocated due to lubricious humors and does not close at its return time, and especially when it is dislocated on one side or the other as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and then let the patient's jaw be returned to its place either on the neck or on the cheek; and then lift the cord which is in the front part of the tic douloureux to the parts above with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the front parts.
And then light the cautery having two ends; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the cord so that it penetrates to one side and then to the other; and there will be four cauteries.
And some times it is adjusted according to this count, for there are eight cauteries:
And then place on the cautery powdered salt, and let the patient be quiet so that the joint is not moved for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is at the front parts and it is done so, then cauterize on the muscle with a nail-like cautery or with pointed cauteries puncturing, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is drained and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26:
Of cauterization of stomach.
When there is coldness and many humors come up from the stomach's complexion and multiply in it, and if you continue the methods of healing and do not confirm, then let the patient be on his back, and extend his arms and legs, and cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the foot according to the amount of a finger with a nail-like cautery, and two cauteries below the armpits so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and lengthen those which are not adjusted so they will make a noise.
And if the depth of the cautery is two thirds of the thickness of the cord:
Let the figure of the cautery be according to this addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let that be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctured where that which is frightened by this cautery: and feel on the stomach puncturing according to the amount you want with tenting, and then cauterize that with cauteries at the punctures; and then treat that with what has been said before until it is healed.
Chapter 27:
Of cauterization of the fretted finger.
When there is pain in the finger due to coldness or humidity or due to thick ventosity so that it has been struck from its normal complexion by an excess of egress, and is treated with what we have said and does not confirm, then let the patient be on his back, and feel three cauteries according to this form and amount over the finger below the hypochondria, where the decubitus of a man lies.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not press it with your hand.
And if the amount of that which is burned the amount of the thickness of the cord, and it is not very hot; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then let him be seated, for he has already extended his legs, and lift up his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a chisel cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not overdo it in cauterization, and let the thickness of all the cord be burned so that it is burned throughout the body and come into the intestines, for the cord here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28:
Of puncturing of abscess on the finger with a cautery.
When there is an abscess or ulcer on the finger and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the finger or in its lining, then if it is in the flesh of the finger, the patient will be depressed and the pain will be acute.
And if it is in the lining of the finger, there will be great pain and it seems that the medicines have worn out its cure for him.
When the patient is turned over onto his/her chest, mark the location of the abscess with a tenting needle. Then heat the cautery that is shaped like a rag, the form of which has been described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the pus has been burned away and healthy tissue appears.
Then treat it with other remedies for the treatment of abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery unless your studies in medicine have been prolonged, and you are aware of many diseases; but sometimes it is tried out on this operation, but nevertheless it is better to refrain from doing so.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
The ancients used to cauterize ulcers by rubbing them with the roots of aristology, according to this manner, and it is this that you should take from the roots of a long, dry aristology, and it should be as thick as your finger.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it in the fire, and cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuance of the furcula and the collarbone; and with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly declining towards the part below the beard, and with two cauteries declining between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, but rather in the manifestation of the pus in its appearance.
And the ancients also said that some of the men used to use cauteries made of iron that were similar to a ray, and they would heat this and put it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reached the apostema and healthy tissue appeared, as we have said in the apostema of the liver.
But in this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear, for it will not happen immediately in the place of a fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the melas.
When you are treating the disease of the melas with what we have said about treatment in the division, and you do not confer your treatment, then a cautery in it is according to three ways, all of which are right-angled, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melsa, according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, the figure of which has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same manner that we have described in the cautery of the liver equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be on his back.
And another way of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two garments, the cause of which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the pus which is in the end of the melas where the jaw of the patient on the left side lies.
And let your elevation by which you raise the pus be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
Then put in two garments, ignite them, in that place into which you penetrate the pus from the other side.
And then take out the cautery; and so four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three garments.
And then you cure the cautery when it has lain for several days, for more than other causes that precede in the treatment.
Chapter 31.
On the cauterization of hydropsy.
A cautery does not cauterize in hydropsy, but rather in the armpit properly.
When you are treating hydropsy with the ways of treatment that we have said in the division and you do not confer your treatment, then let him cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the armpit, and with one cautery on the stomach, and with another cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the melas, and with two cauteries between the shoulders of the back, and a cautery on the right side of the foot, and with another cautery on the stomach. And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the pus.
And then take out the cautery so that it lies for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment by cautery with that which causes two tendencies to him, and let him lie with it helping towards healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is a key according to what its form is above, and it is that with which the back is cauterized is an olive according to what precedes its form.
Chapter 32.
On the cauterization of feet and of thighs.
When the feet are apostemized in hydrops and are filled with yellow water, let him cauterize the feet on the sole of the foot in the nerve which is between the auricular and the annular, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not turn that; then raise your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will flow out.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries over both thighs, and in each thigh let a cautery be made with the end of the cauterizing instrument. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh, that is, below the knee and the other above the middle part of the thigh; and over each thigh two cauteries.
And let the plaster lie open without a cure for a long time, so that some water flows from it.
Then treat him with those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
On the cauterization of the body of the belly.
When the body of the belly is affected by rubbing and humidity so that the digestive and retentive faculties are impaired, which are in the stomach and the intestines, and it is treated with remedies for treatment and does not confer, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauteries of an exudating vertue, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the armpit subtly, with a cautery key subtilely, and with a cautery over the alcatenia on alozis greatly, or with two cauteries.
And if the humidities are exudating and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize him over the pentenilch and over the intestines, and tightly fasten two cauteries over the stomach and near the groins, for it is a perfect cure of the rising of which there is no error.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When in nature there are ancient hemorrhoids, or one of thick humors rubbed, or of corrupted humidities, and they are healed with what we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus below the small spine of the back triangularly, and with a cautery above the umbilicus by two ditz.
And if you see that the patient's stomach is swollen and their food is not digested, and their face is puffed up, then cauterize the area over the stomach with a large cautery as it has been described; and with one cautery over the anus, and with another cautery over the navel using a nail cautery. Leave the cauteries in place for some time, then dress the patient's wound until he is healed.
Chapter 35.
On cauterization near the armpit and on the incision of them.
When you cut an armpit, then you will light the cautery that is similar to a ray. Then insert this burning cautery into the armpit incision, and hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if they are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and dress those with something that suits their wounds until he is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, then it is better to do so in the evening.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in nature in the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the method that we have recounted in its place, and the patient is distressed by it, then he should be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone sees a fistula in nature that is old and discharges corrupt humidity, then the most appropriate thing to do is to probe it with a subtle needle, and then know the quantity of its depth with the needle as described before.
Then light the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then insert this heated cautery into the fistula, and according to the quantity in which the needle entered it.
And repeat with the cautery on that area until those corrupt bodies are burnt once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of cauterizing nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestines, then beware of all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you are certain that it does not penetrate them.
And then dress the wound until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and matters are discharged from it for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
And if the matters are not discharged from it, then know that they are penetrating into the flesh or into its bones and have become corrupted there; or something of those causes from which a recurrence will come to that area.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of warts.
When warts on the body hurt because of rubbing or because of a large windiness, and so the skin of the patient is hurt, then know that you should cauterize each wart with a cautery made from a nail, of which the remembrance comes.
And very gently cauterize them with the second one small after it, so that three cauteries come, and then they will be more effective in the evening.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is a weakness and softening in the bladder because of rubbing and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that area just below the vesica where the hairs of the penis begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of it, and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of knots of the thread; and cauterize that area with a cautery just below the highest part of the bladder, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let there be a nail cautery according to how it has been described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
When there is rubbing and humidity in the sciatic nerve, and so it is prohibited from being impregnated, and its menstruation are corrupted and delayed in provoking them, and pain comes because of their having happened, then know that that area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel as we have said in the cauterization of the vesica; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the buttocks, or with two cauteries, and let there be a nail cautery.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist humors are infused in the area of the ankle, and these are the causes of the dislocation of its joint, and the sign of it is that the leg is prolonged beyond the other when they are compared to each other. And the area of the dislocation is blocked in that place where it hurts.
Then know that you should cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery similar to a ring, after you have probed it with a needle in the circuit of that area as it is turned, and because the area falls from the middle part of the circle.
And let there be a cautery of which we have spoken before in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if that cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of all the tendons; and then dress that area until it is healed.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the area of the ankle and this is caused by rubbing and humidity, the patient is not cured by what we have said before, and that is old, then know that you should loose the patient from gross humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
And the manner of the cautery in that area is according to two manners: or cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
And they come according to two sciences, and one is that you cauterize that area on the ankle with three cauteries in the shape of triangles, and make them at good depths there. And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Sometimes let there be the cautery over the middle part over the head of the ankle so that they are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded the shape in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, so that it is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
And this is the manner of cauterization in sciatica when pain is adherent to the ankle and is not extended into the leg.
But if it is extended into the leg, then cauterize that area with two cauteries over the hip on the side to which the pain extends; and with one cautery over the ankle for four knots a little from the bony part.
And if the cautery is cut, then let there be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the tendon.
And if the pain extends into that area and it is prolonged into the parts of the fingers, then cauterize that area where they extend with a cautery for three points or four, or more if they need it.
And if the patient feels pain in his thigh, then cauterize that area with a knife-like cautery.
And be careful in all cautery procedures not to use the cautery so much that you burn a nerve or large artery and thus harm the patient or cause contraction.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish in their cautery, and the bed fire inflames between the tumor achieved the foot, and perforated and corrupted all the foot. And soon after received strong medicine for the belly, and here came death.
And if the pain is in two parts then cauterize both according to this way.
And they said the wise some in cauterization of a vein from which cautery this is the way: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half of a palm; and its opening according to the thickness of a finger joint or less.
And within that circle there is another third; and the space which is between them is the quantity of the nail of the toe; and let these circles be opened from two sides; and may the length of those nails be an inch or two, and make in those edges of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is its form:
Then let it be ignited in the fire until it turns red and shoots sparks, and then let it be placed on the part of the vein, with the patient lying on his side. And thus cauterize that with three round cauteries in one session.
And let it rest for three days; then dress the wound with wool and let the scab remain uncovered for several days; then heal that by anointing until it is cured.
Albucasis said: O sons, of this kind of cautery we have used few because of the fear of it, and because we have found few who guard against it.
Better for him who bears the cauteries to find the place himself.
Better cautery with medicines burning is that you make two circles having a needle-hole in the center of which the needle of the door of iron is pierced; may the length of the parts in their natural state be two inches or suchlike.
And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let them be opened below and above, and let them contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
Then place on the part of the vein the patient lying on his side, and press your hand over the part of the vein; then take a hollow needle and pierce between the two circles, and let its quality be small at first with fire little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient bear the piercing and the squeezing of it — for that I found piercing like that with fire — until the piercing ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all the vein with warm water.
Then let it rest for three days and dress that with wool until the blackness of the squeezing is healed, and let it be left for several days, and pus will flow from it; this is last in healing.
Then heal that by anointing until it is cured.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make for it a statue in which there is water according to what is done with the vein in guassage.
And this is the way of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take of chalk and of not-extinguished ash of both ends one part each, and crush them and place in a new jar of which the bottom is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into it.
And place beneath the bottom of the other jar another jar filled with water, and pour over that chalk and ash with warm water the which covers those by a finger, and as you compress those with your hand for good compression, and let the water that falls from it drop into the jar below.
Then draw all that water and pour it over other ash and chalk renewed, because that water then becomes of strong quickness acute, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation makes fire.
And some medicines with which there is wide cautery, as with tezizic and honey and ash with soap so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounted from an old man the operation and the cure by which it is cured pain of vein and sciatic nerve, and he magnified much that, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed in one go with bath and sweat so that he was cured of that.
And let it be taken from a certain plant, and if not taken green then taken dried; and let the thing be crushed with a little of grain and placed on the vein in which there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient bears the squeezing.
Then put that in a bath and thus when his body is heated, put that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that it is not proper that anyone should use cautery with these medicines except after the evacuation of the body.
But Ja Escorides said that when with goat’s milk the vein is stretched, let it be cauterized, apply to it oil then, and let the cautery be done to it according to this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the sole.
Then take dry goat’s milk and inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place that over the wool and let it be left until it is cold. Then do that again and don’t cease doing that until the piercing comes into the vein and rest the pain.
And this way of cautery is called cautery of cows.
Chapter 52.
Of cautery for pain of two.
Some times pain is in the back from various causes, such as by compression or piercing or by excessive evacuation, and for those similar causes, by infusion of material rubbed and moistened.
And cautery is not used except in this sole species which is made from infusion of material rubbed.
Therefore know, then evacuation of the patient is with pills formed and similar to them, that are formed over the back in which there is pain three lines according to the length of it, for you have experience by feel in each line or cautery, or else, according to the quantity that he bears the toleration of him and the virtue of him.
And let cautery be done with point cautery.
And if you want, cauterize it with three cauteries or with four cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 53.
Of cautery at the beginning of goutiness.
Many times this sickness happens to small children; and sign of the beginning in them is that they get rigor mortis over them in their limbs with the rise and movement.
And there are compressions in the last vertebrae of the back and of the toes that he already begins to rise over the others vertebrae.
And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the shape of a circle as follows: take the cautery around all parts of the spine evenly
and if you want, cauterize in a circle around the spine with the pointed cautery two lines or three. And let the points be close to each other.
Then return the area where it is healing with what we have said.
But be careful that a cautery is not administered in yellowing which is caused by a spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44
Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And when gout from a cause of friction is cured with a cure and the pains are not reduced, then it is to be cauterized.
And it is that you cauterize the evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with motte cauteries.
And let there be an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains move into the joints or other joints, and this thing becomes evident, then cauterize that over each joint with three cauteries or four of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need the pointed cauteries, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; let it only surround the tip of the needle.
And if the pains move into the joint at both ends, then administer the cautery which we have described in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called sciatica, then point at the circle of the joints as they twist, point at those two lines.
And if there are pains in the fingers, then point at the circle of the joints over each knuckle and over the palm.
And if the pains move towards the elbow or the muscles, then cauterize all parts of each joint.
And do not evacuate the patient from good treatment and the reception of medicines; for if good treatment is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, it will heal, God helping.
Chapter 45
Of cauterization for ruptures.
When you see a rupture in the angles and the intestines protruding through the lining towards the vagina, and it begins as such, then command that the patient stops eating for the day and that he uses laxatives so that the tear goes down from his belly.
Then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to have his bowels released so that either there is a hole broken through or the lining or intestines come out.
Then return to it by your fingers and point at the rupture on the bone of the hip with your finger, pointing to the extremity of which is like the top part of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
Then ignite the cautery, of which this is its form:
until it becomes red and bleeding. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then hold the cautery over that with your hand with the cautery straight, and apply it to where you sense the bone of the hip within the cavity of the buttock; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved it in the first application to the bone.
And wisely observe the movement of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn it so that over the patient does not come death or another great harm.
And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will not succeed.
And see to it that the cautery of children is subtle according to their size and age.
Then heal the site of the cautery for three days with a plaster on it while the scar of the fire is still raw.
Then heal that with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient rest on his back for 40 days while the wound and the plaster are sealed.
And see to it that his food is reduced according to the length of time of his healing so that the tear of his belly does not come out again through effort in healing.
And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a gently made cast, and have him wear that for another 40 days.
And let there be rest from work and replenishment of food and drink and of violent movements, for when he uses this complete treatment of healing, it will heal entirely.
And I will tell of the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that it does not rupture again, then cauterize that rupture with a red hot cautery according to its size; and heal that with what we have said, and do not press on it.
And I will tell of the first ones that ruptures are to be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, and see them as you point:
and there is placed a line that goes along the length in the side over the rupture, and another line above it; and hold your hand with an iron cautery, but the first cautery is better and easier.
Chapter 46
Of cauterization for torque.
When you see in any member a pain from a blow or from pressure and that pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any treatment with medicines, then see to it that there is cauterized with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery of every member be according to its size and smallness, and its nature and weakness, and location of torque and pain in it.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then do the cautery again on it; for from custom of those pains are that they are punctured in a member near to which member it hurts, so that you see the patient healed.
Chapter 47
Of cauterization for leprosy.
The lepers some times with cautery for great advantage, and healing if the nature of leprosy is made from putrefaction of phlegm and of melencolia.
And when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is dry and healed by what we have said in the division and not burning or hurting, nor this, and fear over the patient so that the corruption includes all his body and all its complecion, then cauterize that on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, eves the forehead to the ends of the hair; and both over the ears, and one behind, over the nape or back of the neck.
And finally, with the cautery, make a slight impression on the bone, and from it the skin will be displaced, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is eased; and cauterize over the ulcer as has been described.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we mentioned earlier in reference to the head; and you should cauterize at the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each side of the neck, and with two cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the waist, and one large cautery on the vertebrae near the tailbone, and one on the tailbone itself, and two cauteries on the hips, and one on each hip joint, and two cauteries on the knees and one on each knee cap, and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of his feet; and you should cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on the insteps of his feet, and on the soles.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the ankle joint.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the elbow joint and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And if you find that the ulcer is already open and the bone exposed, then you don't need to perform cauterization; but you should apply a good poultice over it so that the bone can heal.
And you should make the cauteries large or small according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the description of the tools.
And then have the patient well-warmed and standing, with his arms supported; and you should apply the poultice over the ulcer and joint of the bone, and bandage it tightly, and make a good dressing so that the ulcer can heal.
Chapter 48:
On Stupor Cauterization:
When any member is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And if the member is small and you don't want to perform a large cauterization due to the great danger, then you should cauterize it in another way through each joint of the member. Then take care of it with an ointment until it heals.
And if the member is large, then you should cauterize it through each joint of the member.
And if the stupor is on the foot and it is exposed, then you should make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly.
Chapter 49:
On Cauterization of Diseases of the Foot and Ankle through Each Joint of the Foot:
And if you want to perform cauterization on the foot, then make a dressing of ground barley mixed with honey over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly. If the foot is exposed, apply buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it. If there are ulcers present, then you should cauterize the foot.
And if the foot is exposed and you want to cauterize it, then make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly.
Chapter 50:
On Cauterization of Any Ulcers that are Exposed Throughout the Body:
And if there are ulcers exposed on any member of the body, then you should cauterize it at the foot and ankle and heel. If the bone is exposed, make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly. If cancer is starting and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery needle as it rotates.
And if the cancer is exposed on the foot and it is exposed, then make an application of buffalo pouch over the heel and ankle, and bandage it tightly.
And it is much better that it be cauterized in the depth of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter XI.
[Title] Of cauterization for gout.
When gout is delayed in ripening and this is due to excess humors, or the condition of the patient, either because he is old and feeble, or of poor blood, or due to the season, and you want to hasten the ripening of gout, then cauterize around him with small cauteries; and by doing so it will speed up ripening.
But if you want to pierce him with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is its form: and apply it in the middle place of gout until it penetrates the skin.
And if you cauterize him in that place which is lower down, so that the body of the arm be eased; and then heal it up until it is well.
Chapter XII.
[Title] Of cauterization for ulcers.
An ulcer is a rotting that travels throughout the body, which corrodes like fire eating dry wood.
And if you see the ulcer in a place that can bear fire cautery, then ignite some small nail cauteries, and large ones according to what is appropriate for the location of the ulcer.
And then cauterize it entirely all around so that you eradicate all the corrosion and remove any cause of it.
And then let it be for three days, and place warm poultices on the cauterized spots so that the scars are all eradicated and all the corruption.
And then heal it with a flesh-producing ointment.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what is rotten in the corrupt places.
And ulcers are sometimes treated with a sharp medicine because it is a middle way between cautery. But nevertheless fire cautery is much milder.
And I have already spoken of the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will have an inclination for it.
Chapter XIII.
[Title] Of cauterization of warts and similar growths.
Warts often come from the parts below the armpit of a sick person which is called a wart, and it is a large cause, deep-rooted, that eats into the body; and cauterization for these are according to two ways, either by fire cautery or water cautery.
But fire cautery is that you ignite the cautery made hollow like a feather of an owl, which shall be made of iron according to the amount that it contains the wart all around, and it shall have thin edges.
And then apply that ignited cautery onto the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the wart so that the cautery reaches the depth of the wart. Let it be for three days until the arm begins to heal. And then poultice that with mallows pounded with salt, and apply the poultice over it for one night because it will eradicate it from its roots.
And then heal the spot with flesh-producing ointment until it is well.
And if it does not convert, and often happens in the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, then see that you administer cauterization with water on those; and take a quill of reed or of iron or of owl feather, and apply that onto the wart; and then pour into the quill little quantity of water-cautery, and grip it with your hand, and revolve that with pressure all around with your hand so that the edge of the quill goes into the root of the wart, and wait for the patient to bite on the quill for an hour, and then remove it, because the wart and its roots will be eradicated.
And do the same with the others all over their bodies.
And then heal those after the roots of the warts are eradicated with that ointment which engenders flesh.
Chapter XIV.
[Title] Of cauterization for tremors.
When you see tremor due to friction on a nerve or due to fever from some cause of friction, or due to another similar cause, then see that you cauterize that with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one cautery; and cauterize him in the feet, and over his stomach, cauterize with olive oil.
And the tremor of him will rest and the sickness of the friction will speed up.
Chapter XV.
[Title] Of cauterization for accidental wounds to the body.
When in the body there are blisters and pustules that are caused by thick corrupt materials; therefore see at the beginning when it appears, that it is cauterized over all the head of the blister with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood whose end is ignited; or with long razor cuts; or with a lenteular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized with wormwood at the beginning of its expulsion in this way; and when they are not broken, and the superficial part is disrupted by doing these, and it is healed from them.
But nevertheless see that it is done then evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter XVI.
[Title] Of cauterization for accidental blood flow due to incision of a vein.
Sometimes there is blood flow from a vein that is cut due to a wound by the plague which due to an incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar things, and it is difficult to heal that.
Therefore when it happens to anyone, then you shall hold it with your hand at the opening of the vein, and apply over that your index finger, which is made narrow by the incision of the wound, and often over it so that the blood flow stops and does not flow.
And then apply the olive-oil cauteries little and large, by numbers of them, and blow on them so that they are extinguished.
And then take one little or large according to the place and plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein hasten with pus so that you have stopped your finger, and cauterize it so that it is bound up and restrained that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and constrict the cautery, then take another cautery that is cut into the cauteries that are in the fire, and therefore do not cease doing this until the blood is restrained.
And see to it that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that there comes upon the patient another evil malady.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four ways: or cauterize so as aforesaid, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted, its extremities are burnt and the blood is restrained, or that it is bound up with a ligature or that it is ligatured strongly, or that medicines of which their virtue is to restrain blood; and are ligatured with poultice by strong compression, or that they are paused over it with poultices of which the virtue is to restrain the blood.
But that one who administers restraint properly with ligature and compression with bandages or by position of causes burning and of similar things, it does not confer unless a wound.
But if this is directed to someone and the doctor is not present or there is no medicine, then open with a pause of the aforementioned finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand [the patient's] great distress within as the blood is hindered from the upper part of the plague, and on the artery let it not be pricked; and above the artery, let it be sprinkled with water rubbed with something very cold until the blood congeals and thickens; and if there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Of incision and piercing, of bleeding and phlebotomy, of plagues and their likenesses.
We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses where cautery with fire is convenient and burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and I have arranged the chapters from the top of the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that it may be lightened for the one who reads it and then about which he has demanded.
And before I begin this, believe, reader, that what is in this chapter is for fear of what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because he who is performing the operation in this chapter many times makes evacuation through bleeding, which is with blood, through which life is due to the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the pustule or opening of the wound or purification of the plague or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their likenesses. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the majority of them death.
And I warn you that this does not happen to you in which there is a situation, because several times it happens that men are managed by many illnesses. And of these there is one that becomes worse due to his illness and death is lighter for him because of the vehemence with which he suffers from his illness, and because of the longevity of his illness, and because of the illness he has fear that signifies death.
And of those is the one who gives you his word and promise, you waiting for his health, and whose illness is destructive.
And so do not consent to whoever comes to you whose case is like this, and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapaciousness; and do not assume any cause for this unless it is certain knowledge that verifies it for you, and to whom a praiseworthy outcome occurs.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication for him to whom health is converted, because in that is your helper for acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O sons, may God inspire you with his understanding and not deprive you of direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing it by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter about cauterizations, of the cure from the head to the feet, so that it may be lightened for you who demands it and of which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness many times happens to children because of childbirth and when the nurse tightens the child's head with a bandage.
And sometimes it happens because of a hidden cause which is not cleaned.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all of those whom I have seen it befell died, and because of that it is to me a wonder at them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the child's head was always magnified so that breast-feeding could not be done on him because of the size of his head, and more so that the moisture increased continuously until death.
And this humidity is either aggregated between the skin and bone, or is aggregated below the bone over the skull.
Because the operation in this if the humidity is between the skin and bone and the pustule is minor, then you must split in the middle of the head with one slit in width, and let the length of the slit be two fingers wide so that the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And if the humidity is more increased and the pustule is larger, then here are two slits in this way:
And if the humidity is below the bone, a sign of it is that you will see the comissures of the head swollen in all parts and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand on the parts between your fingers and it is not hidden from you. You must split in the middle of the head with three slits in this way:
And then remove all the humidity and tightly bandage the slits with cloths and plasters; and then anoint it with wine and oil on the fifth day, and loosen the bandages and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and strengthen the head evenly; and feed the patient dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of cutting which considers where the pustule appears and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more in the occipital bone, or in the front part, or on the right or left side; and so pay attention to the cut where the pustule appears and the collecting of the water, and do that as you think is most possible.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and bring forth a flow of blood and cause the death of the patient through that flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Second chapter.
When it happens to someone catarrh or phlegm in the ears or feet, and it is old, and there is not success in the cure of the medicines, then the last cure in this is cutting of those two arteries.
And so when you want to cut those which the patient's head spreads over, and then rub the site with an abrasive cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bandage the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where to pulsate the vein; and the sites of both over the sites where the auricles are depressed, and they are hidden in some men.
And then touch the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with a spatula of each part coming into contact with the bone, and let that be through the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts above it.
And let the length of the cut be two fingers wide, because when an artery is cut, the blood flows out with pulsating thrusts, which jumps back and forth frequently.
But if the artery does not show the pulse, then you must measure from the auricle the quantity of the space of three fingers, and then touch with a tent, and pierce into the bone.
And what should be bled is quantity of wine ounce, and let the strong one give him of it more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the collecting of the artery in him.
And then consider the plague, and if there is any cause for cipha on the bone, then cut it so that it does not become a cauterized ulcer.
Then strengthen the plague with plasters and linen bandages, and then heal it with an ointment within so that it may be cured.
Chapter 3
Of the extraction of veins which are in the temples.
When someone experiences ancient or catarrh-like emigrations, due to moist and hot humors in the temples, or violent ancient sicknesses resembling these, and medicine and its treatments do not help, then we must resort to these maladies of extraction of veins in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of operation and extraction of these is to cause the patient to raise his arms so that the veins in the temples appear; and understand the apparent vein in the temple where it is shown by the pulse, and is hidden except in a few men due to the vehemence of friction.
And if it is hidden, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the vein appears obviously. And then you take the spatulum, of which this is the shape: And then you scorch the vein with that with ease until you reach the vein; and then throw on it vinegar and extract it to the upper parts in order to pull it out of the vein and uncover it from the tunics which are beneath it, from every part.
But if the vein is subtle, then you wrap it with the end of the needle, and then cut a part according to the quantity by which its ends are lengthened and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood; for if they are not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
And then empty out some blood. of three times [unc].
And if the vein is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong double-folded wool or cords, and do not let putrefaction come before the consolidation of the plague and there be a flow of blood.
And then cut the superfluity which is between two bandages; and do that at that time or another time.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a knife-like cautery until its ends are cut, and it will be in place of that work.
And it is better for the patient not to have fever or a heated complexion; for cauterization aids in eliminating those causes of humors, and therefore is better during youth.
And therefore it is better to extract the veins that inflame the ancient wound, and have powdery poultices decently made laid upon it, and let it be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with cauteries so that it may be healed.
And if while you operate another vein begins to flow from the vein, then you must restrain that blood, or with cautery, or by compressing the wound, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot so that the blood may congeal, and moisten the spot with water of violent heat so that the acuteness ceases, and it is tied according as it should be.
And what is easier in the extraction of veins is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, after you have pricked the two spots with a tent, and depose each, lighting fire, so that it comes to the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that it is lengthened which is between its ends, for it is not consolidated at all with this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the acuteness of its two points be equal. But if it is milder than the two points, that is better, for if they are acute with both pricks, it approaches each other with swiftness and does not cut into the flesh.
Therefore when there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut loosely.
And this work is better in all works and easier.
And let the space between the two points be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Chapter 4:
Of the cure of acute and acidic wounds of the throat.
When they are acidic wounds, and the veins of those are above the test of the head deforo, and medicine does not help in that any cause of its cure, and the face of the patient is already red and feels walking around as if it were the walking of ants, and his ears are exhausted, humid as if his skin is known, and his eyelids are scalded by the acuteness of tears, the ancients applied this cure with a sponge.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which is on his forehead, and then cut into the forehead three evenly distant gashes according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the gash is two fingers: the first gash should be evenly distant to the length of the nose in the middle location of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the veins which are in the tear ducts, and the third from the other side.
And be wary of the cutting of the veins which are on both sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers placed side by side.
And if you have a sponge with apparatus or dry bandages which absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula between its two acute ends, of which this is the shape of its incision: that is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Excise with that all the vein which is between two incisions with the skull which is upon the bone, and then do that from the middle incision to the second incision. And then pull with that, and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And place the sides of that sharp against the flesh annexed to the vein, and the sides of it against the tooth against the bone, and push that so that it comes to the middle incision, and cut with that all the vessels which descend from the head to the throat.
But if the incision is continued to that appearance of the vein, and then do that from the middle incision to the second incision.
And after the blood flows equally, squeeze the spots of the congealed blood.
And then place in each incision cold water of wound, and place upon those poultices made with vinegar and oil and wine, and bandages so that there be no cauterized ulcer.
And on the third day loosen the bandages and administer great effusion of warm water or thick tea, and then cure that with basilicum ointment with rose oil and others so that the scabs are healed.
Chapter 5:
Of the cure of wounds by cauteries and the throat descending from the parts within the head.
When to someone come purgatives and continuous vomiting, and you see the patient's eyes exhausted little, and their guard is weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated, and from them hair falls out, and in the brain there is a sharp pain and consequent vertigo, then know by these accidents that the matter and purgatives come not but from many veins proceeding from within.
And the best cure for these is this: that you command the patient to raise his eyebrow, and then insert into that a slit at the middle of the forehead, a little in width (and begin the slit from the left temple, entering into the right temple; and it should be inserted into the bone; and lengthen your hand from under the temples, which are bitten down because of chewing), as long as the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill up between the two lips of the slit with cotton wool or with rags. And then tighten it up above with powdered lint, soaked in wine and oil, so that no pus-filled boil results.
And when you loosen it and see that the boil has diminished, then cover that area where the bone begins to grow flesh, and treat it with an astringent ointment which causes the flesh not to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them together, and from this mixture make a plaster and apply it to these wounds at the point of the new flesh.
Chapter 6:
Of the cure for that which bites in the ears.
All causes that bite in the ears are of four kinds; one is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, like iron and glass, or it is from plants, such as beans or peas, or it is a fluid cause, like water and sour wine, or their likes, or some animal.
And so when a stone bites in the ear or any other cause similar to those causes which do not enter nor grow in the ear, and you see the stone, then distill into that some cause of oil of violets or sesames, and then administer its extract, and cause sneezing with snuff, and cover the nostrils due to the action of sneezing. And then place around the ear some balls of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides above it, for many times it is forced out by these causes.
And if it is not forced out, then administer its extract with the instrument called a subtle hooked tweezers of which this is the form:
And if it is forced out with tweezers, that is good; and if not, then administer its extract with a fine needle of few folds.
And therefore if it is not forced out by this, then make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that only the tube be open. And then extract it with your breath with strong吸引力, for many times it goes in company with what we have related.
But if it is not forced out in this manner, then take a little bit of alum or of the medicine prepared with which birds are caught, and place that at the end of the ear, and then wrap around that decently placed plug. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry out the ear from its moisture.
And therefore if it is not forced out by all the causes which we have related, then you cut that in front so that it does not become a pus-filled boil or a spasm.
And the manner of cutting it is that you at first cause bleeding in the patient from the vein of the head and extract the blood according to the nature of it, and then cause him to sneeze between your hands and turn his ear to the sides above it, and finish with a small slit at the root of the ear due to the place being pressed by you. And the slit be of a moon-like figure so that it may come to the stone, and if the stone is found, pull it out with appropriate instruments; and then close up the slit in that moment with swiftness, and cure it when healed.
And if the cause that bites in the ear is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflated, then administer its cure and extract it; but if it does not obey your instruction, then you take fine spatular tweezers according to this form: and with that administer the incision of that fat which is bitten in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many balls, and then extract those with tweezers or with a subtle hook, or with an incision as we have said before, for its extraction is facilitated.
But if water is entered into the ear so that the patient sneezes at the beginning, and fills his own ear with some old cotton wool, and spits on that ear in which there is the water, and if by this it is forced out, that is good; and if not, then take some fine pebbles and heat them in fire for a while, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and press over it with his finger from that side, and press another pebble on the pebble which is in the ear. Therefore do not cease this with pebbles until all the water is forced out.
Therefore do not cease this with pebbles until all the water is forced out. And when the water is completely forced out, as if you took some paper or wax .j., and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burnt.
And then put in another wax and do this as many times until all the water is forced out, and treat it with a tube as we have said before of the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of an animal intruding into that ear, if it is a small one, like a fly or to it similar, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a great size causing pain throughout the head, then administer its extraction with tweezers and fine needles, and its cause is a long-distance from all other causes which bite in the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the tract on distillation, and do not bring your cure to completion, then cover that ear to the sun.
And therefore if you see there any cause of the worms, then extract it with fine tweezers or needles; but if you see no cause, then take a tube below narrow and above wide, of which this is the form: And insert its slender end into the ear according to the amount which the patient can endure; and then suck it with a strong suction and do this many times, until all the worms are forced out.
But if it does not obey your instruction, then cover and close up around the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillation which the ancients have tried in the cure of worms, and discover it in the tract on distillation.
And let your effusion be such that you pour the medical oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is its shape. And make one of silver or gold, very narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
And thus it should be so that it fits into the cavity of the canal from where it will be necessary to remove it. And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice of any herb, or anything else of these medicines in the canal — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with the cotton on top and squeeze with your hand that which is pressed by it within so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is poured into the ear should already be warmed by fire a little. And beware that the cause for which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because medicines of the ear do not bear that.
Chapter 7.
Of treatment of swelling of the ears.
Some children are born from the bellies of their mothers not having broken through, and that happens to some men; swelling in the middle of the ear due to plague or due to a lump in there; and this swelling sometimes occurs in the membrane of the eardrum which does not achieve hearing, and sometimes it occurs in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the membrane of it, which does not achieve hearing, is in the most difficult dispositions for healing.
And in that in which you achieve hearing, beware that you hold the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it. And thus if you see an apparent swelling, open that with subtle sponge of which this is the shape of it:
If the end of it in which there is a small width, of which one part is acute and the other is not; and let the sponge be of two edges by itself so that it does not harm the ear.
And if the swelling is due to a lump born in the ear or in the middle of it, then open that with thin needles and pierce that fiercely until all the flesh is removed.
And if the swelling is in the membrane of the ear, then take a thin rod and heat it a little with fire, and then insert that into the middle of the ear.
And thus if you feel swelling with that which the patient feels with ease due to difficulty of hearing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
And then pause in the ear cloth according to the amount of the width of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do that for some days until you are sure of the healing of the plague; or take some of it and soak that in water and sprinkle over it powdered red lead, and use of it; and if you see the ear already pustulated, then beware that you pull out whatever there is and replace that with something else which you wrap in cerot made from oil of roses, so that the pustule may be cauterized; and treat that until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then soak sponge or cloth in warm water and place over the ear; and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is written in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
Of cure for ataxia which affects the eyelids.
Athezil which affects the eyelids of people some time they are humid, some time they are dry.
And thus beware that you have those with tans or with ointment, and pierce them with thin needles of their roots; and then place over the places powdered red lead.
But if pain comes with flow of blood, then cauterize those with a small pointed cautery.
And the best cauterization is then the incisions and bumps return when some cause of them remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Cure for granulation which comes to the eyelids of people.
Many times it happens in the eyelids of people some cause which is likened to granulation in its strength and hardness; and thus granulation is called.
And it is accumulation of dense moisture in the eyelid above and below.
And the operation in them is that you consider then if the granulation is proceeding in it in that which appears on the edge of the eyelid and is bitten at every part; and the cause of it is blepharitis.
And thus pierce over that with a slit in width, and then scrape that at every part with ease so that it may drain, and then suspend that with needle and pierce that.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with suture; and treat that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not be harmed by that because the oil of it restores that and incorporates.
And if the granulation is declining at the edges of the eyelid from within the surface therein, then open the eyelid and suspend the granulation with needle, another that you pierce for incision, and press that at every part; and if the eyelid by piercing is elongated, that does not matter in any cause.
And then the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and treat the place with what incorporates until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of cure of axcirna in the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirna is a disease which is engendered in the membranes of the eyelid above, and mostly happens to children, harms their eyes and causes to them catarrh; and they cannot regard the brightness of the sun because tears are closed to them.
And thus you see them always over their faces, and they sleep over their faces; and over their eyes below the eyebrows are moist, which have already covered inflammation, and appearance of swelling is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the swelling therein.
And some way of operation is in that which the patient holds his head to you, and then pause cloth over it and make of it cold, and do a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach at every part, and then pause that over it and press with your fingers so that there is accumulated swelling therein; and then open in the middle of that moisture with sponge piercing with slit in width, and let the slit not be greater than the slit which is done in flaubotomia.
But in the membrane beware that you split the whole so that you reach to axcirna, because in the most disposed processes axcirna is reached by slit according to the shape of white gray matter.
And then pull out that with forceps which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges abroad and revolve between the right and left hand so that it is loosened.
And beware that you do not press in the slit so that with the sponge you do not reach to the eye and loosen that.
But if you do not see the pulse at the beginning of the fissure, but you place a small one in the fissure to facilitate the pulse; and then extract that as we have said; and then moisten some cloths with hot water and wine and lay them over the area, and sprinkle those with powders.
And then others who grind salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what is left behind from that moisture.
And then treat that until it is healed.
But if an ulcer occurs at the site of the fissure, then treat that with gentle ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of ways to touch the pulse.
When on the eyelids of the eyes, humors are produced by the natural adjustment and become old, then those affect our vision and cause diseases such as constant tears and softness of the eyelids and membrane, which is called destruction of the eye, and it can be treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with an acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or tactinir of the eye is caused by incision and suturing; or with cannae, as I will say.
And so, whoever you are, place the head of the patient towards you; then lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is lifted, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into where there is pus just below the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate up above, near the margin of the eyelid, among the hairs, and draw out the pus towards the upper eyelid, and then lift that with your finger.
And then probe inside the eyelid, below the hairs that are adjusted by the spatum, at the point where the larger tear duct joins the smaller one; and then extract the pus, and place small balls of lint or cloth beneath the eyelid, and then press on the eyelid with a tent, leaving a mark in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
But indeed, whoever it is, the mark should be made according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among people, and from those who need that a great quantity be removed from the eyelid, according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then probe with the spatum along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct into the smaller one. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs, as in the thickness of a king.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the corner, and then scrape away all of that, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with gum or fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and allow what is superfluous of the humors on both eyelids to flow away with some causes, if you want to do so, but if not, don't.
And then let the incision of the humors heal within three or four days, and then treat that.
And if you want, remove the plaster after suturing, and treat that with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted because of the sealing of the plaster and the accumulation on it; but suturing is better. And so, thus do they say about those who taxanir.
But indeed, there should be no solicitude over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another way in taxmir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid with three nails separated and gathered together according to this form.
But if that is not possible, and the nails are not available, and it is not swollen, then take a needle with thread in it and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the larger tear duct, and the end according to the smaller one, and adjust between your fingers the humors with equality, and then with those raise your hand with equal elevation, raise all the corner over which you have marked thus as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the plaster with suturing, and treat that until it is healed.
But if an ulcer occurs because of your incision or your fissure, treat that ulcer with cerate and to it similar, and with ointment.
And sometimes, when the hairs of the eyelid are turned inwards, then whoever you are, use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing in either is more artificial.
Taxanir with cannae is done thus: And it is that you lift the eyelid and split the figure which is within, according to what has been recounted; and then with skill make two cannae or two astelae of which their length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their breadth is less than the breadth of the spatum. And you have already made incisions in the extremities of some parts, where you hold the threads.
Then collect each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the cannae in some parts with strong constriction, and let that be for several days, for the corner will die and become black and rot off as it is pressed down by itself.
But if it is delayed, then break that with the tongs, and then treat the plaster until it is healed.
And so when that is solidified, the eyelid is lifted up and the hairs don't sting.
And this is the form of two cannae which you will make thus: and the amount of length and breadth, neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
Of lifting hairs that sting in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough, and sting the eyes, then the operation in them is that you take a fine needle and place it in the hair of cedrum and lion's wool, and then adjust the extremities of it with great subtlety and carefulness. And let the length of the hairs be the quantity of a palm.
And then you place another fine hair beneath it briefly, and tie the ends of that if you want to.
And then let the patient hold his head towards you, and be near the sun so that your work is seen clearly, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then insert the needle at the root of the hair which needs skill, and let that penetrate the eyelid quickly while you extract it above with the natural hair.
And then pull on the hair beneath while inserting that into the eye, and let the hairs be one or two or three and not more.
And then pull your hand on that so that the hair is drawn out, while the hair is drawn into the eye with the natural hair.
But if it is drawn into the eye and not drawn out, draw alixati to the sides with the thread which you have composed on that, so that in being drawn out alixalati of the tract above.
And then you wet that with the vision of the eye, for then you will draw out alixati and the thread, and rub each other and close the eye for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows on that well.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust one long hair of the natural hairs, and let that be lifted by it, or let the needle be inserted so that it lies along while you lift that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the treatment of a hunchback which appears above the eyelid.
When there is a hunchback in the eyelid and it is a contraction of the eyelid, whether on the right or left side, caused by poor healing of an ulcer or wound, or from cauterization, and this hunchback may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of an ulcer or wound, or cauterization, or something similar that was badly treated.
The manner of the operation is that you should split that fusion and separate the eyelids, and place in between them a piece of linen, and bind them together until they heal.
And it is important that you do not use any treatments that dry out the eyelids, as constriction; for if you do this, the hunchback will return worse than before.
Use for this cause which softens like fenugreek, and soak in the water in which are soaked fennel seeds and aniseed, or guaiac wood, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse in that the piece of linen, and treat it with that.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you perforate it with anything that is not consolidated according to the shape it had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is nothing but a correction of the hunchback that does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment of a hunchback which is done below the eyelid.
This hunchback which is done below the eyelid, which is properly called a hunchback; and it may be natural or accidental.
But accidental is caused by ulcer or wound or cauterization or other similar things.
And the way to operate on it is to take a needle with a double thread, and pierce the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct into the right one, so that the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it widely. And if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; and if not, take the thread and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split the two wounds on both sides of the lower eyelid.
And the ends of the two wounds are two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and an angle is made between them when they come together; a figure is made between them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
Then push that flesh upwards by the amount that it was cut below, so that it covers the eyelid.
And then join the separated parts and sew them with the woolen thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices until it is healed.
And if the hunchback is caused by an ulcer or wound or cauterization, then it is necessary that you split with a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as has been described before. And then separate with the poultice between two eyelids as we have said before.
In the sum of the words of the treatment of hunchback when it is above or below, the operation runs according to the preparation of the shape of hunchback, and that is in the form of different shapes.
And the wise artisans always prepare everything in every way that is possible for them so that they can return the figure to its natural shape, or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people so that the eyelid is more solid above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural actions, then you must insert the end of the thread below the eyelid and lift it upwards, or extend it with the finger.
And then you insert the adhesion with a subtle poultice, which is not sharp at the ends of the incisions, so that the patient is not bothered after the operation, and remove the poultice so that it does not irritate the eye with its acuteness.
And your incision should open that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
And then put in the eye salted water with which you wash it, or distill in it vinegar dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of linseed, and place over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then the third day use causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of incision of nail and of prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that nail is according to two ways, because it is nervous, and is like a hard, thin ciphe; or it is non-nervous, like white humidity hardened, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced, it takes on an impression, is separated and the iron is not put in it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the major tear duct as it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
But the way to operate in this incision is that the patient tilts his head back, and then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then gather the nail with the tip of a little finger doubled and extend it upwards. And then take a needle and insert it into that a hair of horse or ox or cow or similar, or a strong vein, or double the tip of the needle little by little and put it in the web of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and lift the nail; and extend it upwards, and separate at the ends the angle which covers the pupil. And thus you follow that path through his back.
And then you insert the rest of the stilet into the root of the tear duct with a slender instrument or small forceps, and cut through the meat of the tear duct so that through its incision it does not experience continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is driven into the sole with the finger stretched out or with the palm, as we have said; and then it is driven in with the lion stilet, of which this is its shape:
And be careful that with the stilet you do not touch the horny tunica and that there is no rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then on the incision pour a little powdered salt or vinegar made of wine, and let it remain there until the next day; then dress that with water so that it may heal.
And if the nail is not nervy and you cannot insert the awl into it, or it is not pierced by that which is stretched out, then this kind of nail is healed with remedies, and is healed in the same way as an eye is healed and restored to its division.
And if you want to split it, then open the mouth of the patient and take slender stilet lion of tempered bronze sharpened according to this shape: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rare and closed up and it sticks in that root, then distill from your mouth into the mouth made of wine vinegar or with vinegar made of wine, and let it remain there until the next day.
Then repeat the operation on it until all that is of it is removed; but if you see an ulceration cautery in the mouth, then you cut that, and cure the ulcer at the beginning so that it may heal.
And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The membrane of the tear duct, if it is noticed in the mouth with great injury, should be suspended by stretching out; and insert that one part from that, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cause tears to flow.
And then distill into the tear duct vinegar made of wine and wine until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of incision of the eye and of what is born from flesh pressed upon in the mouth.
Sometimes in the eyes of some men there is born red flesh, and it lies above that it covers the pupil, or near or stretched over the eyelids, and it strongly presses the eyelids to the edges outside and is assembled like ballaster wall.
The operation on him is that the patient should bend his head towards you; and then open the eyes of him and gather up all that flesh with convenient tweezers or forceps; then insert the flesh at the beginning so that all is finished by the incision, and be careful of the eye that you do not tear it away from your operation.
And your incision is with which you insert that or with stilet which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which ashbell comes according to its shape, properly to this chapter.
Then when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with powdered salt, or distill into it red powder and similar to it of the corrosive remedies, and place over the eye outside a cloth with egg white until it is secured from ulceration cautery.
And if any cause of the eye and is caused blood cautery, and you fear ulceration cautery, then cut the eye and cure that ulcer with what causes that ulcer, and then repeat on it the operation until it is healed, and similarly do on the flesh pressed upon which happens in this kind of eye.
However you should not perform any cure of the eye by natural or accidental way, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member suffers that operation.
Chapter .xviii.
Of collection of ashbell in the eye.
Ashbell are red veins which are tested over the eye and they prohibit the working of its operation, and they make the eye long for days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which ashbell is strong and there is not other disease but ashbell, then you gather up that ashbell.
And it is that you command the patient to bend his head towards you, and then suspend those veins with one finger or two according to your prudence; and that finger be of slender doubling according to this shape:
or two fingers gradation in one body according to this shape:
And then those veins are gathered up with slender forceps, with subtlety, and you blot the blood now and then, until you see those veins sucked back into the eye and are drawn back.
And be careful that you do not tear the eye with the ends of the stilet; and if your operation is in the evening in front of the sun, then you remain firm in your operation that you do not insert except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill into the eye vinegar made of wine or red wine because with its acuteness it corrodes what is sucked back from ashbell.
But if it is not possible for you to gather up all in that hour, then you apply plaster on all so that it yields the pain of him, and let him for some days until the pain of him is calmed down and he is secured from ulceration cautery.
Then repeat on him according to how the previous manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter .xix.
Of reduction of hernia to the nose.
When you cure hernia with cautery or with sharp medicine as it is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then do not burn in it but split over the ulcer after the maturity of it, and draw out all the moisture which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
And then when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named from rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is rounded thus with a file or rasped by filing subtle piercing (thus as in the following form).
And place that over the corroded place of the bone, and then revolve it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that corrosion is scraped.
And let it be done several times, then restore the place with astringent and styptic causes.
Then if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and there is removed the body of the ulcer and it remains for over a month, and it is not renewed and there does not happen an accident and does not occur in it an ulceration, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then do not be in it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover according to bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take gangrene according to this form:
Let its end be triangular with iron, and its shaft be bent at the end thus with a file as it turns so.
And then place that over the bone, and let it be near the tear; and lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and then rotate your hand with the salve inside, allowing it to penetrate all the bones, and the patient will feel the warmth as the wind exits through the opening when you cover it with your hand.
And then restore the area with astringent medicines that dry up just as much as it has been wet.
And then when the meat and the place have been toughened, the matter that was effused in the parts abroad returns to the nose; therefore it is easier for gout to affect the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the swelling on the leg.
When the leg swells throughout its entirety and there is no harm or decrease in the swelling, then you should let loose the patient, and then follow up by placing wind-letting poultices on the nape of his neck after having made a light scarification and sucked out through good suckling; and then place over the swelling a liniment which is made of pitch, aloe, onions, and mastic, and then tightly bind the bandage over the swelling with powdered herbs.
And the way of the powders is that you take cotton cloths with many folds, and each cloth is folded in four pieces; and you make those into powder.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which the leg has need. And then tightly bind over that with a hard cloth with strong compression; and repeat the poultices with suckling without scarification; and then take off the poultices and let the leg be tight during the day and the night.
But if in the meantime the ligament softens, then you should loosen it a little.
And then stop using the poultices during the day and night just as we have said.
And if you see that the leg has been reduced, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and compression and the wind-letting poultices until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the start of the swelling of the tunica vaemosa.
When there is a rupture in the tunica vaemosa, and it is prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of pepper, and it is shaped like a man by that, and you want to insert it, then the operation on him is just as we have recommended: you should insert the needle at the root of the veina in the part below in the part above, and then put another needle in which there is a double thread at the lacrimal part, and let that penetrate and let the first needle follow its disposition; and then insert the spot of the double vein and lift with that the part of the tunica vaemosa in the circuit of the needle, and tightly bind that place.
And then take out the needle and place over the swelling wool infused in egg white and let it sit so that the thread falls down with the tunica vaemosa.
And then cure the leg with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth over the leg at the site of the great swelling, and let it be pierced by the subtle spatulum that comes to the front of the leg, and let the white moisture run down, and the leg descend and enter as soon as possible.
And then tightly bind until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of a hernia.
This disease which is called a hernia is nothing but a ulcer which is settled in the leg resembling water descending and it is not that.
But the way to act on it is that you make the patient sit up straight on a prepared and level chair, and then take hold of his head with both hands and hold him so that you see the ulcer coming from the parts below, and then let it be dried up and not descend, and be stopped up, and the patient sees the causes just as he saw them.
And if it does not descend, you should know that it is water.
But if the descent of the ulcer is not prepared with what we have said, then make the patient sit up between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and apply it on him over the membrane stretching a little from the continuance of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (at the sight of the eye), until the ulcer is pushed out.
And then when it is pushed out, you then distil water tailing into the leg in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then let it be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the cure of a descending ulcer.
We have already said about the species of water in division and what it is convenient to pierce with an iron needle according to the disposition, then that according to its health.
Then you should make the patient sit up between your hands over a chair and bind his leg tight.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his leg, if the leg with the ulcer is the left one; or with your right hand if it is the right leg.
And then take alum with your right hand if the leg is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
And then place the end of the alum near the crown for the thickness of the vein in the white of the eye from the part of the tear gland, and let the alum be greased with butter and rotate your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the alum has already come to a visible cause.
And let it be the distance of the path of alum to the front the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the leg; because you will see the pupil with the vision of the leg through the clarity of the tunica cornea.
And then place the alum in the place where there is the ulcer, and then you pull it down another way, and then if the ulcer descends as soon as possible, then you see the patient over that on which he breaks his sight immediately, and let the alum be in his leg.
And then rest a little; therefore if the ulcer is descended, then you take off that other way before alum is put in.
And then when it is dried up and does not descend, then you take out the alum with ease, and rotate your hand a little with it, and then dissolve in the ulcer a little of clear salt of gemma and wash the leg inside; and then place outside the leg cotton or stoppa or wool infused in rose oil and egg white and tongue with that the leg.
But those who are of our time place over that cooked meat with egg white.
And if it does not obey you the alum to the treatment of the leg because of its hardness— for it is hard bone — then you should take the spatula which is called albertid, of which this is the form:
And then pierce it with that those conjunctions, and do not finish your hand in the thrust, and it is not unless you make way to alum subtle place.
And then put in alum as we have said.
And when you have finished your work, let the patient be prepared sleeping descent made in which he sleeps on his back in dark house, and be prohibited from all movements.
And place it in such a way that its nature is inclined, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
And let the ligament recover according to its disposition on the third day.
And then loosen that terrible bond and show him the true cause, and make him see some causes, and then return the ligament to its original state on the seventh day.
And do not do this during the time of healing or immediately after the infusion. Have them move that way so that the water can flow easily and violently from the affected area.
But if pus develops, then loosen the bandage on the seventh day and treat the wound with something that will promote the flow of pus.
Then reveal to him the cause and place on his face a medicine that will regulate his breathing, keeping him in the dark for several days.
And then let him be carried away by that gradual process and discuss with him the causes of his condition.
And know that it is not permissible for the disciple to see anything during the operation, and then you must be courageous about performing the operation.
And it has come to our attention that some people who are in the Artach suffer from fire in their eyes, and some say that a fire is lit in the eye socket, causing water to flow out.
However, we have not seen this in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
And these are the forms of the species of eye problems, so that one can recognize them who does not know them:
And they are made of copper or iron wire, and the ends of them should be shaped into a triangular point, the acute angle like that of the shape of a triangle.
Chapter .XXIV.
On the treatment of growths in the nose.
When in the nose there are various growths which have developed for some cause related to a scorpion sting or to a stone weighing down on it, and this ailment is called polypus because of its resemblance to that pebble as represented. And from it there issues a foul-smelling pus, and from it there is a blackened, rotten meat, and from it there is a lion's meat not of a dark color.
Therefore, if it is not a fraudulent or rotten lion's meat, let the patient hold his nose and breathe into the nostril, and prick with your finger in that growth. And then extract it from the nostrils, and then burn what you have understood with a sharp, fine instrument in one nostril until you know that all the meat has been removed; for if something remains of it due to some cause so that abscission is possible, then you must treat it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that nothing of it remains. But if it bleeds or pus develops, then you must pause there until it stops; or if they are malignant pustules, then you must cut and cauterize that area so that the bleeding stops and all the holes have been stopped.
And then let the nostril be treated with vinegar and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds moisture into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate according to how it should, then you know that within him there is a growth in the nostril which has not yet been removed by abscission.
Therefore let the patient put a piece of wool in his mouth which has some thickness, and let him move it around, and place between each tooth the amount of the tip or less, and hold the patient's nose and insert one end of the wool in the nostril with the thumb or other finger so that it is possible to do so.
And when this has been done, let him breathe out his odorant into the canals of the nostrils, and spit onto his palm, for those who have experience in this action do the like to children at school, and it is a gentle cause to the one who wants to do it.
And then place both ends of the wool, one end that goes out over the nose and the other that goes in the nose, and then administer a cauterization to the meat with the fingers that are on the wool, and do this until you know that the meat is cauterized from the fingers.
And then pull out the wool and place in the nose the abscission of the blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until everything that remains from the growth has been eaten away.
And then at the end of the healing, place in the nose a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
But if there is an excess of pus, use that which was mentioned earlier.
And this is the form of the instrument used for purging the nose, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be shaped like a small open vessel, just like a small cup, and let the meat be similar.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the end of the instrument used for purging the nose should be flat, uncovered; to which is handled in him, with which you hold it in him, oiled or with water that you want from the juices and from the suckers.
Chapter .XXV.
On the growths in the ends of the nose.
Sometimes there is a growth in the ends of the nose, and it becomes swollen and grows over several days until the patient feels pain from it.
And for this you must insert that into the beginning of his appearance, and remove all of that. And then place on the spot a cauterization or burning medicine which is in the location of him.
But if its abscission is delayed so that it becomes swollen, then consider whether it has become suppurated, hard, of a dark color and with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron because this is a suppurating pustule; for many times when you insert this pustule it becomes inflamed for him.
And if the pustule is of a lion' s meat and not of a dark color, and sometimes its abscission is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that without fear, and treat the area with what emerges and press it in so that it heals.
Chapter .XXVI.
On the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when there is a disunity which has been dissolved by pus or by similar things.
Know that when the solution of disunity happens in one of these cartilages, it rarely occurs in some people.
Therefore, when for some cause of these, you consider whether it is a fresh wound with the patient' s blood, and then bring together the two lips of the wound with a sewing, and then treat that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the disunity are already separated and each one is healed, then let you cut off each open part of its apparent tendon so that blood flows out. Then sew together the two lips and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and ground incense on top, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or one of the other consolidation plasters over the powder, and let it lie for two or three days, and then remove it and replace the plaster, and let it lie until the sores are healed.
But the manner of sewing is to add the solution of continuity or needles as we have related in the sewing of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with bile as you please and make it known.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes which come between the two lips in the parts within.
Many times many men have in the parts within their lips certain hard pustules resembling ear wax; some of them are small and some large.
Therefore, if you turn over the lips and split each of those hard pustules all around, and then make an incision to let out the pus, filling up the place with ground incense so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the place with something astringent until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of cutting of the flesh pressed against the gums.
Very often there is on the gum pressed flesh which the ancients called albus; therefore if you suspend it with your finger or something else and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run out.
Then place on the place ground incense or other astringent or cauterizing powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again secondly, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of drawing teeth with an iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the parts within and around the gums there are rough, hard, black or green spots which come from corruption of the gum, and the teeth are made loose:
Therefore, if you make the patient open his mouth and press down on the head with your thumb, and cut off the teeth in which those spots appear, and cut away the causes as though they were sand so that no cause remains behind, and this will be done with the blackness and the greeness and the others so that they are cleansed.
Therefore, if what is in the beginning of the cause is removed, it is good; and if not, then you shall repeat the cautery on those spots another day, or the second or third day until it comes to the last state as you wish.
And know that teeth have need of many remedies of diverse forms and many figures according to how they are prepared for your operation. And therefore the razor with which teeth are cut in the parts within is another than the razor with which they are cut between the teeth according to other forms; and you ought to prepare these razors whose forms you will see at once:
Chapter 30.
Of uprooting of teeth.
If you cure the tooth of its pain by all means and delay in any uprooting of it, for there is no cause which is beneath it when it is uprooted, for it is a sublime substance which is an obstacle to the uprooting.
But if the patient is forced to uproot the tooth, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for often pain deceives the patient and it seems to be in a healthy tooth when it is really in a sick one; therefore you shall cut that one and then the pain will not cease until the sick and painful tooth is uprooted, for we have seen this by operation of the barber-surgeons.
Therefore if you are certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then if you scarify in a circle around the tooth with a spathe in which there is some strength, so that it is dissolved from the gum all round, and then draw it out with tweezers or with subtle pincers little by little until it is uprooted.
And then you shall pull it hard with great strength for good speech or stupidity, and place the head of the patient between your thighs so that his mouth may not close so that you do not break the tooth, nor give the patient greater pain.
And if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and place it beneath in every part with ease and exert force on its removal as is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is split or worn away then if you plug that crack with a piece of cloth and tighten it at its extreme with a fine thread, so that it is not split in the hour of your constriction on it as you hold it.
And you shall open sufficiently with scarification in the circle of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that it is not split, and return upon the patient for the wickedness which he may do so that his first pain is lessened.
And beware that you do not do what certain ignorant barbers do in their hastiness and audacity upon uprooting them, without administering what we have recommended; for often they bring great diseases on men which are difficult to be bound, and the roots of them being removed all or some of them, or that you draw out that tooth with a bone of the jaw just as we have often witnessed.
And then the uprooting of it is to be washed in the mouth with hot wine or vinegar with salt.
And if blood flows out of it, then grind some quantity of vitriol and sprinkle upon the wound; and if that vitriol does not work, cauterize.
The form of the pincers and tweezers with which the tooth is to be drawn out at the beginning must be of long length, short handle and broad, so that they are not bent when you work with them.
And let their handles be as thick as to be strong and not bent when you draw out with those; they must be short lengths.
And they are to be made of Indian steel descended from right angles; and the ends of those are to have teeth of which some fit into others and draw tight with strong constriction; and sometimes the ends of those are to have the form of a hawk's beak, so that it is hooked, and they are strong constrictors.
Chapter 31.
Of uprooting of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaws that are split.
When you must uproot a tooth which is split for some cause, then let you place upon the spot a poultice with a bandage for one or two days until the place is softened; and then insert an instrument or pincers the ends of which are fitted together like a hawk's beak, the form of the forceps:
The ends of them to be made with files or chisels.
And if it does not obey you with these forceps or pincers, then let you dig into the root and cut away all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called the lever, a little bar of which the form is thus:
And it is to be of short length broad, not bent so that it is not split.
Thus if by this the cause is forgotten, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be of triangular and very thin extremity.
And you are helped by this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form, following appropriately: and by other instruments which are used in cutting teeth; for it is done with this instrument which is similar to a large needle, and this is the form:
of the triangular bent or short extremity, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
And another wisdom that the instruments of the moving teeth are and similarly the other instruments.
But the wise and subtle artisan in the art finds by himself matters according to what the operation and various illnesses mean to him; for there are illnesses of which the ancients did not speak nor set proper instruments, due to the forms of diverse species.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken, or if you pierce, then cure it on that in its place with what is convenient to him of the instruments and forceps which we have spoken about in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and help yourself by gesture of which this is the form:
And there should be some thickness in it little by little, and it should be bound or held by the mouth so that it does not escape or enter until the bone of all is forgotten; and then restore the place with convenient medicines to that end.
But if in the bone there is a small piercing, then cut that of that piercing and of its blackness, and cure it so that it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of teeth prominent above others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form by those the shape is lagged, and most especially when they affect women, and most especially venerables; therefore you should consider: if tooth is next another tooth, and there is no possibility of separation or lining of it, then cut that; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you insert that with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to pig's snout, and should be made of Indian iron of acute extremity.
And your incision by which you insert that into it in several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be infected with another of the teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to polishing, then polish that with an Indian iron file of which this is the form:
And let all of it be of Indian iron and the margin sharp; and let it be of very small points like needles with which the tooth is polished little by little in several days with ease, so that no other tooth is infected and falls away. And then line it at the end, and cut that with a sharp razor.
And if the tooth of which one part is broken and hurts the tongue, then you should polish it so that the sharpness of that fracture is worn down and dulled, and be flattened so that the tongue is not hurt nor speech impaired.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of restoration of infected teeth with gold or silver.
When there happens to teeth before concussion and removal due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot strain on what he chews, and you have cured that with astringent medicines, and your cure has not helped, then so that they do not rot, it is necessary to strengthen them with gold and not silver, for silver turns green and then rots after a few days, but gold never changes color.
And let the gold be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that it can enter between teeth; and the form of the filling is that you take the gold and take twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and then so that it grows with two tortuosity of the gold between two infected ones, or if one or many, so that the tissue comes to the healthy tooth of the other party. And then repeat the filling so that it comes to the party from which you begin, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not infected.
And let your filling by which you strengthen the gold not escape from the roots of teeth.
And then insert the excess extremities of the gold with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert and conceal those between the healthy tooth and the infected one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then polish it thus tightly with Roman sand.
But if it is loose or cracked, strengthen that or them with another gold in such a way at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the filling of two healthy ones and two infected ones, thus with their veins:
And when it is made so that one tooth or two return to their places and are grown again as we have recommended, and become infected again.
And it does not happen unless it is a wise artisan.
And sometimes a cause of the bones of cows is appropriate, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and is placed in the place in which the tooth fails, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of incision of the ligament which comes on the tongue and forbids speech.
This ligament which comes under the tongue sometimes naturally or accidentally happens due to a wound which is already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, your head being in your lap; and elevate his tongue, and then insert that ligament of nerves according to its width so that the tongue is loosened from its binding.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and that is standing due to consolidation of wound, then you wet the tip of the needle and cut that according to its width so that you have cut the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And take care that there is not a fissure made in the membrane of the flesh, and that you split only the tendon and blood flows out.
And then let it be washed the trace of the incision with aqua regia or with vinegar or with wine, and then pause under the tongue for a moment; thus is the one which holds the patient's tongue down in each night so that it is not consolidated again.
But if blood flows out, pause over the place vitriol broken into pieces; but if the blood vents, then cauterize the place with a lantigo cautery which is appropriate for that end. And then cure it with other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of extraction of ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes an aposteme happens under the tongue resembling a small nail prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and it is swollen so that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the aposteme.
And if you see it of a dusky or black color, hard, to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch that for it is rotten.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you should apply the ointment to it, and insert that with a slender spatula, and insert the whole of it; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you should stop it with a bandage made of pitch, until the blood is constricted.
Then return to your work while it is still fresh, until it has been washed with agreeable wine and salt; and cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of an abscess from the ears, and that which occurs in the throat, and of other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the throat, there are glands which are attached and are similar to cotton, which burst outwards and are named tonsils; if you cure these with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you should consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, and has little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; before you leave that, let it become ripe, and then either you will cut that out, or it will break open on its own.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and its root is slender, then that is what should be pierced.
And the operation on it is that you should consider before your operation if the abscess has already rested by itself with complete rest or if it has decreased by any decrease; and then make the patient lie down facing away from the sun, with his head in your lap, and open his mouth, and the servant holding his hands take a noble instrument between their fingers to press his tongue down, so that:
And the servant taking his tongue and pulling it forward through that channel if it is necessary to pull out the abscess; and it should be made of silver or brass, and be slender like a needle.
Then when you press with that instrument and the abscess is shown to you, and place your finger over that, then take ointment and put that in the aperture, and pull that outwards as far as you can. Another one which pulls some cause from the membranes; and then pierce that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
Another one which pulls some cause from the membranes; and then pierce that with an instrument of which this is the shape: And it should be made with slender iron; and it is like tweezers, except that the ends of it are curved so that the aperture of each one is towards the other, very sharp, and it should be iron which has been tempered.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce that with a spatula of which this is the shape of it: and it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And once you have pierced one aperture, pierce the other according to this manner of piercing; and then wipe the patient's throat with water.
But if blood flows out, then cure it with water of decoction of bark of pomegranate or of bay leaf and the like for causes which constrict the flow of blood until the flow of blood is constricted, and then cure that until it is healed.
And sometimes in the throat there are other abscesses besides those tonsils, and pierce those according to what is said in the piercing of two apertures simultaneously.
And I had treated a woman of an abscess which occurred in her throat; that abscess was inclined towards a dark color, had little feeling, and it had closed her throat; and the woman breathed with difficulty, had prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if I had not acted.
And the abscess had pushed so much that it had made two holes through which pus drained out.
So I cut the abscess open and placed one of their ointments in it, and pulled that out, and a great portion came out of him; then I pierced the other aperture from where I understood there was another abscess, and then I closed his mouth, pressed his tongue, and then I put the ointment in that abscess.
And then I cut a large portion of it out, and there was only a little blood flowing from him. So her throat was completely cleared and she began to drink water immediately and also eat food; then I did not cease piercing that abscess many times over a long time, and there would be another abscess in the same place, which I would pierce so that it was prolonged.
So I used iron and cauterized her throat; then after a few days I walked around and did not know what God did to me from that; therefore, I will continue.
Chapter 37.
Of piercing the membrane when it is abscessed.
When there is pus in the membrane and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round at the bottom, then it is called a boil.
But if it is cured with what we said in the division and does not comply with your cure, and you see that the abscess is cauterized and is thin; and if it is at that length and blood flows from it, of a dark color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then beware of piercing it, for there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument of which you process its shape; and then put the ointment in the new one, pull it down, and pierce that with one of two instruments of which I spoke about the piercing of two apertures.
And beware of piercing that unless it is adjusted to the natural term with addition; for if you pierce it more, you will harm his speech.
And then, after the piercing use what we recommended in the piercing of two apertures and cure that until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the piercing of it, then use the iron in cauterizing him without fear, and the manner of the cautery in him is not except with sharp water; and it is that you place the patient's head in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we said, and then take the water which we said in the chapter on cauterization, and comply with it while it is alive, and stop that neither thick nor slender, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
And take a slender spatula and scrape the new one from which you removed the membrane; and if it is soft or bleeding, and the patient quiets down, then stop his speech.
And then hold your hand over the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of about half an hour until you see that it is blackened and numbed by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take lint and wrap that around the end of the iron, and submerge the iron in the medicine, and insert the iron with the lint into a tube so that the lint adheres to that tube; and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the boil, then close that which has been cauterized for three or four days.
And if you wish to iterate the medicine, do so, and then sterilize the wound with a hot poker dipped in wine, and cleanse it with the water that was used to dip the poker into the wine, and wash it with soap, and treat it from the outside with embrocation, and on the inside with healing salves until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than surgery and less frightening.
Sometimes the ulcer is healed with something more subtle than cauterization or incision: take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, scissum arabic, camomile, and similar herbs to these, and prepare all those ingredients, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be steeped in sweet wine; then let the bowl be boiled gently, and let there be a hole in the middle of the bowl, on which is placed a suitable hollow instrument made of silver or bronze.
And the end of this instrument is inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the ulcer on the tongue, while the tongue is very fogged up.
And then repeat this several times until it is dried up, and beware of performing this treatment during the decline of an ulcer, for it would be too harsh on the ulcer, but you should perform this after the ulcer has been cauterized.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and attach a ball of wool to its end, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is beneficial for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and other objects stuck in the throat and other causes.
Many times something gets stuck in the throat, or a thorn from the foot, or some other cause.
Therefore, you must pull out what is visible to you by looking at it while pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of your eyes, so that you can see what is in the throat.
And if there is something hidden in the throat that you cannot see, then make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, for very often the cause of a blockage in the throat is that the object is forced down by the food; or let the patient eat a piece of bread or a raw lettuce leaf, or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sponge, and apply it firmly to the wound, and then the patient swallows it, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns, it will pull them out. And take an eel and dip it in vinegar, and let it stay inside the mouth and be chewed and swallowed; or take a piece of rope and chew on it and spit it out again.
But if they are not pulled out with those methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in the following shape:
And let it be thicker than a small straw, and on its end have a hollow that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
And let the patient tilt his head back, and be careful not to touch his bones in the throat, but with that instrument gently probe for the thorn or the object, or have the doctor hold his hand over it.
But let the patient himself insert it, for he knows best where the object is stuck, and with his hand gently probe from above, and pull the object out with the instrument downward, as much as the object will allow without causing any harm.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood clots stuck in the throat.
When the ulcer has been treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with remedies, then consider the patient' s throat, for you must have probed his tongue with an instrument as we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see a blood clot, pull it out with a small hook or a fine needle gently and decently.
And if you cannot pull it out with that instrument, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place a hot iron in the hollow of the tube, and do this as many times (as long as the blood clot is killed and comes out) and refrain from drinking water all day.
And then take a pitcher full of warm water, and pour it into his mouth, and wash the throat with it; do not drink any other liquid or medicine for an hour or so with your hand, for as soon as the blood clot comes in contact with the water, it will come out.
But if it is not pulled out with what we have mentioned, then smoke the patient' s throat with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument that we have mentioned for smoking the ulcer.
Do this in whatever way you can.
And there is another way to smoke it: take a bowl in which there are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth, and on that cloth there is a hole, and put the end of the instrument into that hole; and then smoke the patient' s throat with that, and let the patient hold his mouth over the end of the tube so that the smoke does not escape, until you know that the smoke has reached the blood clot, for as soon as the blood clot is reached, it will come out.
And if it does not come out, then repeat the smoking several times, and refrain from drinking, and eat salty foods and almonds, and drink no water, and with this regimen it will surely be expelled.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which blood clots are pulled out when they are seen; and it is similar to forceps, except that it has some curvature: which is inserted into the throat, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is smooth, and on it there is a groove, so that when something is pressed against it, it will not slip.
Chapter 40.
Here ends the first part of the treatment of ulcers and their division.
Ulcers are many things, of various kinds, according to what is remembered about them, in this book.
And they are varied in their formation and division by two ways, of which one is by the nature of ulcers themselves; and by that which comes from humours.
And the second way is according to the parts of the body where they occur, for an ulcer on the head is different from one on the back; and an ulcer on a fleshy part is different from one on a joint; and each of them requires treatment by incision.
And there are also ulcers which are not punctured but rather mature in their pus, or are fulfilled with matter.
And other ulcers are punctured when they are cruciform, and not mature according to their nature; or are near joints, for when an ulcer occurs near a joint, the part around it is prolonged because its muscles or nerves are affected, causing contraction of that member; or it is near a main member, and if you delay in puncturing it until it is mature, it will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, so do not puncture it unless it is mature; or it is made near the end of the body so that the flesh around it becomes prolonged, and a fistula is formed, or it occurs on the edge of the body if it is not healed. May I inform you of the time of the piercing of the pustule, for that is when it matures.
You will know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and also when there is a reduction in redness and pulse, and when the head of the pustule becomes sharp and the other signs appear.
You will know that piercing has occurred in the lowest part of the pustule, and also from the pus coming out of the healing process of the eminence.
And piercing should always be done through the length of the skin or body, if the pustules are on the parts of the hands or feet, and in the places of the veins, nerves, and arteries; and in short, in all places equally, where there is no reflection; because in those where there is a reflection, piercing should be done according to that member.
But if the pustule is on a fleshy part, it is better to let the piercing be made inside so that digestion of it be confirmed according to what we have said; for if you pierce it before then, the body of it will be prolonged and there will be much filthiness and strengthening of its lips and depth.
But some pustules are pierced according to the breadth of the skin or body, because of necessity, or according to that member from which it is indigestible.
And you shall administer a small piercing for the great pustules; and a broad and ample or many piercings according to the diversity of the size of the pustules.
And others are from pustules in which the cord is hollowed out and cut, when it is made thus as bread; and so it happens in tumors of scrofula and scrofulous bumps.
And some are cut with a section having three angles; and others are cut thus in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, thus as the pustules of the angles.
And some are administered round section and moon-shaped section, and resembling those.
But to that which is not as its pustules are superficial lions, you shall pierce it with superficial piercing or plane only.
And when the pustule is thick and has collected much pus, pierce it and do not be afraid to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted some part of it, then plug up the pustule again for another day, and then extract a greater part, and do this many times according to its graduation until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is of phlegmatic nature or a woman with child, or small infant, or old man in decrepitude; for the animal spirit many times is dissolved by the exit of pus, and soon dies after, so you should open them up.
Therefore keep this chapter with great caution, and when you pierce these pustules, wash the wounds and consider if the wound of the pustule is small, or a flat section, then you shall administer the remedies of oil or old wine; but if the pustule is large and the fissures of piercing are many, then you shall put a plug in each slit so that they may come together again.
And if in the pustule a part of the cord is abscinded or hollowed out around it, then you shall complete it with old oil or thread made from linen cloth, thus as when you have treated pains or roots, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and process it and heal it by that which you know to be best.
But if there is bleeding in the hour of your operation, then you shall administer warm water and vinegar in which you have steeped a linen cloth, and apply it to the site of bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you shall administer remedies and cures, and powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and of division.
But if it is in wintertime and the location of the pustule is near many nerves, then you shall soak cotton in wine and oil, and apply these to the locations.
And if it is in summer and the locations are fleshy, then you shall apply cotton soaked in water and oil or wine and oil; and do all this until the third day, as we have said, and then open up the pustule, cleanse it and administer what suits it to heal.
And this is what is necessary to know about the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have said above in each chapter how the cure is for each pustule particularly.
Chapter 41:
Of section of pustules which come in the cord of the head.
In the cords of the head there are small pustules which contain tunics that are made of many parts, and their species are numerous.
And from these come pimples, and some contain moisture like lime. And some contain moisture resembling powder, and some resemble them; and some are scaly and hard.
And in the section of all these, and in the extraction of them there is no fear, as long as the extraction of them does not disturb the artery.
And the operation in the section of these is that you express them with an instrument the form of which you will see below, the one which is called entromes, so that you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with section according to its length by superficial section in this form:
And begin the section from line B to G. Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then you shall scrape it by which it contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for many times it returns if there is any cause.
And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with this the wound and leave it until the next day, for by this you will corrode all that which is left of that film.
And then apply the ointment to it again a second and third time if it is not healed, so that you are confident there is no cause of that film left; then heal the wound with ointment so that it may be healed.
And if the pustule contains a nodular lump, then cut it according to this form: By section having the form of a cross, and cut on both sides of the section and bore it from end to end, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if your artery causes contradiction, then do what I have told you before.
And similarly do in the pustule which is whitewashed with section and cure as we have said before; and cut over pustule which is whitewashed so that it may be pustular, for it contains little blood and little moisture.
And some of these pustules are in the head in some men who do not contain moisture; and its cause is that they have struck over a pustule on the head of an old woman and plugged up the pustule thus with soft pebble, rough, white, which could not be pierced, and if they strike it, they would hurt it.
But in other pustules that come accidentally on the head which are not in this chapter, as well as those that come on the heads of infants and have the roots of warts, their section should be superficial.
And make the incision in those from the lower part of their body so that the body is relieved of the disease in the lower parts.
Then treat those with what is appropriate for that type of treatment.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofula which happens in the neck.
These pustules sometimes appear on the neck, armpits and angles; and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and many that are engendered among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, and also with nodes and pustules on the head, as we have related.
And the species of these scrofula are many, some of which are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color of which is apparent is close to the color of the codena, and is enlarged to all parts, and is not annexed by the nerves of the neck, nor by the veins, nor by the artery, and is not deep, where you investigate that with a superficial cut of the part above to the part below the body of the line of G. between the line of B., and peel that from all parts, and extend two lips of the codena with tweezers, or with many tweezers if you have the need of those, as we have said in the pustules on the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is a greater precaution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the spatula not move sharply, so that it does not hit your hand with a cut, or disturb the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to be incised; for if you cut a vein or artery and forbid yourself from your operation, then put on the wound vitriol ground small or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and close the wound, and let that remain within which causes the keenness of the pustule and let the wound be soft and begin to turn red. When the blood is abstained.
Therefore return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire with your finger into the other small scrofula, therefore incise those and cleanse those.
And if it is in the root of a large scrofula vein, where then you should not incise that scrofula at its root. Before that you twist that with strong thread and let it drop by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already saturated in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you incise the whole scrofula, then you should pinch the two lips of the wound and suck out the pus so that none remains above.
But if you see that pus remains because of the greatness of the scrofula, where then you should understand to incise its root and drain it and administer suture and what is said.
And of the scrofula which contains humidity, perforate that with a superficial incision where it appears to you to be the location of its maturity, and make an incision of what is below the pus of the body, as we have said.
And then administer an incision, calx with ointment and bandages to those, in order that it corroses what remains of the corrosion. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then you cure that with generative ointment of flesh until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the section of the pimple of the pustule accidentally in the gullet.
The ancients taught this section in the epiglottis, and we did not see anyone in our land who has done that.
And this is the inscription of the word of those.
But in men having a scrotum, where the extraction of the epiglottis is avoided, as it is not done for them for that all the veins and the larger of the patient are here.
But in those who have pustules cauterized in the mouth or gullet or both ears, when the illness is not in the throat, where they should use the section of epiglottis to avoid loss which is done by perforation.
Therefore when we want that, let us incise the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with small section for the width in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be in the diaphragm, not in the cartilage, and this location is convenient to section, because it is deprived of flesh and its vessels of blood are light.
And if the physician is fearful, where then let him extend the membrane of the gullet with tweezers, and then split the membrane so that he reaches the cavity, but avoid the blood vessels if you see from those any cause.
And then incise the septum according to what we have written; and it is significant about the section of the cavity by the phlegm which comes from that which is of him broken and through the incision of the voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Therefore when the hour is diminished in which the incision is feared, unite two lips of the membrane of the wound, and cut that only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause the flesh within to be healed.
And Al-Bucasis said that the summary of the word which we have written, its exposition is not but that some of those pustules have cauterized the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his throat was swollen, and some went to incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes the air on the location of the wound through any respiration, and he is saved from death.
And for that they commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then therefore they commanded to close the wound, and cure that until it is healed.
And what I have seen by my physicians is that a servant pressed a cloth and moistened it in the gullet of the patient and cauterized one part of the canal of the lung, and he was called to its cure, and it stopped the mucus as it is stopped from the dead, and he uncovered the wound and stopped the blood which was flowing from the wound.
Therefore he confessed that that had not incised a vein nor artery, and the wind was coming from the wound, and it healed that until the fire was healed.
And he did not listen to the servant unless she screamed in her voice, and then after some days he returned to the milking of his dispositions.
And now he says that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of the section on pustule which happens in the gullet outward, and it is called hernia of the gullet.
This pustule named hernia of the gullet is a large pustule according to the color of the body, and it is found in women.
And it is according to two manners, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural there is not remedy.
And the accidental is according to two manners of which one is like nodes green, and the other manner is like pustule which is done by constriction of artery, and in that is fear. And don't make the patient wear armor except in those who are small. And you examine that and inspect it as he said, and if you find it looking like a knotted vein, not suspended from any of the veins, then cut into it along with the knots, and pull out what is inside it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then probe his whole body, and apply medicine to the area so that it may heal.
Chapter .45.
Of the cutting of the various types of knots.
There are many types of knots, and I have already discussed all their types in the division.
And one should know the difference between a knot and an exit as there is doubt.
Therefore, I say that with an exit there is heat and violent fever and pain until the ebullition of the superfluity is subdued; and there is completed putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But with a knot, there is no heat or fever or pain; it contains that lion's tooth which has its own bag.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cyst and it is made like a bag, either major or minor, and they are according to two species, for one is fatty and contains humidity, and the colors of humidity are many, according to what I discussed in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a knot, probe it and open it at its beginning with an instrument called an intromis, according to what its form will be in the chapter which is next.
And it is the method of probing abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and you twist your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
Then place your hand over it according to the measurement of the size of the abscess, and pull out the instrument and consider what has come out in its trail.
And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then probe it with a superficial cut according to what I have said about other abscesses.
And if you do not get humidity from the trail of the instrument, then know that it is fatty.
And cut over it in a form of a cross according to this form: Thus you have taught it, and suspend that by the nails, and cut the membrane from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or bag, if you can, over that and pull out that pus along with the knot.
But if it is broken in the operation and it is not possible to pull out that pus, then you should cut it into pieces so that from it nothing may rupture again for any cause.
For if from it anything ruptures, whether a little or a lot, the knot will return according to the most.
And if you see that from it any small part ruptures, then complete the wound with some corrosive powdered acids and strengthen the wound, and place over it what caused the abscess, and cure that by another cure until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then you cut its two lips and cure that with what incarnates.
But if pulsating blood comes to it contrary or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the place of the vein that is veridical and let it rest for two or three days until the swelling of the blood subsides; then return to cutting what has ruptures in the knot.
Chapter .46.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary for probing and piercing.
Those are the forms of the intromises, and they are of three species; one is large, and one is middle-sized, and one is small.
The form of the large intromis is this:
The form of the small intromis is this:
They are made of iron, of full-hole, and of tapered ends, so that the instrument fits into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called albaris, and one of them is called veridis.
And they are of three species; one is large, middle-sized and small.
The form of the large experimenter's form is:
The form of the middle-sized experimenter's form is:
The form of the small experimenter's form is:
They are convenient for abscesses and exits and fistulas and boils, so that they fit between those [bones] and from other causes.
And they are made round, large, and pointed, with which needles are sewn, and they are made of ramon citrin, or of ramon, or of iron, or of silver; and the best are when they are made of ramon citrin.
And they are made the experimenters of black feathers, which are considered that through them the fistulas are opened in the cavities in which they are reflected by their levitation with those reflections.
And they are of three species; some of them are long, and some middle-sized, and others short, according to the quantity of the opening of the fistula and its stricture.
The form of the large experimenter made of lead is:
The form of the middle-sized experimenter made of lead is:
The form of the small experimenter made of lead is:
The forms of the nails are of many species; some of them are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three species: large, small, and middle-sized.
And their bodies are hooked, and they are of three species.
And some of them have two curves, and they are of three species.
And some of them have three curves, and they are of three species.
And all of those are necessary in their place.
The form of the small simple nail is:
The form of the large nail with two curves is: The form of the middle-sized nail with two curves is: The form of the small nail with two curves is:
The form of the large nail with three curves is:
The form of the middle-sized nail with three curves is:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and pierce the knots and abscesses; and they are of three species; one is large, middle-sized, and small.
The form of the large scalpel is:
The form of the middle-sized scalpel is:
The form of the small scalpel is:
The ends of those with which is made the cut are pointed and the other ends are not, and they are not placed in such a way that it is done gently in the cutting of the knots the fear of piercing of vein or nerve; and by them the patient is healed and given rest a little by the scaring of the abscess.
And these are the forms of bandages, which are of three kinds: large, medium and small, as you will see.
They are made of wool and are similar to a round shield.
And it is punctured on the outer edge, concealed with a spatula, and the inner part, inside and out, as you wish, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers through the piercing of the pustules and are not perceived by the patients. And they are of three kinds: large, medium and small. And these are their forms:
The forms of vents through which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small. Their forms are as follows:
They are made of citrus tree bark, round with some length, and are thin.
And these kinds of vents stop the flow of blood with great speed when there is a need and they are not used for the first time as medicine.
However, do not use these to stop the flow of blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as on the insides of the arms and thighs, and on the flesh of the chest, breasts, belly, armpits, and similar fleshy parts with moist skin.
And sometimes these instruments are made smaller, similar in shape to scrotal sacs, through which blood is stopped when a phlebotomy or an incision of a vein or artery is performed.
And sometimes they are made round like this:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Sometimes men's breasts are swollen due to a sleeping habit when they start to become hairy, and then the breasts become swollen, resembling women's breasts, and become painful to the touch.
And for this, when you cut into them with a lunar incision according to this form, from the line .B. to the line .G., and then remove all the thickness, fill the wound with embodied medicine, and then sew the two lips of the wound together and heal what is left.
But if the breast sags towards the sides and is softened by its weight like women'e breasts, then it should be cut into two parts at its middle with two incisions resembling a lunar figure, so that each part contains the other because of their connection, as the longer line contains the shorter one according to this form, from line .B. to line .G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and scrape away the pimple-like growths, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders that are necessary in the healing process until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut because of the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the roughness, and then heal what is left.
Chapter 48.
On piercing pustules that come from below and cause itching.
Those pustules that come from below and cause itching are of the kinds of scrofula, hard, and contain a sac-like substance.
And some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be punctured with a lunar incision like this: from line .G. to line .B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the pustule, fill it with wool and leave it for another day.
And then the wound should be cleaned and healed with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the pustules of the kinds of nodules and scrofula, then you should split them as we have said in the section on scrofula above.
But if the wound extends so that it causes pus discharge, then administer a cautery as we have said before in this section.
Chapter 49.
On incisions of pustules that occur through an artery or vein.
When an artery is broken and the vein that is on top of it is hardened, then many times pustules occur because inflammation and pustules are caused by an artery or vein: when a pustule occurs through an artery, it is long-lasting in the depth of the body; and when you push on the pustule with your fingers, you feel a wheezing.
And what occurs through a vein is spread out throughout the superficial parts of the body.
And an incision on this pustule is dangerous, especially in what is below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its treatment with a cautery should be avoided, and what is on the extremities, or the head, should be avoided.
But for what occurs through inflammation of the opening of an artery, split it in its vein with a long incision; and then open the incision with pincers and then the artery and loosen the membranes that have been uncovered.
And then place an awl on that and make it penetrate to the other side, and narrow the artery with a double-edged knife in two places, which causes a shuddering when you pull on both arteries which are in the arms.
And then plug up the place that is between two membranes with a spatula so that the blood in it is all discharged, and the pustule is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which pus is generated inside when the membranes fall, and then heal that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if it is a pustule due to an incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible of the pustule by its vein, and then insert an awl below where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and narrow it with a double-edged knife so that you pull out from the other side, and then ligature the pustule with a thin thread according to what you feel when pulling on two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread is pulled out, then insert the awl below all of the pustule due to the incision of the awl first, and narrow your fingers in four places.
Then dry the pustule in its middle part where it comes out so that when it is dried up, you split open the excess of the vein, and leave what is left.
And then place over it a powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 50 on pustules that occur due to torque of nerves.
Like pustules occur in arteries and veins, and similarly pustules occur in nerves when they occur due to a blow or occur due to excessive twisting.
And it occurs most often in the places of the helpers, or in the heel, or any place where the joints are crushed.
And it is a serious pustule, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and has six dispositions in it, and when it is pressed hard, the patient feels a stupor.
And it is not pustule-like in the abdomen, and because of that, it is below the diaphragm, and he is unable to move his arms or legs.
Therefore, for those who have pain in their joints, there is no need for the application of lead, because shortly it would cause contraction.
However, for those with pain in their head or forehead, open the diaphragm with a spatula. But if there are only a few pustules, then take out that one with tweezers from its root.
And if it is large, then open it with a blade, and remove the pus from inside, and then close that wound with stitches, and treat the wound so that it heals properly.
Chapter 7.
Of the section of pustules which happens to the jaw, which happens in the stomach.
Some men have pustules in their stomachs and other parts of the body which are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi. The root of these pustules is thin but their head is thick; some of these men have chapped lips, some are small while others become very large.
And I have seen one such person whose stomach had two pustules that looked like fungi; there was no difference in them except for their size, some were small and thin-rooted while others were larger.
And the lips of these people would crack and bleed, and moisture would flow from them all the time.
Therefore I opened those pustules and found one inside that weighed 18 ounces. The other one weighed six ounces.
The operation at the beginning of these pustules is that one should consider if the patient is humid or dry, and the color of the pus is white, humid with thin roots; then open it with a wide blade and burn the pus with fire, because often the cutting of this pustule expels much blood; and if you see blood, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient is fearful and timid, refrain from opening it with a blade; instead, take fresh lead ore and rub it on the pustule, in the way we previously described; then leave it for two days.
Then tie it tightly with the lead wire; therefore, do not stop tightening the large lead wire around it until it is completely cut off and falls out on its own.
However, if the pustule has a thick root, then opening it causes fear and terror, especially when it is located in the stomach.
But you can cut it partially, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then treat the wound so that it heals properly.
And beware of opening a pustule that is dark in color and feels insensitive to touch, because it is often cancerous.
And I have seen this happen many times.
Chapter 8.
Of the treatment of hernia of the navel.
Hernia of the navel is caused by many things: either by fissures on the diaphragm which is located above the stomach, or by the tissue or intestine slipping through these openings; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery that is located in front, or by a constricted ventricle.
But if it is caused by a fissure in the diaphragm and a tear in the tissue, then the pustule has a similar color to the rest of the body; it also has less pain, and appears in different places. And if it is caused by a slipping of the intestine, then its position will be as we previously described, with more intense variations, and when you press it with your fingers it hides, and then returns; and soon it becomes very large due to taking baths and strenuous activity.
But if it is caused by humidity, then it is soft and does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or burned.
And if it is caused by blood, then it has dark-inclined pustules with these signs.
But if it is caused by a tumor, then it is a serious and large pustule, hard and firm, and it grows according to its quantity.
But if it is caused by a ventricle, then touching it causes pain.
And the operation on it is that one should consider if the hernia of the navel is caused by blood from an artery or vein, or by a ventricle; then one must refrain from treating it because there is fear and terror in that, as we instructed in the chapter where we talked about pustules caused by arteries and veins.
And if the hernia of the navel is caused by the intestine or tissue, then command the patient to lie on his back, and be standing upright; then touch with your fingers around the entire navel, and then command him to press his chest against your hands while you are pressing the area above the navel with a wide blade; then extend the pustule to the sides with strong pressure or with tweezers in a decent manner.
Then open the mouth of the extended pustule above the navel and insert your finger into it; and if you have pushed it back and held it there, then pull out the intestine towards the inside of the stomach.
And if you have pushed back the tissue, then take that with tweezers; and cut off its excess.
But if it is pressing against an artery or vein, then surround it greatly and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them in the circle you made around the pustule in the form of a cross, with the needles penetrating through; then tighten the pustule into four parts on top of the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the flesh that has been extended and dropped on its own; or open it when it becomes thinner and is about to drop, then treat it with what is suitable for its healing.
And if the hernia of the navel is caused by a tumor or humidity, then you must open the pustule as we previously described and dry out the blood or humidity which you find in it; then treat it with what is suitable and consolidate the wound.
Chapter 9.
Of the treatment of cancer.
We have already said in the division of cancer and how it is treated with medicine, and that it is dangerous to treat it with iron without first being ulcerated; we have also talked about cancers generated in the mother and the caution in treating them.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer appears in places where it is possible to eradicate it, like cancers located in the breasts or in the groin and their branches are similar to those of the limbs; therefore, one should extract all of it, especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and large, one must not approach it, because I have never seen anyone healed from that illness nor become better.
And the operation on it is, when it is located as we previously described, to make him rest and give him black hellebore several times; then bleed that person, if there is evident congestion.
And then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he will be operated on, and you shall cut off the nails of the fingers and toes that belong to him; and then from all sides with a good incision, do a thorough examination so that no cause remains in the roots of him. And let the blood flow, and do not cut off the wound quickly, and squeeze out the places, and wipe away the blood with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you to do so from the instruments.
But if it troubles you with the flow of blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area so that the flow of blood is stopped; and then cure that wound with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 44:
Of the treatment for dropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, of its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is nothing other than the species of [dropsy] from bile alone; and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympany nor to the species of hyposaracha, for these are deadly.
And when you have treated this species of tympany with medicines and your treatment does not help him, then consider: for if the patient is already weakened, or is suffering from another malady, or another dropsy, like this if there is a cough or sickness in his abdomen and similar to these, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for fear of this.
But if you see the patient swollen with fluid, and there is no other malady in him except for dropsy alone, and he is not a child or an old man, then the manner of operating on him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and you squeeze his abdomen with your hand, filling up the water from below the navel, and you take the spathe of thorns according to this shape:
Let it be of two acute parts long, with an acute end like a spathe; but let there be in it some small brevity little by little, so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and take out that.
And then consider if the generation of the dropsy is from the parts of the intestines, for then you should with the section lengthen him from the navel down by the amount of three digits at the lower ends, in his right side over the navel.
But if the generation of dropsy is from an illness of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three digits.
And if its generation is from phlegm, then your section should be on the right.
And do not let your section be over the side where he wants to lie so that the superfluities do not flow to that place.
And then pierce with the instrument throughout the whole cavity, and insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spathe between the cavity and the sphincter, and you drain him out; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or as much.
And then pierce the sphincter until the spathe reaches the desired location, and it is where the water is. And then take out that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and is like a cannula of silver subtle; it is made of silver or brass or lion-skin, to which at its lower end there is a small cut, and on its sides are three cuts: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is split according to the manner of a feather, just like:
And at the upper end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately falls upon the instrument, thus evacuating the water in a small amount at a time; for if you evacuate more than that which does not return in the hour, then the patient will die quickly from resolution of his animal spirit, or he will suffer a fivefold death that is near to death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what are shown to you the dispositions of the patient's strength by his pulse and his goodness.
And then take out the instrument and let the water remain, for its cause is that it is retained by the cavity which closes over the sphincter of which you are told to pierce according to this manner.
And then return the instrument on another day if he can endure that, and take out a little of the water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware of errors so that not too much remains in the water but only a few drops.
But if you fear for the patient and let out of the water a great quantity, then cure him with dry medicine in a bath until he is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the phlegm and the liver, for the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Chapter 45:
Of the cure of children whose places for urination are not pierced.
Sometimes a child is born from the belly of his mother and the head of his mixture is not pierced (or it is cut tightly or it is in its place).
Then it should be touched with piercing of him immediately that he is born with spathe moved subtle according to this shape:
And then stop in the cut a needle of lead and bind it, and let him be for three days or for four days.
And when he wants to urinate let him be restrained and urinate; and then return that.
And if you do not stop the lead, then it is possible that the urine which goes over the place does not harm this closure.
But he of whom the cut is tight should be treated with a needle of lead as we have said for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the cut is not in its place are led, for the cause is that of these, he who is born and the cut is from the end of the penis due to which it cannot urinate at the parts within, thus elevating the penis with his hand at the parts above; and it is not generation, therefore the sperm cannot arrive at the mother according to rectitude, and it is a sickly thing.
And the manner of operation on him is that the patient be bent over his back, and then extend the penis with your left hand with violent extraction, and insert the head of the penis of the place of the foreskin with a spathe acute, like an incision of feather, or you scrape any part, so that the meat of him comes similar to the head of the penis and that the cut falls in the meat place according to where it should.
And beware that in your operation you flow blood, for many times it happens to him; and stop him with it that you draw out the blood, and cure the wound until if it is healed.
Chapter 46:
Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis and of hardness and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin of the head of the penis.
Sometimes it happens to this whitlow in the penis and there is eminence of meat gone bad.
And of one it is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Non-malignant, suspend it with a needle and draw out that until the whole is drained; and then stop on that cot which is immersed in Egyptian ointment; and then cure that with ointment of dayfinicon until he is healed.
If the ulcer is malignant, of a dark color, then you should administer cautery near its edges and roots.
But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the penis, and one part of the ulcer is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the ulcer which is inside at its beginning where it is attached; and then you should cure that which is outside, for when you cure that complex the foreskin will not be secured from being torn.
And indeed we have seen this happen to the testicles and foreskin with blackness and corruption, so then you should cauterize all that which has turned black or is beginning to corrupt; and then spread over it ointment made from ground pomegranate peel mixed with ground and sieved bran.
And then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then administer lunar cautery in this way:
for cautery helps in two ways, namely for bleeding and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed completely, then you should insert into the opening of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in that whose foreskin is loose, and on whom circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion happens due to plague or suppuration), then you should cut with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is separated from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut with a spatula between the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, can be easily pierced due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin thread which has been moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be cured with a styptic until it is healed.
Chapter .LVII.
Of the purification of children and of the cure for those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other plagues; but rather since it comes from our action and will, and its cause is specifically in children, it is necessary that we assign to it better action and a shorter way so they lose less health.
So I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision for any of their men, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, and the cause is that we have found the majority of artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use ointment made from pitch and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and not found better purification with tweezers, or ointment made from pitch which is used in purification with the nail, for many times the foreskin has escaped underneath, for the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one is pushed down underneath, and it is easily forced towards other incisions and certain pain. And purification which is done by the butcher, and is made with a knife, of which the butchers use, does not secure the incision of the tip of the virile member, for it easily goes inside its channel.
But in the operation with the nail, iron and corruption often obstructs your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and in many cases it does not need purification, and I have seen this.
But as for the purification which is done with tweezers and ointment made from pitch, its goodness I discovered through experience, for the tweezers have proportional incisions, so that the acuteness which is above is equal to the acuteness which is below; and therefore when you press your hand they are equally compressed, and the ointment is made into a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all sides, with which no error can occur.
And the way of the first operation is that you let the child be mostly upright if he is one of those who understand a little, and do not do anything but apply the ointment to his penis for just one day.
Then let him be cheerful in all ways that it is possible for you to receive his intelligence. Then let him be between your hands, established comfortably, and not crying; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or underneath your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
Then put your hand to his penis and breathe into the foreskin, and draw it out so that the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify it of that which is accumulated in there from filth.
The form of the tweezers for purification, this is their form:
Let the outer tips be blunt and the inner ones sharp, so that the nail of the claw is not cut, and let the length of both tips be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But the error in purification is that often all the intrinsic foreskin goes out, or a part of it because of the incision.
Then you should spread that which is in your hand with your nail before the pustule of the spot and insert it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that with tweezers and insert it.
But if it has passed three days and the pustule on the penis is reduced, then you should insert that which is flat underneath the penis, and you should cut that which is raised by the pustule with ease, and insert it according to how it is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the penis, for it will not hurt him.
And then cure it with that which the plague consolidates from the powders of which we have spoken in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted into the foreskin to measure, and it obstinates the parts above, that does not hurt him.
But then cure it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .LVIII.
Of the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by a stone or by congealed blood, or by phlegm or by catarrh, and it is similar to those of whom we have spoken about the methods of cure in the division.
And if the cause is not dissolved as we have said it is vehemently caused in the patient, then one must administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, and this is its form: It should be made of silver and the needle should be hollow like a quill pen with a long, narrow hole in it, resembling a palm and a half in length, to which there should be a narrow tube attached at its tip.
And the way to withdraw urine through it is to take the folded cloth and wet it in the end of the syringe with wool or cotton for a good seal, and insert the ends of the cloth into the end of the syringe below, and cut away any excess cause of the wool with scissors; then push it into the tube with force and fill the syringe with white wine.
And make the patient lie on his back, and pierce his bladder and penis with an olive oil-soaked reed, and a mixture of olive oil and water.
Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upward at its tip; and then press the syringe in there, until it reaches the bladder, and you will know that it has reached the empty cause, and if not according to this order, then the urethra is bent.
Then slowly extend the cloth with the wool little by little, because urine will soak the wool.
Then extract it with care and make the patient pass urine, and use the syringe; do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is given relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with camphor and similar instruments which are appropriate for this.
When ulcers or pus occur in the bladder, or blood has congealed there, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra; and this is its form: It should be made of silver and have a hollow needle at its tip, resembling a quill pen, about two and a half inches long, with a tube attached to it for distilling liquids.
Unless that in the end of it is closed off. And there should be three holes in it: two on one side, spaced apart like a pen.
At its beginning is a hollow space in which the liquid is placed; and it should be according to the quantity that is pushed through it without addition, so that when any cause is pulled through it, it is pulled back with the liquid, and when it is expelled, it is expelled with the liquid, and when it is expelled far, according to how the clampcedra is made with naphtha in the battles of the sea.
So when you want to pour liquids into the bladder, insert the end of the clapcedra into the liquid, and push through it the liquid that is pushed up from below, because the liquid will be pulled into the hollow of the clapcedra.
Then insert the end of the clapcedra into the penis as we have recommended with the syringe; and press in the liquid with the liquid that you are pressing, because that liquid will immediately reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Form of a subtle clyster by which the bladder is clystered; and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or brass, the tip more pointed and resembling a small feather, and below that a tube is attached inside it.
And take the bladder from the patient, and put into it the liquid that you want to clysterize in the bladder, and then bind that between two with a strong ligature using a folded cloth, and heat that liquid over the fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster into the penis.
And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the liquid with pressure descending, so that the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its circumference; and then insert a strong cloth into those holes, so that it can be turned inside out; and then add the circle just as the ligature is added, by putting in that whatever liquids, oils, and waters you want.
Then you bind that in the instrument and do to it just as you did to the bladder, and express with your hand so that the liquid reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division of the kinds of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about the stone for which there is an operation with the hand, and cutting.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will now narrate it with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine which emerges from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and there is sand in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and moves it back and forth many times, and then is constipated.
And this disease is the cure of children from it when they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the old. But in the young it is mild due to what is in them.
And if the stone is large and its cure is more difficult; and if it is small, then it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of it, then first cleanse the patient with a clyster which extracts all the humor that is in his body; because that humor sometimes prohibits the expulsion of the stone due to its obstruction.
Then take the patient by his feet and make him bend over and press his buttocks so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jump up and down sometimes.
Then make the patient lie on his back with his arms under him, so that the bladder is completely turned downward.
And then expel all of that.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then you cut him immediately over it.
And if it does not emerge from below with your touch, then cover the tip of your finger with oil and insert it into his anus. Then expel the stone so that it falls below your finger. And slowly draw the stone into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and expel that to the outside through the opening which you cut.
And order the assistant to hold the bladder with his hand; and order another assistant to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and to hold the umbilical cord which is below the genitals, at the location where the incision is made.
Then insert a sponge, of which this is the shape: and cut between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, towards the left thigh; and let the incision be on the stone and the testicle be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the outside incision is wide and the inside narrow according to the amount that can be removed from the stone, and no more, for soon the testicle in the anus will be crushed due to the pressure of the stone, and it will go out without difficulty.
And know that there is some stone which has angles and edges, so that the removal of it is made difficult because of this.
And there is one resembling a lion's tooth, and it is round, and it is easy to remove.
So if it is the one with angles and edges, place it in the crack.
And if it is not possible to get it out, then you must either push on it with your finger, or squeeze it decently with a tool, the end of which should be like a file with which you can squeeze the stone; or insert under it a curved tool with a blunt tip.
And if it is round, then you must push it down with your finger. But if you cannot get it out, then enlarge the hole a little, and if you see blood flowing, cut away at that with powdered vitriol.
But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you must push your finger to the mouth of the bladder, and insert a small instrument into it; and similarly proceed if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, then it is foolishness to cut it with a large incision, for there are two things that can happen to the patient: he can die or suffer continuous urination due to the fact that the place is not entirely healed.
But the minister should draw it out if it has been pushed out, or he can insert tongs into the fracture and extract it in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in aloe and dragon's blood, and close it up. And place over it a cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in rosin and water to stop the wound from festering.
Then return the patient to his bed, and do not loosen the bandages for three days.
And when you have loosened it, wash the wound with water and a little oil, and then treat it with ointment of diaphoretic and diuretic drugs until it is healed.
But if the wound becomes swollen and festering, and it looks like the blood has congealed in the bladder due to which urination is prohibited (and this is known through the output of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood; for if it remains, it will cause putrefaction of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and apply ointment of all kinds, according to what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And you should take care throughout the healing process that you keep both thighs closed and adjust the medicines which are placed on the wound.
And if the stone is small and in the middle of the penis, and it has been pushed in, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I have written before about incisions, for troops experienced in this treatment have approved of that cure; and I have tried it, and you should take a hole-punch made of iron felt, of which this is the shape:
of triangular shape, pointed, placed in a staff.
Then take some thread, and tie the penis with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the penis, punching through easily until the punch comes to the stone. And turn the punch with your hand towards the stone little by little, and pierce the hole from the other side until you penetrate it; for then the urine will be passed at once.
Then press your hand over the part of the stone which is broken off from the end of the penis, for that is split, and it is blocked by urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for some reason which prohibits it, then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then press on the stone in the penis between the two threads. Then extract it. Then loosen the thread and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
And the thread below the stone is not necessary except that it does not return to the bladder; and the other thread above except that when you loosen the thread, the stone comes out, and then the wound recovers.
And therefore when you tie the thread above, you should lift the testicles upwards, or let it return to its place, and then the wound will heal as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
On the extraction of stone from women.
A stone in women is rarely engendered.
But if you see a stone in one of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and is prohibited by many methods.
The first one is when the woman is very young.
And the second is when you do not find a woman who knows how to discover if she has been with a man, or is one of those women who have had a child.
The third is when you do not find a woman who knows this craft, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision on a stone in women is different from the location of the stone, because the wound is very deep, and there is fear in it.
But if necessity requires you to do so, then you must take a woman who knows this, and she is rarely found.
But if you lack that one, then seek a midwife who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman who is experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has had children.
So she should do all that you command her to do about the stone from the beginning; and the cause is that she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, then insert her finger in the anus of it and touch the stone.
So if she finds it, cut off that part below his finger, and then command her to insert herself on it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and touch the stone, for then she should place her left hand over the bladder, and hold it with a good grip.
So if she finds it, then gradually press that part of the opening of the bladder towards the openings below with the strength of her virtue within so that it comes to the root of the thigh.
Then the surgeon should make an incision on the side of the patient's leg where it hurts and remove the stone from that spot; the patient's leg should not be tied up so as to prevent the stone from falling out.
The incision should be small at first; then the surgeon should insert his finger into the wound and if he feels the stone, he should cut around it according to its size so that it can be removed easily.
And know that there are many kinds of stones: some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and have bumps on them.
And so you should know how many kinds there are according to what you feel when you examine it.
And if you see blood flow, apply crushed vitriol to the wound for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation and remove the stone.
And prepare some of the tools which are used in removing stones from men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery which has been cut, then you should put powder on the wound and tighten it with a bandage; leave the stone in place and do not try to remove it, for the patient will soon die. Then heal the wound.
And when the severity of the bleeding has subsided and the wound is closed up, return to your operation and remove the stone.
Chapter 62:
Of incision on a hernia.
A hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which covers the intestines and lies under the diaphragm; it is called membrane.
And sometimes it occurs in the surrounding membrane which nature has prepared for that purpose at the beginning of the intestines; there is another intestine beyond it and it is the diaphragm of the white membrane we have mentioned before, and this is just a membrane.
And the cause of this hernia is weakness which occurs in the intestines and because matter is poured into them; sometimes it occurs as a result of blows inflicted on the intestines.
And this moisture has many colors; sometimes it inclines towards yellow or blood-red, or red, or is black and putrid, or is water-white, and that is what matters most.
And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water occurs are these: for if it is in the white membrane we have mentioned before, then the hernia will be round and declining slightly in length like a figure of an intestine, and it will appear on the intestines because the moisture collects all around them.
And if the moisture is in the surrounding membrane, then the hernia will be round at the beginning of the intestines and one thinks it is another intestine because of that.
And if the moisture is between the diaphragm of the intestines and the white membrane, then cut from underneath; and if it is between the diaphragm of the intestines and the surrounding membrane, then cut from above.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then examine it in the hernia by probing with a needle whose tip has been dipped in vinegar; and according to what comes out on the tip of the needle, judge what is inside.
Therefore when we come to cure it with iron, then let us command the patient to be phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and make him lie on his back.
And let him lie on his back for some reason or other a little longer, and place under him several folded sheets.
And let yourself sit on the left side of him and command the assistant to stand on his right side, stretching his arm out across the diaphragm of the intestines to the beginning of the navel.
And let yourself grab the arm and split the diaphragm of the intestines at the middle point along its length towards the armpit.
And let the incision be made according to a straight line equally distant from the line which separates the peritoneum of the intestines, so that it comes to the white membrane containing them.
Examine it and observe, and beware so that you do not cut the membrane; and your incision should be according to the part which is suspended by the intestines and examine the incision according to its quantity as much as possible to you.
And let yourself pierce the membrane full of water with a wide incision and extract all the water.
And let yourself separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the membrane towards its upper parts; do not touch the diaphragm of the intestines which contains them, and cut the membrane in such a way that it is possible for you. And let yourself examine it either entirely or in parts, and especially its sides most carefully; for if you do not probe the incision of it thoroughly, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
But if the intestines process out of that opening from their diaphragm in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the membrane, return it inside and let yourself close the two lips of the diaphragm of the intestines with a suture, and heal that just like the other wounds, so that it is cured.
And if you find the intestines putrid due to another disease, then let yourself lift the vessels which are over the suspensory ligament and extract the intestines; then heal that just as we have said before.
But if the hernia is divided into two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore you incise that part according to how you did the other, similarly; and if it appears to be one operation to you, then you do it.
Then you clean the blood and enter into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two pieces of cloth and the navel of the belly; and place on top folded cloths and powders, and apply those on top with a bandage which is according to this shape:
and let two pieces of cloth be pressed and made into a pad with wool according to this shape; and the extremities with which it is tied tightly from the waist or from wet wool, and let them be attached with tightness in the belt of the underpants, and one extremity takes hold of the buttocks inside, and the second takes hold of the opening of the pantaloons, and two extremities on the thighs below, and the other two extremities over the armpits, and all tightness is adjusted in the belt of the underpants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization in the place of incision with iron; and you take a fine knife-cautery and incise with it the vein of the thighs, and it is ignited according to what we have recounted until the white capsule containing the hernia is uncovered, and then you apply cauterization according to this shape: and is similar to the Greek letter alpha.
Then pierce with that ciphac, and it is ignited until all moisture is driven out.
Then extend the ciphac with tongs and cut with tongs, and cut with fine cautery ignited; and incise that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from bleeding, and better than operation with incision.
But if you encounter an ulcerated wound in the hour of incision or in the hour of cauterization, or bleeding, then know that you heal whatever difficulty occurs to you by that, with healing which you know for it according to what is said.
But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation due to its horribleness, then you perform piercing according to what I have recounted; and it is when it is certified that you must, through the significance which we have said, know that this hernia is aqueous.
Then know that you should raise the patient on a high pillow, and then pierce the wound in the lowest part of him with a wide-spaced chisel, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
And the opening is ample so that all the hernia may run out.
Then place on the site cotton and apply that and leave that, so that the remainder of the hernia runs out. And then heal that until the wound is healed.
But if difficulty occurs in the flowing out of the hernia at that time when you pierce it: and this does not occur unless the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes difficulty and prohibits the flowing out of the hernia, then know that you put into the wound a pencil or instrument by which the hernia is extracted from the hydrops, the shape of which is preceded; or attach to the compression of the wound a small.
And know that the hernia returns, and is stopped for about a year or so; and when it has returned, then let it be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will pass his days thus.
Chapter .lxiii.
Of incision upon a fleshy hernia and its healing.
Know that in the incision upon this hernia there is fear of death in the greatest dispositions; for I have seen its dismissal and being saved by that better.
And I am remembering the operation on it and the spices of the wounds.
Therefore I say that the wounds are born in the parts of the body whose vessels are composed and it is made so for many causes; or by acute acute superfluity which is poured into the vessels, or by concussion.
And the color of the wound according to the color of the body, and there is not pain in it, and it is a grave wound.
And quickly it is an apostema suppurated, whose color is dusky, and there is not sensation in it.
And sometimes it is made by nodulation of the arteries, and by inflammation of those thus, so that already the memory of it has been perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersing of the wound when you compress it with your fingers; and it does not know that it touches.
But that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it for any cause due to compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that upon this species incision and upon the other meats; and you incise the vein of the thighs, and then stretch the fire towards the parts above, and extract that from the white capsule, and ligate those, and incise the suspensory more so that you deliver that from all parts of the fire.
Therefore if the fire is already to those meats consolidated, then know that you extract the fire and incise that.
And if there is adhesion for any cause of the capsule, or between that which is between the vessels, then know that you deliver all that adhesion and incise that by round incision.
But if there is flesh generation in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then know that you incise all that is of it, and extract the fire thus as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaking in rose oil and wine; and then heal that with the other healing until it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the healing of a hernia which is of veins.
Vein is wound wrapped with any wrapper similar to growth on the testes, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking upon the patient.
And in the healing of this illness there is fear for that from which its memory precedes.
However, know that we give direction in it according to how they make the first.
And I say that you raise the patient on a high pillow; and then pierce the suspensory of the testes to the parts below; and then stretch the fire to the parts above; and touch those with your fingers at the vessels which have been tried in the bowstring; and hold those with extension vehement.
And then incise with a wide-spaced knife through the vein of the vessels so that they are uncovered.
And then cut from all parts as we have said in extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
And then insert into those a needle in which is a double point, and apply that in the first of the places in which veins occur, and apply another healed one turned upwards in the last of them. And then incise those in the middle place by oblique incision according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the putrid and corrupt humors.
And then heal the wound with healing of other wounds in which you desire the generation of the venom to be engendered by falling of the vessels which burn one of two testes, for that is not evil for that.
But if the veins become completely blocked, then one must extract the testicles or cut off the vessels through which they are nourished, in order to deprive them of all nourishment through the obstruction of the vessels, and that they may wither away, or be removed so that they do not cause harm.
Here is the text you provided, formatted for easier reading:
Here is a line-by-line translation of the text:
The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision that extends from the top of the abdomen down towards the groin, causing a rupture and protrusion of the intestines through that opening.
And this rupture can occur in either direction: upwards or downwards, and it happens for various reasons: due to a blow, a fall, screaming, or the lifting of something heavy, or similar activities.
The sign of this condition, when it is due to an extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and there is swelling in the groin area as the abdomen presses against the intestine.
And the sign of the condition when it is due to an incision in the abdomen is that at the beginning, there is violent pain; and there is diverse swelling apparent below the pubic bone, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body is drawn forward at the waist.
And sometimes the intestine's lining is pushed out with the tissue, and this hernia is called a 'strangling intestinal hernia'.
And sometimes it occurs due to inflammation, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine, and here it is trapped, and it causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it brings about violent pain, especially when pressure is applied.
And in the treatment of this condition, there is fear of error, for one must avoid causing harm in that area.
And the manner of operating on this condition is to command the patient to draw in his belly with his hand towards his navel if he obeys his instructions, and then have him lean forward at the waist, resting his weight on his arms and elevating his legs.
And then tighten the groin which binds the groin of the testicles towards the top, and insert the testicles entirely into the incision; and then pull apart two lips of the incision with hooks according to what you require in order to open the incision with them.
And if the incision, according to how much is possible for you, that from that place the lining be pushed out.
And then scrape away at the abdomen beneath the groin of the testicles, until the white, tough abdomen is revealed on both sides.
Then you insert your finger into that which holds the testicle, in what is between the white abdomen and the scrotum, and free it from that adhesion which is in the rear part of the scrotum.
And then hold the groin of the testicles towards the front with your right hand, and extend the white abdomen upwards with your left hand, and lift the scrotum up to the top of the incision; and command an assistant to extend the scrotum upwards, while you dissolve the adhesion behind it with a sharp instrument.
And feel with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the tough, white abdomen. But if you find any cause there, then you must return it to its proper place within the abdomen.
And then insert into the bottom of the groin of the testicles through the incision from which blood and pus flow, as we have described in what we have said before.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place a dressing over it; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes the white abdomen is cauterized at the incision, as we have said before, when there is fear of a flow of blood, because sometimes these occur) and tie the ligature so that it holds itself.
But if its healing is delayed, then let it be bathed in warm water, and place a dressing over it according to what we have said before.
And then cure the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Here is the text formatted for easier reading:
Of a hernial swelling.
In this hernia, there is no one who has been healed by its treatment with fire.
And the first one is that it is made as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; and that is that you tie the vessels over that incision with ease, and then dry up the swelling in the center around that place by which those vessels are protruded.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Here is the text formatted for easier reading:
Of the rupture that occurs in the groins.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the groins as we have said before, and it protrudes out from that place.
And there should be no cause for the intestines to protrude into the groin; and if they do, it is rare; and return inside at all times.
But if time passes and this occurs, then there is a fissure in the abdomen through which the intestine protrudes into the abdomen; and this happens due to the extension of the abdomen, which is in the groin as we have said before, and that cause is because the abdomen is extended, and then it softens and protrudes out.
And its cure is by cauterization as it has been preceded by the description of it.
And sometimes it is cured by fire in this way: and the patient lies on his back between his arms, and then dries up the place of the rupture of the swellings protruded through the incision to the width of three fingers.
Then tightly bind the white cord that is under the scrotum so that it is uncovered.
And take the rod and place it over the prominent part of the scrotum, and press it against the abdomen.
Then cut two notches into the end of the rod in the scrotum, and sew one to the other.
Then cut off the end of the rod, but do not cut into the scrotum at all, nor extend the incision, or any other cause that you may know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And cure that with the cure of wounds, and when you incision the bowels, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not attached.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68:
Of the softening of the scrotum of the testes.
Many times the scrotum of the testes is softened in some men because the flesh that is between them is softened, and the guarding of it is relaxed.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who performs the cure of him that he makes the patient lie on his back, and open all the scrotum which is softened onto the natural scrotum; and then sew together the two lips.
And if you want, cut off in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four cuts and with a tight stitch.
And then cut inside between the stitches; and cure by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the bowels have fallen back in.
Chapter 69:
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but it has been written to me that I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two reasons, one of which is so that he knows the cure of it if he is questioned about it, so that he knows how to cure it when it happens; and the other reason is that we many times have a need to castrate other beasts for our own uses, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by constriction or by incision to sectioning.
But in the one that is done by constriction, the method of the operation is to make the beast lie on its back so that the testes are softened and hang down. And then take them with your hand so that they are dissolved and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration done by incision and sectioning, take hold of the beast and squeeze the scrotum of its testes with your left hand.
And then cut the suspensory ligament, and make an incision on each side so that two processive holes are made.
And then cut those more than you have excised. And do not put any cause on the scrotum, except for the sottile scrotum which is over the veins.
And this way of castration is better which is done by constriction, because constriction leaves no cause on the testes so that the beast desires intercourse.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70:
Of the cure of hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites in men are according to two types: one is where there appears a space between the testes, at the place which is between the two testes, and it figures like a woman’s vulva; in the other, there appear both testicles on one side.
And sometimes from that they emit urine which is in the scrotum of the testes.
But in women there is one species: and it is that the clitoris of a woman is like two testes of a man, a little bit at the entrance of the vagina, like the foreskin of a man and two testes.
And the cure is of three species: two of men and one species of women. And it is so that you cut those tightened flesh so that the impression of that goes away, and then cure them with the cure of the other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which they emit urine which is in the scrotum of the testes, there is no cure nor operation for it.
Chapter 71:
Of hernia and prominent flesh due to women's causes.
Hernia is strongly tightened onto natural causes so that it is stressed and is made tight the guarding; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women as much as in men, and it protrudes into intercourse.
Therefore take the excess of hernia with your hand or with a needle, and cut.
And do not cut through in the incision, mostly in the vein of the razor, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then cure it with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh which grows in the womb of the mother so that it fills it, and strongly protrudes at the openings of the vagina according to the appearance of a tail (and therefore some first called it "tail hernia"); therefore if we cut it as we do with hernia, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated, or it has a small wound. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to ill health which has preceded it, and that is done or by tightly tied flesh or by sottile scrotum or thick.
And it is done either in the womb of the mother, or in its ribs, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and it strongly prohibits intercourse and pregnancy, and very much it prohibits menstruation.
And its knowledge is done by guarding of the midwife, if the swelling is apparent, then you pierce it with needles or with a razor.
But if the swelling is by sottile scrotum and it is attached to both lips, then you sew and cut it.
And it is so that you pause over the two lips for a while, and then you pause your fingers of both hands in turn on both sides.
And the woman be on her back, with her breasts extended, and then open both lips with force so that the sottile scrotum is broken and the swelling is opened.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it over the area, and wash it with hot water every day so that the area is not consolidated.
But if the scrotum is thick and dense, then take it with spatum late or with a needle of myrrh.
But if the swelling is by flesh, then suspend it with a needle, and cut it.
And they are the medicines that make the flow of blood cease after biting, like ahacia, and dragon’s blood, and astringents, bound with egg white of an egg.
And then administer a broad lead band so that the wound is not loosely consolidated.
And he should keep that position for several days and be administered dry heat.
Then the wound should be treated with a consolidative dressing until it is healed.
And sometimes there are accidents in the mother's body, and then they should be treated in this way. But if it is due to scrofulous tuberculosis, there should be no contraindications to the use of iron in any way.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red bumps which occur in women's genitals.
Hemorrhoids are an obstruction of the openings of many veins, and when they are old hemorrhoids and become constricted.
And I have already said in the division of them their species and their signs, and will say thus those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
So I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the anus of the mother and do not appear to the senses, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
But those which are in the anus above which there is sensation, they are those that are treated.
And you should put the woman in warm water and then stretch it with tweezers or with rough cloth, and insert those with the roots.
Then you should sprinkle on them one of the powdery stop-bleeding herbs without biting, thus with cassia and its likes.
Then you should put her feet in warm water for an hour, and then pour that warm water on the affected area.
And if it persists bleeding, then you should make her a bath with an infusion of sumac and of pomegranate peels and of gourds and their likes.
Then take barley flour and cook it with honey and sour wine, and make a poultice of it over his back.
And if the blood is dark, that is good; and if not, you should attach two leeches, and to the breasts, no scarification.
Then take wool and soak it in juice of black bugloss or in juice of hollyhock or in juice of wormwood with red wine, and attach it to the affected area; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And treat that until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On piercing a wound-hole accident in the anus.
Many species of tumors occur in the anus, thus with scrofulous tuberculosis and tumor-ulcer and ulceration and induration and herpetic and fistulous hemorrhoids and raggedness and others. And I have already said those illnesses and their species and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
And I will tell in this treatise of scrofulous tuberculosis which appears in the anus when it is of those tumors that cause suppuration, and if you want to know how its cautery with iron is performed.
Then you should consider if the pain of the tumor at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and when it becomes swollen and if there is sensation over it, then do not pierce it, and treat that with something that helps on maturation until the acuteness of the accident ceases.
Then you should make the woman lie on an elbow that has two elbows; and recline on her back and bring her feet up to just below the navel, and let her thighs be spread apart, and place her arms beneath her head, and lean each one with a pillow in a convenient way.
Then the midwife should follow to the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the anus is opened, the shape of which will depend on those causes that will be appropriate.
And when you want to administer that instrument, you should insert it in the anus of the woman, and what goes into the anus of the instrument is not more than the opening of the anus, and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the anus, then you should pause powders on the texture of the opening of the anus so that it be prohibited for all instruments to enter into the opening of the anus.
And you should hold the wire that goes around the instrument from the side above, and who administers it should turn the wire so that it is opened the opening of the anus.
And when the ulcer appears and it is touched with the hand and is dry, then you should cut that off by means of a broad knife.
And when the suppuration is evacuated, then you should pause in the wound a sponge soaked in rose oil or oil with some styptic quality, and place the sponge in the opening of the anus.
And you should pause a sponge over the perineum and over the anus clean wool soaked in water in which are soaked mallows.
Then it will be treated for two days with ointment appropriate to what it needs until it is healed.
And some times the anus and the wound are washed with water and honey so that it is purified with water in which is soaked bark of linden or of long-leafed artichoke, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the anus, then you should be prohibited from its treatment with iron, having treated that with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the male babies should be treated when they appear according to an unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife examine in the beginning the figure of childbirth according to its signs, and when you see the woman distend below and desire to smell the air, and about it is raised from what is on her is the part, and hasten the exit of the baby, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the exit of it over her head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical.
So when you see those signs, then the belly of it is compressed so that the baby descends gently when he descends over her head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical, and is cleansed of those superfluities by good cleansing.
But that which is the other part non-natural and not-lawful when the baby is exited over his feet and the body of him is exited before his head and his mother's hand or his father's foot, and he is cleansed of those superfluities by good cleansing. Or he is exited his head and his mother' hand or the belly of him, or he is converted strong over her shoulder, and like the figures of him non-lawful.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And I will show all the figures of them, and what way they are in those for that it is signified by that and lies upon that.
When the baby is exited over her head by natural vigor and that is violent on the woman and he has made for him a difficult part, and his strength is already debilitated, then you should make it sweat, or that women hold him and evaporate the moisture of him with fenugreek oil and with hot oils.
Then gently insert the midwife's finger between the lips of the vagina, and with the second finger open it or suck up any moisture with her nail. And press on the woman's abdomen to help the baby descend.
But if they do not descend, then the woman must be anointed with liniment of poppy and liniment of fenugreek using a sponge.
Then command the man to hold back his breath and have the midwife press on his chest and make him snort with it; and keep his mouth and nose closed for an hour, because the child will soon be forced out.
And if the two hands of the child are forced out at the beginning, then you should gently pull them back little by little. But if the patient does not obey the remedy, then place her on a bed and lift her feet up, and gradually tilt the bed towards the ground; and the woman must be held so that she doesn't fall from the tilting.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child is dying, then push those in and pull out the baby's arm or tie the body to your hand with a cloth and pull that one out evenly, because it will be forced out.
When the child lies on its feet, then you should gently push those up, and gradually turn the child, and have it suck its fingers, and take one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
But when it has come out between the thighs, then command the man to bear down and make him push it out with effort, because if God wills it will be forced out.
And if it has not been forced out with what we have described, then gently return the child little by little and place that second shape naturally over it, because it will be forced out with easier delivery.
And if it is blocked by all that we have described, then take liniment of alder and dissolved gum, and pound both thoroughly in the mortar, and line with that the birth canal at the lowest part of the woman's abdomen. Then make her sneeze in warm water while she achieves the hypothermic state.
And when you see that his limbs are loosened, then have him breathe in the smoke of myrtle and place that below him. And when she has breathed the smoke for an hour, then have her lie on a bed, and make her snort and open her mouth, and lift that up, and press the lowest part of her abdomen gently, because the child will soon be forced out.
Delivery of the child hanging sideways with one of its hands. Let it be gently pulled back by the hand, but if you cannot pull it back, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
And if she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed, and shake her thighs with violent concussion, and administer oils which are made of mucilages.
And if the childbirth comes on, then have her lie on a bed, and study the hand, and suck the child according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command the man to bear down as it is forced out.
Delivery of the child with its arms and legs expanded and the abdomen out in front of its mother. Have the midwife take the child's hand and gently turn it over little by little, and have that be easy for it.
And when it is and how it is sucked, then place over its mouth what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
Then command the man to suck little by little, and when you have done that, then have her lie on a bed and command him to be bent over to the right side, and command him to be pressed; and make her sneeze with effort. Exit of the child prepared above its side.
When it occurs to the mother according to this way, consider and then you insert the second one with your nail so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the child is suspended over his face and neck, then you insert that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and delayed.
Then press the child to the inner parts as you hold it according to what is appropriate, and command the woman to bear down several times, and it will be forced out with easy delivery if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple births. Know that twins occur many times, and some times one or four are born, but that is strange and rare, and they do not live.
And count those, although they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguish those within the ligament in the umbilical of each of them and some times are forced out so as is one child with easy delivery, and sometimes exit not-labourable so as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult some of them by their needing childbirth and come to what we have said of the non-natural figures, then you cure those as we have recorded.
And if the midwife does what she does with ease and subtlety, and delay, and it is prepared according to the child' s health, then let her be guided according to all its shape as it is prepared by the nurse bringing health.
Remember that which forms in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six and seven, and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman who aborts has six [fingers], and another has ten, which was caused by measurement of the glorious wise.
And all this know that it is in the science of the midwife who is strong in her opinion about what appears like that, and therefore stop at that as she is used to it.
Chapter .lxxvi.
Of extraction of the child when he is dead.
When you cure the dead child with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not put out, and you are forced to use incision with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound nature and does not suffer from any accidents by which she is in danger.
Then let the woman be laid on her back over his chest, and let his head be inclined downward and his thighs raised up.
The servant should have one hand on either side of or bound to the patient's body so that it does not extend beyond the extraction of the foot.
Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with moistened oils and mucilage of alder, fenugreek, and fennel seeds.
Then the midwife should grease their hand with those oils and mucilage, then insert their hand gently into the mother's vagina, and locate with their hand the place where the nails are in the foot.
And you should check the appropriate location for this: then consider if the foot is prepared to descend onto their head, and then place the toenails in their heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under their beard, or under their armpit, or near their ribs, or under their hip.
But if the descent is onto their feet, then in the instep, or middle of their back.
And hold the toenail with their right hand, and place the curve of the nail in the space between their left hand's fingers, insert their hand gently and place the toenail in one of those locations we mentioned that addresses the obstruction.
Then place and hold in the opposition of their foot another toenail, or a third if necessary, so that there is mutual attraction and not extension according to its straightness only.
Let the tooth be loosened from every side so that its extraction is eased just as it is done with a tooth.
And if something in between them is held back, then the midwife should grease their fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and turn what is held back.
So if the part of the foot is displaced, then the toenails are moved between the locations that are highest; and do this as the entire foot is displaced outward.
But if the hand is displaced in front of the other, and it's not possible to bring it back by contracting the foot, then wrap a cloth around that; then extract it as the entire hand is displaced outward, and insert it into the joint of the hand or the elbow.
And do the same to the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the foot is large, or there's constriction in its extraction, or there' s water collected in its head, then insert between their fingers sharp spatula and split the head and extract the water, or discover it with an instrument called "alundat" the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that is next.
And do similarly if the foot is naturally large-headed: then insert that with a forceps, or take it with an alundat just as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is displaced and constricted by the armpit, then it should be split so that the moisture in the feet is discharged.
But if it's not complicated or obstructed, then insert the head as soon as possible according to how convenient for you it is.
And if there's swelling or dripping in the armpit, then pierce that so that the moisture in it runs out.
But if the foot is on their feet, then its attraction is weakened and the direction of it to the mother's vagina is weakened.
But if it' s constricted by the armpit and feet, then extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split the armpit and feet so that what is in them runs out.
But if the other limbs are pulled back and the head turns, then the midwife inserts their left hand; but if the mother' s mouth is open, then insert the hand into the airway of the larynx, and surround with that hand the head, and pull that toward the mouth of the mother, and then insert in it a toenail, or two toenails, and pull it with those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an ulcer that comes to the u, then it should not be pressed upon; instead let there be administration of emission of moist, fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the foot is on their side, then if possible, it should be straightened; and what we have said for a living foot should be administered.
And if that' s not possible, then let it be split into pieces, and extracted.
And let there be no cause left inside the secondina.
And when you have finished all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of ulcers that come to the mother.
And if there' s bleeding, then let it be stopped in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have also seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and on that fire another pregnant woman, and the dead fetus is the other one. An ulcer occurred in his elbow for a long time; and it became swollen as the fire opened, and he began to vomit blood.
And I was called to his treatment, and I treated him for a long time, and the ulcer wasn' t healed.
Then I applied to him some plaster causes of strong attraction, and one bone was extracted from him, and then after a few days, another bone was extracted; and I was very astonished, as there were no bones in his belly.
And so I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I removed the ulcer, and extracted from him some bones, the woman whose condition was as said before, and she already lived that way for a long time, and there was a little discharge of blood from her.
And I did not consider that to be strange, but rather what is known and helps with what the doctor artifices with his hands for treatment.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of speculum with which the mother' s vagina is opened:
This is the form of a narrow tube in which the lips are inserted, and to that insertion there are two benefits on both ends of two tubes. However this benefit should be more subtle in tightness, and it is made of ebony or boxwood.
And the thickness of each tube is two fingers and the edge of either side are one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle part of two tubes there are two adjusters of those wood which are already closed, the length of which is a palm and little more, and the thickness of each is two fingers, or little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother' s mouth so that it is opened by them when you turn both specified benefits.
Other similar form that is more subtle and narrower:
It is made of ebony or boxwood according to the resemblance of forceps. However at the end of it there are two additions like this as well, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb, then you must cause the woman to lie on her back with her feet dangling, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument like you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want from the opening of the womb, while the midwife does what she wants.
The form of the placenta which the ancients mentioned:
Form of the fetus which is pushed out:
Form of the head which has been crushed:
And it is similar to forceps whose teeth are at the end, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, and sometimes it has teeth like a pair of scissors with which it is cut and crushed. Form of the head that is crushed little:
Form of a thorn which has an edge:
Form of a thorn which has two edges:
Form of a spatula which has two ends, with which the head is cut off:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All of these instruments are exercised and when they are more numerous and prepared according to the artist, the more difficult it is for him to operate and the more people he needs for his quantity.
And you should not neglect any of these instruments because their necessity is inexcusable.
On the extraction of the afterbirth:
When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, then you must order the patient to retain her breath, and then cause her to sneeze with a towel, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out as a result, that is good.
And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce a hole in its cover, and place herbs in it that open the mouth of the mother, such as: calaminth, rattleweed, aniseed, camomile, Arabic scilla, cassia wood, and saintwood. All of these herbs or some of them should be soaked in water inside the bowl, and you should place it over fire.
Then place a straw in the mother's mouth, and keep it there until the evaporation comes into the cavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second time let it be expelled with force.
But if this treatment is not effective, then order the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in mullein tea, and then insert it into the vagina and grab the second one with it, and once you have found it, pull it out little by little according to the correct technique so that the mother does not suffer excessive pain. However, if it is attached to the mother's womb, then insert your hand as we have instructed, and when you find the second one, extract it gradually according to the correct technique so that the mother does not experience intense pain. Afterwards, make sure she is turned onto her right and left sides with ease.
And if the mother's mouth is blocked, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and with medication of the bowl with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to exhaust yourself by pulling too hard, but instead make sure that what comes out of her mouth goes into the woman'coyssa, and then anoint it with ointment and tetramedion; for this will cause it to rot, become dissolved, and then expelled.
But when it putrifies, a bad odor rises to the head and stomach, and this hurts the patient; therefore, make sure that smoke is administered in a convenient way.
But some of the Ancients have also tried smoke from nux vomica and dried figs.
Form of instrument by which the woman is smoked for the retention of menstruation and the second one:
It should be made from glass or earthenware.
And the narrow end should be inserted into the vagina and the wide end placed over the fire, and the smoke should be directed onto the embers of the fire.
And keep it there until the smoke is consumed, and then repeat this process.
Of the cure of the infant's anus that is not perforated.
Some newborn infants and their anuses are not perforated; therefore, they are gently and carefully opened. Therefore, order the midwife to open it with her finger; and if not, open it with a pointed spatula, and be careful not to touch the foreskin.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
But if you are afraid that it is blocked, then insert a straw into the hole for several days, and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
And sometimes the anus is blocked by a clot or abscess; therefore, when that clot is broken, treat it as we have said about the cure and the plug.
Of the cure of fistulas that emit pus from underneath.
Fistulas that emit pus near the anus or in the space between the buttocks have a soft and thick discharge, which comes out close to the anus.
And it is either one fistula or several.
And when that discharge becomes old and mixes with the watery pus, it turns white or putrid, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate in several places.
And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the exit and through windiness; and sometimes they use the patient' mouth for egress, and often they expel a lot of pus from there.
And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the depth of the vagina; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the vagina.
And in order to know if a fistula has penetrated into the anus or not, insert your finger into the anus and insert a thin rod of horn or iron into the fistula when it is tense.
But if it is tense, then insert a thin rod of lead or horse hair into the fistula so that you feel the rod or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all or if there is no cause for ejection or windiness or pus coming out of the hole, then know that it is not penetrated, and then proceed to the cure.
And when the fistula has penetrated into the bladder or into the depth of the vagina, then its meaning is the ejection of urine from there and the prohibition of it to be healed by medicine.
But if it has penetrated into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circle around it, then its sign is that the rod goes in there if it does not feel tense in the bone, and the pain in the circle around the part; and pus comes out of there at times; and it does not help with medicine, nor is it healed with ointment.
And in all those penetrated fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure of them is labor and vanity of the efforts of doctors who talk about it.
But in that which is not penetrated and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been seen and tried.
And it is that the patient lies on his back on top of his knees and raises his legs over them, with his thighs tilted towards his stomach, and then insert a rod of iron or horn into the fistula until you find the place where the rod goes in.
And if it feels pain around its neck, then insert your finger into its neck.
And if it feels the rod already pushing itself into the hole discovered, or flesh and bone, then know certainly that it is penetrated; therefore, do not labor in that, for there is no cure in that, as we have said.
But some people say that it is healed in some men.
And of the medicine by which it is hoped for youth in it is that you burn cautery subtleties according to the width of the fistula, as it has been preceded, and insert that burning into the fistula until it comes out around its neck; then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that they are already dried up all those flesh clamped fistulas which seem like a feather of goose.
Then treat that with poultices wrapped in wool until all those flesh are dried up, and then cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed in any time by another cure.
And if it goes in but does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the rod which is obviously flesh or bone, and the fistula comes out where it touches the surface of the codon, then dry up the codon from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry up the flesh by the rod, and it will be freed through the rod, and it will be healed.
And then cleanse the flesh that has developed ulcers, which resemble the quill of a feather and do not come from any other cause.
But if blood flows from these meats when you touch them with your hand, then the meat must be cauterized with fire or with a sharp instrument. For a cautery with fire draws out moisture and dries up the humors.
Then treat it with cool bandages wrapped around the affected area, and then treat the wound with a hard, dry ointment that produces scars and solidifies.
These medicines have the power to stop bleeding and dry out humors. When they are applied, the wound is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
But if the ulcer has already reached the rectum and is elongated from the body's surface, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And if you feel a membrane or flesh with it, and it is close to the opening, then there is no need for an operation on it, but rather a second examination with confidence and hope.
There are three ways to treat this: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry up the ulcer and return it to its cavity so that you can insert your fingers and apply treatment; or do not cut at all so that you do not pierce the membrane containing the rectum, and make the patient suffer against his will because of the insertion. Then treat it with what we have already said, for it will heal quickly. Or elongate the membrane and drain the pus from the ulcer, as we have said, either with your fingers or another sharp instrument; then cleanse the flesh that has developed ulcers which resemble the quill of a feather and do not come from any other cause. Then strive to restore the entire wound by cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated and the fistula opens at the anus, then drain the pus more quickly through the patient's body. And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert your finger into the fistula and it is on the side of the anus around the body's surface and at the edge of the anus, then take a piercing instrument with a pointed end, which is prepared like a needle for sewing up wounds in this way:
and insert it into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it pierces the edge of the anus near the inside, then pull out the instrument from that wound so that you can insert your finger into the anus; then pull out the end of the instrument and bring together its two ends, and tie them, and leave it in place for one or two days. And when you feel the instrument piercing the flesh, tighten it between the two ends of the instrument and draw it out.
Then treat the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, unless it goes into the rectum, for it is not up to you to pierce the membrane. Then treat it so that it heals.
The shape of the split-spoon with which the fistula is split: its curved end is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that it does not pierce what it should not, as it should be.
Of the sewing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the opening of them.
Hemorrhoids come in two ways: either they are between the anus like charcoal, or they are like fat with hair. And some are small and large, and the blood flows from them at any time, and they are one, and some are cut, and outside and on the edges of the anus.
But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little moisture, from which flows a watery fluid or a little blood with a continuous body, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the rectum is to command the patient to sit and to be compressed so that the rectum dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut and suspend with tweezers or what you have those with your fingernail, and then pierce them down to their roots.
But if the tweezers are not held in them because of their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or twine or a piece of wool, and pull them out with your fingers, and then pierce them and powder some powdered caustics over them at the opening so that they are as cauterized; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with the other treatment so that they heal.
And if the anus does not obey defecation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a small amount of biting, and let it be washed with that water which is in the rectum and let the patient defecate quickly when he is compressed.
But if the hemorrhoids come out of the anus, then the cause of them is looseness, and it is that you take them with your fingernail or take them with tweezers and pierce them, and then treat them with what we have said so that they heal.
And if you see an opening, know that you should administer suturing of them in this way: take a piercing instrument and insert it into the needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their ends, and make the piercing instrument penetrate with its other end into the root of the opposite side, and wrap the two ends of the instrument around the part below the needle horizontally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong grip, and then remove the instrument.
Do this to all of them, and let one flow and not the others, so that the superfluous blood flows from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate over the anus and let him sit. And then let it be discharged so that it flows out; and when it is discharged, treat the hemorrhoids with ointment or another treatment so that they heal.
And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then know that you should pierce them with the point of a split-spoon or with your fingernail so that they become moist and let the escorce above it be healed, which prohibits them from consolidating; then treat them so that they consolidate.
Then you pierce them with a very violent piercing more than the first so that blood flows and they are excoriated; then treat them so that they heal.
Know that hemorrhoids, so is key, and it is not if it does not throb according to the color of the body resembling a head of a nail, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the lower parts around the feet and at the edges, and because of this there is pain.
Then know that what is in the circuit of the claw is pierced, and is held with tweezers or with tweezers, and is pulled out from its root; then treat it.
And if you wish, cauterize the second [part] as preceded in its chapter.
Warts are small, rough, fistulated, and round protuberances on the surface of the body, and they often appear on children's hands.
And its cure is to stretch it out and insert that, or to pierce it with a needle until blood comes out. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
However, an ant is a small, hairy, or fistulated protuberance on the surface of the body that moves around the penis; when rubbed, it feels like a bite from an ant, and it occurs throughout the body.
And its cure is to take a peacock feather or a vulture feather, which should be strong, and place it on the ant so that it contains the circle of the feather; then, with your hand, turn the feather so that you pierce what is inside the ant's circle, and place it on the flesh of the penis, and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an ermine or steel needle in the following way:
Let the tip of the needle be very thin and blunt (so it does not pierce) and wrapped so that, when placed on the wart, its appearance is smooth and the rotation of the needle is effortless.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
The instruments used to administer cauterization are described below.
Sometimes cauterization is done with silver or brass or molten ermine or mallable metal; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to those who are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and that which is administered to those whose anuses are sore or painful, their cauteries should be small.
The form of a large and rare cautery:
The head of the needle, at the top where the pouch is tied, should be wide in this manner; and the distinction where the pouch is tied should be there as well.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt  (so it is not open) like a lion's tooth, honed to a fine point; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and more gross for a small one.
And the pouch in which are placed the medicines of an animal's bladder or sheepskin should be one palm long.
And it should be perforated with many holes so that, when it is revolved, the thickness of the object is between the holes.
Then insert into those holes strong, raw bile from ten cows, or surround those holes; and adjust with that the pouch; and when the pouch is placed on it, tightly grip the head of the cautery between your fingers, and then cauterize with that each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should lie on his back, and raise his legs up and place under them a board or a pillow; then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar plants; then insert it into the anus with ease, and let the minister take hold of the pouch and squeeze it with both hands and press with strength until everything that is in the cautery is evacuated; then pull out the cautery and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that out, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with it for an entire night, it is better for healing.
However, if you cauterize that in diseases of a swollen belly and its discharge, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful bumps, then the cautery should be very fine and sharp, of those cauteries with which children are cauterized.
Of the cure of wounds:
You have already said in the division of the cure of wounds what suited the free man, and I have also described the cure of those with hand and medicines according to their complement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the location where they occurred.
And the causes for which many wounds are made are thus with a stone, or cutting with a knife, or piercing with a lance, or beating with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar objects from those causes.
However, the wounds that are in parts of the body are thus with a wound on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I will recommend the cure for some wounds so that you may pause that reasoning and rule over other wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the compounded wounds will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when it happens in the head a simple wound and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is with a stone or similar object, and the tendon has only been stretched and is a large wound and you fear an abscess forming over it, then you cut and flebotomi the cephalic one as soon as possible, and do not delay that; and draw out from that wound blood according to the quantity of its strength if there is no prohibiting cause of flebotomy, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is little.
And let the flebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and let the patient abstain from repletion and from wine and heavy food.
However, if any prohibiting cause, then let him be diminished in food and not approach meat or wine.
And place over the wound, if an abscess forms over it, cut it in oil roasted alone or in wine in which it is steeped.
However, if he is certain of an abscess, then place over the wound, if it is recent and his blood and air have not changed that powder which I recommended earlier; then stop for a while.
And if the air has already changed that, then place over it alcus gummi until it is healed.
However, if the wound is large or it is by cutting with a knife and similar objects, and its lips are not pulled together by threads, then pull them together with sutures according to how I recommend of their sutures.
However, if the wound is already uncovered from the bone and there is no retention of it except for a small suspensory, then insert that and then cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by cutting into the tendon, and command the patient to abstain from heavy foods in which there is thickness: heads and formen cots and similar to them, until it is healed.
And if you find in the tendon putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert everything that is rotted and cut it out, and then cure that.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut off by medicine, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not cut off, then you cut it with a spatula, or ligature it; and if necessity compels you to do so, then you cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is slight, so you powder them with this powder, which hardens them before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of nuts, broken one part, blood of dragon, broken two parts; cause not extinguished, broken three parts; let all be well ground and strained, and with it fill the plague, and keep it bound with a good binding until it adheres well, and coagulate it with the blood.
Then bind it above with powder and lye, and do not loosen it while it is thus that the medicine is not expelled from it as long as it has not healed.
And sometimes it does this alone, when you do not have nuts or dragon's blood available.
And you do this operation on great plagues when it seems right to put it on and keep them tight; and on recent plagues with their blood that the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in the summer, then it is not necessary to use this powder, but cure them instead as we said, by placing on them some thickened ointments or pastes made from wheat flour with water and honey, which cause blistering; and cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if a fracture in bone has happened to the plague, and it is small, then you remove that with tweezers.
And I will tell you the cure for fractures of the head when it is poisoned.
Of plagues in the neck:
But if the plague happens in the neck, then there is no difference in medicine between that and a simple plague in the head.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no injury to it but it should be avoided by curing that with something that makes a violent contraction, as well as cinchona and zeger, which are like vitriol and similar to them because they harm nerves and contract that. And do not put on the plague anything that causes any heat, because the substance of the nerves is hot and their continuation is to the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
And if that which is cured by mild medicines, as well as being washed with warm water, some vegetable oil poured on or not roasted, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other stones are applied according to this manner, and ointments moistened:
But if the plague is great, then administer suture or cut the lips of it, and cure that with powder until it is healed.
But if there is depth to the plague or suppuration has happened to it in the lower part, then pierce that in the most depressed place:
But if an artery is cut in the plague and blood flows from it, then separate or stop that, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so:
But if the spinal columns of the neck have been cut or all of them, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with suture over the cane of the neck and do not touch that; raise it up and return it to its natural figure, and bind that tightly with a decent binding, and apply powder to that for several days; and cure that with ointments in which there is contraction and excitation until it is healed.
But if the plague has made pressure on the bone, then pierce that, and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all those which you can; and that which you cannot, let that be pierced so that the plague becomes pustular, and separate that and let the discharge of it be removed.
And if the plague is recent, then powder that with the powder which has been recounted to you. But if there is a fistula in the plague, then cure that with something whose remembrance will come soon in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or a dart, and there is depth to it, then consider more if the plague has windiness when the patient breathes; then know that the plague is deadly.
And if there is no depth to it and the plague is recent with its blood, then you put on it in the first hour powder, and do not bind that so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returning to the heart and making the patient faint; but apply an attractive ointment to it, and let that be loosed twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then you put in the orifice of the plague a piece of cloth soaked so that it draws out what there is of moisture; and let the patient sleep on the plague so that what is bound in it flows out.
But if three days or more have passed from the plague and no spasms or tremors of the heart or bad tightness occur to it, and you see its other good dispositions, then know that the plague is saved; and cure that with cauteries and the other treatment until it is healed.
But if its healing is hindered and all time has passed, then know that a fistula has already been made; cure it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the plague is from a wound of a spear or a dart and is simple on the surface of the foot or the sole, then cure that with what precedes of suture, if it is great, or powder, if it is small.
But if there is pressure on the bone and broken pieces in it, then you twist the plague and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then pierce them so that the plague becomes pustular, for their extraction is removed.
And of the other accidental plagues in the other members the youth in cure is the youth of what has been said.
Of plagues in the belly:
The indisposition that happens in the belly is either great or small or middling.
And small disruption is made difficult by another way, and it is known that its reduction is more difficult if you do not cut off the penetration of them into their place at once, because it opens and is swollen so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that there is not difficult reduction of the bowels, just as it is difficult in both species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is according to four ways, but two sutures are common which are used in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
And two other sutures proper communicate with the other wounds, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I will return to you each one with its exposition and declaration.
Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is difficult to return it, then it is in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore, when it is like this, then you should scorch it so that you soak a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or grab it in squill water, and cypress, and spic, and embrocate with that the intestine inside until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this in the one in which there is stippling, and it is better than plain water in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore, when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there is alder and malva, for by this, the instrument of it is alleviated with little cause.
But if the intestine of him is broken due to this cure, then split the disruption a little with an instrument by which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the first cure is better when it is not cut and there is no need to dry and starve.
Of the instrument, know its form:
One part of it is acute and bent, and the other part is not acute, and the extremity is fine, and let it not be as fine as a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
And therefore, when the wound is enlarged and you see the intestine out, then let its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on it, for it is better.
But when the disruption is broad and it is in the lower part of the belly, then let the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then let him lie on his chest and the feet higher.
And likewise, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay attention and consider this all the time so that the part in which there is the wound be higher than the other.
And thus let you administer this in great wounds and in minor wounds.
And in small wounds, apply what is prepared for you, and let the minister be between your fingers, who holds the wound entirely with his hand and adjusts its lips, and uncover from it to that which sews the suture any cause or another.
And this is the common way of sewing: one that you take the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and let it be from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, another that you do not put a thread in both extremes of the cord, with two extremes of the tape which is under the cord of the fingers inside, so that you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremes of the cord and two extremes of the tape, and so are made four turns.
And let it be strengthened with a double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and let the two lips and the wound be drawn together by a decent gathering; and let go of the thickness of the finger and take another needle in that, and let it be bound with a thread as it is tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And let the needles be smaller between thickness and fineness, for thin needles move farther into the flesh; and thick ones are of difficult instrument in the cord, and therefore let them be smaller in thickness and fineness.
And let the needle not be placed in two extremes of the cord propped so that the flesh is not pierced farther and that the wound opens before its consolidation.
And they are not to be prolonged in sewing so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
And let the extremes of the needles be pierced so that they do not hurt the patient from his sleep; and you will place on the suture powdered herbs expanded from all parts, which have the extremes of the needles; and let them go in so that you know that the wound is consolidated.
And these species of sewing with needles in what manner is more convenient in small wounds, for it holds in the sewing of them one needle or two or around those.
But the second sewing is common: and it is that you administer with sewing the four extremes, of the cord and two extremes of the tape, in one go, with a needle in which is wrapped thread in both thickness and fineness.
And let it be when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremes, reduce the needle from that meted part from which you begin, so that the thread drawn back box from the most superficial party to the wound, so that the sewing is according to sewing of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
And place between each sewing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this sewing is known to men.
And with such sewing, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, and it was the rupture of the wound larger than a palm, and it was come out of the intestines about two palms from the intestine of the middle location, and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and therefore I reduced it after that the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and he healed it and is well; and therefore, this lived by words years, and is in his dispositions.
And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was, for I did not cure that with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not applied nor any medicine, but placed over the wound cut vinegar twice a day and frequent washing with honeyed water until it was healed.
But I say two species of proper sewing according to the narration of the Word.
And it is that you begin with sewing of the cord, and pierce the needle from the part out to the part inside.
And therefore, when the needle penetrates into the cord and in that you measure lengths according to rectitude and in length of all the body, and let the extreme of the tape be in the part in which you have pierced the needle; and let it penetrate in the other extreme from the part inside to the part out in the other extreme of the mihit.
And when you have done that to penetrate, then let it penetrate another go in that meted extreme of the mihit from the part out to the part inside; and let the extreme of the tape which is in this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other extreme of the part inside to the part out.
And let it penetrate with that your penetration with which you make it penetrate in the tape in the extreme of the mihit which is in the part of him so that all that penetrates.
Then begin on this side of the groin, and with that hand take hold of the end which is at the head in the other side, and pull out the needle from the ligature which has penetrated, and then return it into that ligature and sew up the end of the head which is in the other side with that end of the thread; and pull it out of the ligature on this part of the patient.
And do this one and another, and do this one then another within, sewing up all that is outside according to that example.
And the whole of this manner of sewing is that you sew with a skin-sewing in which you sew the head one side from the end of the ligature and leave the other side between so that it is filled up.
But the second species of proper sewing which I call the way of Gualia, and this is of speech of him and recommended by him, is that you sew it according to semilitude with which someone medicated sewed it, just as they join the whole divided part to its compared part convenient by nature; and apply the end of another to the other end of it, and this is done according to how your experience dictates.
Because you place the needle in the end of the head towards you near the outside part, and cause it to penetrate into the inside part in that sole, and join two ends of the head; then turn around the needle and cause it to penetrate from outside to the inside at both ends of the head.
And turn around those corners, and cause to penetrate some of the outside part into the inside part in both ends of the head other than on the contrary side.
And this manner of sewing is better than the common lighter sewing, and it is sewing from which I have remembered an account.
This is the speech of Gualia.
And they said that some sew the belly rectally with two needles; so you place in these one a needle, and begin with the penetration of the needle from that which is behind you, and cause it to penetrate into the other side according to sewing of those who sewed bodies head-to-toe.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the sewing of it is more difficult than of other places of the belly.
But the judgment of medication of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
The which cause is that when you perceive the plague recently with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew it and apt it decently, then place upon it powdery encarnative.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place upon it some unguents which are to you present so that they make hard stone and enclose the threads, and are consolidated head and wound; and cure that thus as is the cure of other plagues when it is healed.
But if you are not present the medicines, then place upon it immediately, for when it begins to bubble up blood and cut off the old flesh, and change that twice a day, just as you and your teacher have taught, until it is healed, for you do not need other medicine in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then know that you should soak lion wool in oiled quality, or in rosin oil, and place that in the circuit of the places which are between the angles and below the joints.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, how many times that is done, then christen it with black styptic wine, and especially if the putrefaction is derived in the intestine and a penetration hole is made into its cavity.
And know that that which is of the gross intestine is a lighter cure than that which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is a difficult cure because the intestine which is called “gut” does not receive cure of plague that boxes into it from all; and that is by the great multitude of veins which are in it and by its magnitude of that in those, and by subtlety of body of that, and by proximity of that to nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you attain that recently, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the intestines head-to-toe.
But if it has passed to space and is already done green or black, then that you strengthen that with thread over the place which is made black of it, in order that come flows of blood because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
Then insert that which is other that binding, and place two ends of the thread depending on the party below the plague outside it, in order that over you be elevated the attraction of it by need of the settling of the fabric and emission of the blood of the plague.
Remembering of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some men, because I saw a man who was plagued in his belly by penetration of lance, and the plague was of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was old and made fistula, and was taken out of him and ventositat.
Then I followed the cure of him although he was not confident in the cure of him, but I continued to sublimate that until it was healed and the place is consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, and I followed the matter which he incurred upon it accident of evil in his belly; and he did not incur any for that evil accident and remained in his many dispositions eating and drinking, and appropriately entered into bath and is exercised in his limbs.
And they said some experienced that when there is plague in the intestine, and it is small, then know that it be tied according to this way: and is that you take thimbles of great fingers; then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a thimble of those which has an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes upon them and tightens its mouth, cut off the end of it because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another thimble near the first one, and do not cease that to do with thimbles one by one according to the quantity of all the plague.
Then reduce it and sew the plague; and let those thimbles remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and may no accident happen to evil.
And it is possible that the intestine be tied with thread subtle which is made of intestine of beast attached to it, because it is thinner than needle; and is that you take the end of those threads of intestine, and let there be some flesh removed, and then tie the end of it with thread of li, wound up, and then insert that thread in needles and sew with that the intestine, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this way of sewing with thimbles is not but according to way of confidence and hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then there is not but subtilization, and not complete cure of it.
Of cure of ulcer and fistula.
Know that all plague and ulcer when it is inflamed and becomes old, and is made ulcer, and is not consolidated and flows blood all the time and is not cut off, then in whatever member it is, universally is called fistula and we call that ulcer.
And a fistula according to truth is a knotted, stuffed, hard, white node with which there is no pain and to which the cavity is as it is in the cavity of a bird's egg; and for this reason that one is called an ovum, that is to say, an egg.
And in some men it is moist, emitting pus; and quickly the moisture is discharged in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is thick, and is small, and is coarse, and is subtle.
I have already described all those causes, their signs and their treatment with medicines in the division.
Now I will explain to you the treatment of a fistula which is caused by surgery with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the brain, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae, or one of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and some affect the vicinity of a principal member, or its likes.
And therefore, one of these fistulas which is caused in this way is among the most difficult diseases to heal, and does not accept treatment, and its occupation is labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places which I have mentioned, and you hope for its healing, and trust in its treatment, and wish to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or steel, and if the fistula is straight, probe it with this.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead, for lead, by virtue of its light weight, is drawn and bent along with the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has many windings, it is not possible for you to probe it.
Therefore, cleanse the orifice with a cloth through its openings, for the moisture by which you cleanse it flows through these openings and comes out of them.
And then probe carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know whether here there is bone or nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or close by, or is an ulcer whose many openings are all upon that, through your examination of the patient with your hand over the area, and through the signs and the causes of the pain which result from your compression of the area with your hand, and through similar things.
And when you have examined all those causes with true attention, then proceed to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is an apparent one close by, or in a salty location, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery or vein, or from one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Then dry the fistula as has been said previously about its description, and prevent anything which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and cure what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of skin and its likes, and heal it within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then you should insert it into the fistula as far as possible for you to reach, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and then administer hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and place those within the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is broken within the cavity of the fistula caused by corruption.
And then heal it with ointments which generate healthy flesh within until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and this is certain to you, then you should probe it and dry it as we have said, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve, or of a principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in it, then cut away all of the corruption; and then heal it with that which makes new flesh within until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and still emits pus as before, then you should know that you have not attained the complete eradication of the corruption; and then uncover it again and probe it carefully once more with your sharpest strength, and then cleanse it and heal it.
And therefore, if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the great depth of the body which has not been reached, and therefore in this one for you there is nothing to do except to lay aside that one.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of these, and of those do not leave any cause with your strength.
But if you encounter any resistance from the moistures, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then insert those limbs or flesh if it is here, and separate the bones.
But if you are not prepared to set the bones at this hour, then pause over the wound what will make the wound swell, and leave it until that is in the environment of those bones of flesh and of limbs, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have cut in your operation is restricted.
Have patience, if you fear, pause over it a cloth steeped in soap, or a cloth steeped in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when these limbs are pulled, and the bones are separated from their connection, and the attraction is eased from them.
But if it is a great bone like the bone of the arm or the leg, or their likes, and what is corrupted in it is only its fascia, then cut away that fascia behind where the blackness and corruption are, and then heal the wound.
But if what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close it and to cut it all within where the corruption is reached, and then heal it within until it is consolidated.
And I have advised you that in order to pause that for the patient in his bed so that he rests as an example and helper upon your operation.
Let there be a young man about 30 years of age, to whom pain occurs in his head, and from the parts within, the cause is due to the matter within the body which has reached the head, and it is matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and there is no cause extrinsic to him.
And then the time was prolonged because of the error of the doctors while the abscess was open, and matters arose in him, and his treatment was paused until the chest became fistulated, and they made in him terrible wounds which all discharged pus and the humors of the body.
And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and there was no improvement in his condition until I was called upon to treat him.
And I saw his chest and the matters which ran from him through those openings, for a great wound; and indeed the body of that man was all swollen and his color was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone.
And so I probed all of the openings and found that they all led to various parts of the chest.
And then I cut into one of those openings and discovered an opening in the bone, and it was already rotten and blackened, and indeed a part of the chest was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the mediastinum.
And then I sewed up that which had been discovered to me, and prepared the uncovered bone.
And I saw that there was not in the bone, but only corruption which I had excised and sewn up, and indeed I had already removed it.
And then I prescribed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I iterated and discovered again over the bone secondly on the first discovery, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And I sewed up that which appeared to me from that corruption, and indeed it was necessary for me to perform the cure and restoration of him, and he was not restored.
And then I discovered another wound in him and did not cease to pierce the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of him, and he was not restored until I had pierced around one palm of him, and that was extracted with its marrow, and indeed I restored that with medicines, and it is consolidated slightly and healed.
And there was no necessity of iteration in the operation and section of him except for the disposition of his frailty and for the scantiness of his tolerance and fear of death, because lethargy beset him in all hours by excess of evacuation.
And therefore he is healed with whole healing, and nothing remains in the place of the hard bone; and his disposition is good in his body and he has regained his strength, and he is conversant in all dispositions and suffers no contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the prominent bone is extracted from its place in the body, then you shall cut that secondly in this manner: and it is that you shall take a ligature and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that in their hand; and tie that ligature of woolen yarn thicker than the first ligature; and indeed tie that over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to draw the flesh to the parts below, and you shall uncover the flesh over the place which you wish to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And place a post or table beneath the bone adequately, for when you do this there is not prohibited that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And let the sawing be on the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to feeling, then force another saw against it.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and indeed place a post beneath it, and indeed saw that at the first part where there is corruption so that the sawing is continued with the other part.
And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, insert that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not reason for that except cunning.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however let you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you open it up, and cut it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and indeed with any cunning be rectified for you when it does not cause you contradiction vein or nerve.
And know that there are many incisers and saws to incision these bones according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and the thickness of them, and the subtlety and the greatness and smallness of them, and the hardness and thinness; so that when you prepare for every specie of operation convenient instrument for that operation.
And know that that operation signifies for you on the specie of the instrument from which you lack and have long and profound knowledge of the manners of this art, and experience of manners of diseases, for indeed then you had from your masters that which is convenient for them of instruments for every disease.
And you know that there are to you in the end of this chapter the number of instruments with which you shall form them with simples and which you shall process for your prohibition, which you experience on the others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another great saw:
Form of a file: Let the head of this file according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points according to the form of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient except that with it be rubbed the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or is a great mouth wide.
Form of lesser razor:
Form of broad razor:
Form of another saw adequately made: let it be made arch of it more superior and the acuity of it of steel, and the member of it of a dagger adequately made. Its form:
Form of a razor in which there is concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor of curved extremity:
Form of small razor resembling tent:
Form of other smaller inciser:
Form of another inciser; this resembling a file, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones:
Form of a file which is convenient for piercing of the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly let all the causes which we have said of razors and of incisers and of saws.
Of incision extremities and of the sawing of bones.
The extremities are swollen or for intrinsic cause or for extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with those medicines and the healing does not confer, or the corruption returns to the member from which there is no cutting of any cause, then let you incision that member where the corruption lies so that the patient escapes death or great harm which is greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black while being cooked, or you will see the blackness entering where that burning has entered into that member which dries it and takes over the whole body; and therefore cut off that part with a sharp knife.
And similarly, if it is caused by the impact of some venomous causes, such as scorpion venom or snake or toad, and similar.
And if the corruption or impact is in the fingertip, then you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
And similarly, if it happens to the hand, then you cut off that part from the root of the arm, and do not give space to the corruption so that it takes over the arm.
And if instead it happens in the arm, then cut off the arm at the bend of the elbow joint.
And if the corruption passes further and turns around the elbow, then that is the death of the patient; and in the administration of another cause in a cure, it is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, if corruption happens in the toe, then you cut off that part at one of the joints.
And if it takes over the sole of the foot, then you cut off the whole foot. But if it can enter into the toenail, then you cut off the leg at the joint of the toenail.
And if the corruption has already come upon the toenail, then there is no remedy in him but dismissal, and let the patient die.
And the manner of cutting off the member or binding it is that you tighten the ligament in the part lowest where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the location; and extend one ligament to the lowest parts, and extend the other ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that all the flesh is exposed; and then let it be cut or bound.
And cover what has been cut with linen from all sides so that it does not touch the wound itself, and let the patient come healed and scarred.
But if it happens that there is flow of blood when the wound opens, then you cauterize the location burnt or place upon it some powders which constrict the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
And then bind the affected member with a ligament in a convenient way, and cure that until it is healed.
And now I return to you that which I promised to a man in his foot, this medicine incident which I and you have recorded, which is when darkness comes upon him in his foot with burning which was similar to fire.
And that corruption happened first in his toe so that it spread throughout the foot.
And then that man prepared for himself remedies more than he could bear the cure going to the member with the strength of it which was tormented by pain and burning, and he cut off that foot at the joint, and it healed.
A long time ago that corruption happened in the finger of the hand indicated.
And then it came to me, and so I was forced to strike that superfluity with what I placed upon the hand of medicines, and then the cleansing of his body; and the superfluity is not struck back and begins to go to another finger as it begins in the hand.
And he begged me to cut off his hand, and I did not wish to do that hoping about the striking back of that superfluity, but because I feared the cutting off of his hand, for the virtue of the patient was great.
And after he had despaired of me, he returned to his own land and found that man preparing and cutting off his whole hand, and he healed.
And I have not added this narration except that it be an aide about what is caught of this disease, and that it be a sign by which it is known and according to which it is performed.
Of the cure of sins and quality of enema with medicines.
When apostema happens in some fleshy members and the space of the apostema is prolonged so that it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and pierced, and the pus comes out of it, and the place is empty as if it were a vessel, and there is not any impression on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
But however if the space is prolonged so that the corruption presses upon some member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
And the cure of it is that you cut off that canal totally as it is turned over, and especially when it is thinned out and is made with linen, and you press so that it does not adhere to the location by its corruption.
But if you hope that the canal adheres and that corruption has not been achieved by later consequence, and in the canal there is passing of pus, then you cure that with an enema.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm which comes has a fetid odor, then enema that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and resin received divided in a vessel, and are tied over the fire until the medicine is cooked to a consistency of honey.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema with that the sinus, and tighten the orifice of it, and let the medicine remain in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then take it out with care; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the swelling is diminished.
And sometimes it is enema with water of ash when that medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of wood, and put upon it water; and then strain that and enema with it that sinus until you are confident that the sinus is finished.
And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then enema with water and honey and powdered resin mixed, and enema that sinus with wine and honey mixed, because by property of honey it cleanses and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when there is superfluity of dryness and stiffness.
And when you do this several times and you are confident that the sinus is diminished, then enema with what makes the flesh to come together in it.
And it is that you take some unction of myrrh and dissolve that with rose oil and astringent wine; or enema with some medicines and other unguents which have the properties which I have written in the treatment of the ointments.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow so that the cannula of the enema does not go in, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place over it a sponge wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you gather the lips of it with a stitch and leave from it the quantity in which the enema goes in its addition.
And if the orifice of it through which the arm goes is raised to the parts above, then dry that in the pus which is in it so that the arm goes in from below, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the sinus the flesh is engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone pus, then you perforate the member with preparation by which blood flows out of it gently according to your attire and that there is no cause for the blood being retained in it.
But that which is over the orifice of the sinus, which drips all the time so that it dries up whatever is inside the blood. And so that you know if what flows from it is a lot or a little, or is digested, or not digested.
And so you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And when your treatment is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that is dried over the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or it has appropriate adhesion, then you loosen it on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, then change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
But if the sinus has a long space and you see subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing is appropriate, for there are some people in whom generation of flesh occurs on their wounds, and from whom it is made in the contrary way.
And if blood that is not digested flows from the sinus for several days, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you apply in drying medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with ointment of theriac, when there is excess of addition of honey.
And the best medicine for it is to take theriac ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and pour on it old wine that is equal in its substance, and apply this to it, and use it.
And so do this action when there is no blood: ointment of theriac, honey when it has been boiled until it is thickened, and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and mix them together, then grind them all into powder over the fire, and spread it on cloth and apply it to the sinus. And spread the honey that you have boiled until it is thickened over the cloth and apply it.
And sometimes they are applied to it with a long aristo logic and roots of celestial lily (and that is celestial lily) and farina of wormwood and centaurea, and use those simples or prepare them, grind them and sift them into powder over the honey that he has recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that corruption is in its root, and so do examination in the bones or in the other hard members or tendons; then you treat it with treatment of a fistula, as is said above.
Of treatment of panaries and nails worn away, and addition of incision of the finger, and section.
Panaries is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand or the toe, and it is very rare in other fingers, and as it is prolonged, its cure is more difficult, or it is an abscess of a cauterized wound, or it is corrupted, and it causes blood to flow inside that corrode the roots of the nail, and very much corrupts all of it, and the corruption very much permeates the bone within which has a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes lopsided, and its color becomes dark.
And so when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then you should know that you pierce with iron all the superfluity that is rotted from the nail and appropriately cauterize the wound there, because burning is beneficial in that.
But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail are filled with flesh to the parts within, and it begins to prick and hurt that, then you should know that you place a thin needle below the edge of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push that up and insert the flesh with ease, and put on that which comes from the flesh of corrosive medicines until everything is dried. And so cure that with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already pervaded the bone, then you should know that you pierce that bone and extract it, for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the finger, then you insert it into one of the nuts according to how its memory is pressed, and so cure that until it is healed.
But if the nail has been knocked against something or hit, and it hurts very much, then you should know that at the beginning you apply phlebotomes to the finger, and appropriately dry the nail with a pointed spatula by making a transverse cut on it, and be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh under the nail, for you will cause vehement pain in the finger, and a cause of generation of superfluous flesh in the location; and so cure that place from which there is pain.
But a finger that has been born in the hands of some people is very much flesh, and very little bone, or it is in the nail.
And some are born in the root of the joint, or its generation in some knuckles of the fingers. But that which is born in some knuckles of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born in the joints is very much hurt.
And of those which are born fleshy, its cut is easier, and you insert that below its root with a wide spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, its cure is difficult; and so be careful about its incision.
But of that which is born in the finger at the knuckles, you should know that you pierce the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and cut it with one of those appropriate saws, and so cure that until it is healed.
But consolidation that occurs in the fingers between their joints several times or by generation of the person who is born so, or by consolidation of a wound, or by burning fire, or similarly, then you dry up that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.
And so place between those pieces of cloth moistened in rose oil so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate between them, or place between them a thin lead plate so that it is consolidated according to how you wish.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then you dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
Of incision of wounds, so are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are engorged and twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities, which appear in the extremities of the body, most commonly in the legs, particularly in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Thereafter, when you administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment for them is according to two methods: the first is that it be incised and that black blood be drawn out; the other method is that the vein be elevated and all of it extracted.
The incision is done in the following way: first moisten the leg with warm water so that the gross blood, which is feculent, is dissolved; then tightly press the patient's leg from the highest part of the thigh to the lowest part of the groin with a bandage, and then dry the vein at one, two, or three locations with a broad incision, and elevate the black blood with your hand from below upwards into it, so that the quantity you want and can endure is discharged; the strength of the patient will tell you how much.
Then tie that up, and command him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and pain is felt by the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient, if in it are found varicose veins, and then put him into a bath and moisten his leg with warm water so that it becomes engorged and the veins are swollen; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if no bath is available, so that the limb is heated.
And then cut the vein at the bend of the leg in its length or behind it near the groin, or below it near the ankle.
And then open the vein with scissors and scrape out the vein in all parts where it appears black, and you should draw out its content until the patient's feeling is diminished; this will be indicated by its turning from black to red.
And then with a needle pierce the vein, and when you see it white and quivering, tie it with a string.
And then put below it the vein so that it is elevated and drained of blood, and suspend it with a silk thread tied to an iron hook.
And then cut another section below that section with three incisions, and scrape out the vein from above it where it appears; this will be indicated by its appearance.
And then elevate it and pierce it with a needle in the rear incision below the ankle; then extract it and elevate it so that it is discharged through the second incision, and then extract it from above that incision.
And then do this so that you extract it from the incision which is highest or lowest of all the incisions, so that it is all discharged; then pierce it there.
And if it does not obey you in being extracted and elevated, then insert a strong bent needle into it and ligature it and extract it, or insert it below the vein and rotate your hand all around so that it is drained from all parts. And beware that it not be cut; for if it is cut, it will then be difficult for you to elevate it and it will be harmful to the patient.
And when all of it has been drained out, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and has tortuosity from which there is an infiltration into the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should split it at all parts of its tortuosity and suspend it with a hook so that you elevate it entirely.
And beware that you do not cut the vein and harm it, for it will then be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise your prudence in doing this.
The shape of the incision by which it is dried:
It is not curved with hooks nor of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtlety; there is superfluous thickness in it as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg:
This vein is engendered in the legs in warm lands as in Al-Ategi in the land of Arabs, and in the hot and arid lands of India with little gentleness, and in which there is no grass or trees.
And it is also engendered strongly in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its gestation is from putrefaction which comes below the vein as from venomous snakes and worms and scars and worms engendered between the vein and the flesh.
And the sign of its advent is that this vein inflames violently in the leg, and then the location becomes blistered, and then the vein starts to discharge from that blister which seems like a plant root.
And then when the end appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead, which weighs one-sixth of a drachma. Wrap this and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you see it coming out of the parts, wrap it in lead and suspend that. And if it is prolonged, then you pierce a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which has been pierced so that it is discharged, for if you pierce it, it will be contracted and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in that location and ulceration.
For let it be drawn out little by little so that it is discharged from below and does not cause any harm in the body.
And this vein is found in some men who are of the length of 5 or 10 palms, and I have seen one that was of 20 palms.
And if it is cut during the hour of its medication, then insert the end into the incision and pierce it with a long needle into the body so that everything in the matter is discharged, and then administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and then cure it with the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has swollen bumps, and mostly when it appears at the joint of the leg or in the leg, and comes to it bumps of openings, and is discharged from each opening.
And then cure it as we have said in the division and with what is above it.
Of section of worms engendered under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some land because of the bovine disease due to which it moves the cows and is a worm which is found between the vein and flesh, and goes all through the body pushing and falling, and is shown by its feeling as it moves from limb to limb breaking the vein and coming out.
And its generation is from putrefaction of some humors as when venomous worms and snakes and roundworms and ascarias are engendered in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes through the body and is elevated to the head, then it breaks out in him and pierces the mouth, and then it comes out many times.
And so when you want to cure him and extract it, then it is not done unless you first make him feel a strong pain and contraction on what is above him and what is below him, and then quickly dry the area and extract it.
And if it is buried in the flesh and you cannot pull it out, then you must apply a cautery with fire to the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the tool, by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
Now if you want the stone to reach the head quickly, then stretch the scalp tightly with a strong contraction, and quickly dry the area and extract the stone; and let the patient use purifying medicines for his body that evacuate rotten humors, and guard against foods that cause putrefaction.
On the treatment of gout.
This illness is named in our country 'nafir', and it is a pain that comes to some parts of the body, and soon travels from part to part.
And I have seen this according to how I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a town, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and as soon as it had broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation go just like a worm moving from place to place, more quickly than you could imagine, just like live silver when it moves from place to place.
And then the pain went into that part and settled in the muscle, and so I stayed there for an hour.
And so it went through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
And so I understood that it was moving through all of his body as I saw it; and I was very astonished at its movement from part to part. And I had seen this before in my own eyes according to that way, however I have heard of pains being transferred from part to part. But I did not see it with my own eyes as I did in the woman.
And I did not think that it was anything but because the woman was old and had thin skin and exposed veins, and in this appeared to the senses that changing windiness.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this back-cure in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear at the head as we have said, then you stretch on that and underneath him quickly and dry over him where that windiness has gone, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you cure him by expelling the humors and by that which expels windiness, and treat those by pilules of farts and pilules of serapi and similar.
On the extraction of stones.
Stones are various according to their species, and according to the parts of the body where they are found, because their diversity is that some have great points, and small, and hollow, and blunt, and some are solid; and of those some have three angles, and others are like tongues; and of others are like splinters.
And the signs of the brain are when it falls into the brain and pierces the skull, and is raised from the cyphax which is above the brain, because accidents occur through it like violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and heat in the ears, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of senses and vomiting of bile, and the voice is broken and destroyed, and moisture white like dust is emitted from the wound.
And so if you see these signs, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the stone unless it is out.
But the signs of the stone when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a soft cause; and quickly the movement of the stone is like the movement of the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound, and it brings chill to the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; and so know that death descends with it.
And the signs when the stone has wounded the lung are emission of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels that are near the throat are swollen, and the patient's color is changed, and he breathes heavily, and asks for cool air.
And if the stone falls into the membrane which is in the feet, then the pain is near the little ribs, and there is made a wound great by violent pain and by sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
And if the stone falls into the stomach, then quickly you will see some undigested food from the wound.
And if the stone falls into the belly and is stuck in it, you will see some wound of the wound, or the membrane, or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for curing it except by extracting the stone.
And if the stone falls into the bladder and urine is emitted from it, and some wound goes from it to the parts outside, and quickly there is great pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
But the other members like the face, neck, throat, shoulders and armpits, and the bones of the back, and the jaw, and the hip, and the leg and its likes of the members are safe according to the best dispositions when the stone does not block a vein or artery, and it is not a venomous stone.
And I will tell you this that I have seen of these stones so that you understand it about your cure.
The cause of which is, because in an old man a stone fell into the tear gland of his eye at its root in the nostril, and I extracted that from him at the other side, below the eyebrow, and he was healed, and did not occur in his eye any harm.
And I extracted another stone from a Jew in which it had fallen into him at the edge of his eye, below the eyebrow, and the stone was already hidden and he had not obtained it except for a small end with which it adhered to his stem, and it was a great sharp stone with lion’s ferrule.
And the Jew was healed, and there was no harm done to his eye.
And I extracted another stone from a Christian man which had fallen into his throat, and it was an Arabic stone, and it was that to which there are eyebrows; and then I inserted it between two teeth, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I pricked it with that, and quickly I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and so, since thirty days had passed and there was no change in him from any cause of his dispositions, I made an incision over the arrow and pulled it out, and he healed, and no evil accident happened to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound was closed over him, and since it was about seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her belly, and the wound was closed within him, and she was not changed in any of her dispositions in terms of urination or defecation, and the woman did not suffer damage in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound was closed, and he broke the arrow, not feeling any pain, and moved similar movements.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's son who had fallen in the middle of his nose and had already tilted to the right a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called for his cure when it was three days since the arrow had pierced him.
And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I probed it with a subtle probe, and he didn't feel it; but he felt a sting below his right ear, and then I perceived that this sting was from the tip of the arrow.
And I applied to the site an ointment in which is virtue atractive and digestive, trusting from me that the site would quickly heal for me to see the location of the arrow, so that it would dry up over it.
And there happened in the site no significant accident that the arrow had achieved that site; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for many days and there happened no accident; and the wound healed meanwhile, and the piercing of him was closed over a period of several days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and he recognized this to me.
And then I applied to the wound sharp corrosive medicine for several days until it opened up, and with a probe I probed that, and found the tip of the arrow subtly, which was adherent to the shaft.
And then I continued to use the sharp medicine in the perception of the wound until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to me, and it took me a while with that for the space of four months.
And then when the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and pull on it without resistance, I did not cease to probe and operate on it with tools until one day I began to operate on it with forceps according to their shape, as will be described in the end of this chapter; and so I extracted that arrow, and then restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered entirely and there was nothing wrong with him.
And I will tell you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you pause with this rule and meaning on it which I have not said, for the parts of this art and its definitions are not comprehended by narration or understanding of that book.
And the wise artisans compare a few things about motion and about what is present concerning what is absent, and find new operation and new instruments due to the descent of strange causes of the art when it happens.
And so I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are placed except according to two ways: either by attraction of the site into which they enter or by repulsion of the other side.
And that which is expelled through the site from which it is entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy site and is shot out and expelled.
And if it does not yield to the exit of the hour in which it catches, then leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes dry and be separated from its attraction and its exit.
And similarly if it is placed in bones and does not yield to you at exit, then leave that for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion every day, and it will be expelled.
And if it does not yield to you after several days, then pierce around the arrow in that bone throughout its whole length with a subtle probe until the site is enlarged and extract that.
But if the arrow is hidden in the site of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you probe that with a probe, and if you sense that, then shoot that with certain tools which are convenient to its attraction.
And if you cannot operate on him due to the constriction of the wound and due to the length of the bone, and here there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you work over the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is held in the ears with which it is held, then you loosen the flesh in which it is placed throughout its whole length with every operation that you can do; and operate on that, if you cannot operate over the exit of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the twisting of those until he yields.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any site where it is, then use with twisting of your hand with forceps at all parts until he yields; and probe with very subtle probe so that the arrow is not broken and that it be made to you difficult attraction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot operate on that from your hand, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in its circuit dry up, and then repeat that because by then it is separated. But if you meet counteraction of bleeding, then you administer what we have said of cure in its chapter.
And guard your virtue of cutting vein or nerve, or tendon, and operate in every way possible for the exit of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as we and you have recommended.
And therefore when you contract the arrow so that the patient is according to its figure according to which it has had the piercing of the arrow in him, for it is more advantageous. But if that is not possible for you, then you minister what is possible for you through the figures.
But the arrows that are expelled by repulsion of the other side, or which have already proceeded into the parts outside, or make softness of the exit of the arrow due to sensation of the part above the tendon and move that prominent; then you cut over that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which they hold the forceps; and then shoot that, for it is made looser to exit.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lance according to its contrary position within the bone, and enlarge it with the lance itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process where it is stuck.
And if the shaft of the lance is stuck in it, then you push it out with your hand.
But if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer a blow, then you enter it into the hole so that it goes into the hollow of the lance, and then push it out with your hand.
But if the lance is hollow, then you push it out with a strong blow by entering it into the hole, for the lance is driven out by that.
And if the lance is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do so, and then cure it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the lance pierces the foot, or belly, or bladder, or side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut on it, then cut on it and be wary of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps by which the lances are pulled out::
Their ends are like a bird's beak, serrated so that they grip the lance and don't let go.
And from these are made several species, large, small, medium, or mixed, according to the quantity of the size of the lance, and its painfulness, and the amplitude of the wound, and the constriction.
so that the implement of it within the hollow lance is driven out and pushed with that.
Of bleeding of the veins.
The veins from which bleeding usually flows are .xxx. of which are in the head, there are two pulsating veins which are close to the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the temples; and two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two blood vessels that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and — these are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are bled in the arms are .v.; because one of them is the cephalica, and it comes from the wild lime tree; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is hollow, and it is a small vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people call it “vein of all the body”, and basilica is the vein which rests on the domestic lime tree, and it is called “citillar”, and the vulgar people call it “vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and it rests on the wrist, and it is the one that is bled, and it appears obviously above the hand; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the small auricular vein and the little finger, and there are two ramps in it.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of these is below the curve of the tooth of the wild lime tree; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the leg of the domestic lime tree; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the leg of the wild lime tree; and in the leg there are other veins similar to these.
The opening of the veins that are close to the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigration and bad old ulcers in the head.
And the way to open those veins is according to what you see: it is that one should cut the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occiput at the location of both veins with a wide bandage with good friction; then tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that they appear the two and their locations at the sides of the ears, in two places depressed from the head; and feel those with your finger, and if you feel their pulse with your finger, here is a sign by touch.
Then you take the cutting lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert it below the vein in the codon so that the bleeding comes to the bone. And then elevate your hand with the vein and the codon to the sides above, and insert the vein with incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow as much as you want.
And then tie it with a bandage and leave it until it is healed.
And now I have spoken in the beginning of this book about the incision of these and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the opening of their bleeding is for ancient emigration and evil bad eye and constant body of pointed sharp things flowing out from the eyes.
And the way to open them is according to what you see: compress the patient' neck a lot so that the two veins appear by obvious appearance, and let their pulse be felt below your finger; then you sign with touch.
Then you elevate the codon above the vein to the sides with your finger, and insert the bleeding below, and elevate the vein above; and insert it as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then loosen the compression of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place a cut and bandage over it with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And now the memory of them is preceded, and of their incision and attraction in the beginning of this book.
And so the opening of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is for ancient illnesses of the face and emigration and heat and rotten, fetid ulcers.
And the way to open it is according to what you see; it is that the patient compresses his neck with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is called fossor, of which this is the form::
Place the point of the fossor which is at the end of the instrument on the vein, and pierce it with a needle or with another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; then loosen the piercing of the patient and tie that up until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with bleeding lat, however, it does not appear that the bleeding is of acute extremity like the other bleeding, but it is of flat extremity, and that vein is opened according to the transverse, because the bone is close and strong and would break it in it when it is subtle.
But the opening of the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes for heat of the eye and heat in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, then you phlebotomize them, and you stand over him.
And phlebotomy is done according to the transverse vein, and a little along the length of it, because there is no flesh in that place; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, soon its end is broken.
Then cause the blood to flow as much as it is necessary for you; and stop the bleeding on those, and tighten them with a new ligature; and then loosen the ligature.
But phlebotomy of the nose vein is relevant to acute fever and violent vomiting and diseases of the face and hemorrhoids and redness that occurs in the face, and especially when it's old.
And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient tightens his neck and you hold his nose with your left hand; and take the phlebotomy subtley long, and place it in the middle part of the nose's head according to its rectitude, because the vein does not appear to feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And you finish with your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then tie it with a ligature, because it is restored quickly.
But phlebotomy of the two small veins leads to constriction of the throat and to the onset of leprosy and many diseases, and also to bad corrosive ulcers like scrofula.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that the patient tightens each one under his neck with a bandage, and the operator stands over the patient's head while the patient sits on a stool.
And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with small, ample phlebotomies little by little; and draw blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you see is necessary for that; and then do likewise on the other vein.
And then loosen the bandage and tighten the two veins with a slight ligature so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay down the patient because the plague is healed.
And phlebotomy of the algerich veins brings about small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its circuit.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that you cause the patient to open his mouth before you, and tighten his neck with a bandage, and then turn back his lips and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by their blackness, and that is because in the circuit of those there are small black veins; and so cut into each with an incision cutting.
But if doubt is under you, and you don't know which is that one, then you go to an incision of the largest of those, and of the most pus evident of those.
And do likewise on the two veins that are above the lips.
But of the two veins that are below the tongue, phlebotomy brings about the headache to suffocations that are in the gullet, and diseases of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that you follow the patient's head before the sun, and lift up his tongue, and look under his tongue, of one side of it veins and of the other side of it veins; and the color of each is declining to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not finish with your hand in phlebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and phlebotomy of them is done according to two ways, either with mirtilat or olive-wood at declining subtlety; or cutting with a knife, and it is called if without smell, and this is its form:
It is the side of it thus with times, and it convokes to open the full concaved veins apparent thick gross; and at those that contain gross turbid blood.
And that phlebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it convokes to phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain citric subtle blood.
But phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins; for drawing blood from diseases that are below the gullet and neck, and that affect the feet and belly.
And it convokes the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that one, to guard and be over-careful at it, because below it there is an artery; and if he err and hit in the puncture of the phlebotomy, cut into that artery and occur blood-flow, so that he must not phlebotomize it with pointed phlebotomies, rather cut with a knife as above with without-smell.
And if the basilic does not appear by evident appearance, then you leave it and move to the other one, or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomize at the end of the arm, because that one is evident; and cut into it with a knife as above with without-smell.
But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then before the tightness of the arm touch the place between which you know the pulse's location, and then sign on it with your hand; and then tie the arm and cut into the vein with a concaved section with a knife as above with without-smell; and beware that the concussion occur at some space of the artery' location.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling at the location that you have signed with your hand, then that swelling is an artery's swelling; and so loosen it.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as an infant's, and the blood is thin red, then know that it is of the artery; and then you close and place your finger over it for long space; and then stop your finger, and if the blood is abscinded, because many veins are abscinded, then you tighten the arm and leave that one.
And keep the patient of the youth of it, and be over-careful at it and do not maltreat him for some days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not abscinded, and you see that there is no medicine present at it; then you cut into the artery, if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the blood is abscinded; or take a splinter of fistic, and open it, and take one mat and tighten it over the vein' location with a ligature, and on the next day.
And then if the blood is abscinded, good; and if not, then heal that one with what it is preceded by the reminder of the location of the abscinded veins flow of blood.
And the abscission of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small location of the plague and the possibility of the arm' ligature.
From the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial when one draws blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because of this, it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and of a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And beware of the phlebotomist when he is above fear in the phlebotomy of the patient, because below that there is a nerve; and then if he pierces the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and it is difficult for him to be healed, and often he is not healed at all. And this nerve moves many times, visible to the senses; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, then you should place the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you split the vein in length.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates illnesses of the joints.
And beware of this in particular: if you want the phlebotomist to pierce with olive-wood phlebotomy or with myrtle-wood phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, for it does not pierce an artery or nerve.
However, very rarely is an abscess found in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but do not notice that abscess.
The first of these is that you know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and for hope in it and precaution against onset of illnesses, and that phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after eating, when appearances of fullness appear.
And phlebotomy be done on the third day or the first after three hours of the day have passed.
But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it produces convenience and necessity, or at night or during the day, at any time and at all times.
And beware of an infant not being phlebotomized until he is 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month between the seventh month, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized if they have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, beware that the bowels are cleansed before phlebotomy with lion's milk clyster, if in them there is a retained split, so that the veins do not throw out the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main members.
And those who are phlebotomized should not be nauseous or sick from any illness, nor from drunkenness, nor from malady or from fainting until they have been restored to their senses, nor from dropsy, but phlebotomy should be feared especially when there is colic pain and especially vomiting, and especially pain of the belly, and especially multiplication of cough and of fever, and especially from cause that dissolves strength, or is corporeal or animal.
And especially consider in the subsiding of humors before that if the blood is thick, by means of foods and drinks, and by means of medicines if that is possible for him.
And especially enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subsided.
And pause the phlebotomy of him in the afternoon of the day, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And you should ensure that the foot of that one is guarded in that day from all animal accidents, so it is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, so it is labor and excess pain and cough and their likenesses to them.
And at his bath make the causes be present in the use of which the humors usually leave men by aromatization and odorant and by balms and their likenesses according to the quantity of possibility.
And the phlebotomist should follow on a cushion that is more high than the cushion of him who should be phlebotomized.
And especially extend his arm, and rub that by the phlebotomist's hand two or three times; and especially tighten the ligament with a belt and wrap that twice.
And the tightness should be moderate, because tight tightness or looseness is a prohibition of blood flows; or it is for softening, and then the blood of the body goes out.
And especially the tightness, beware that him who should be phlebotomized rubs his hands together in between them so that the veins are inflated and are declared to the senses.
And especially the phlebotomist anoints his phlebotomy with a little of the old oil properly; and especially pause your right hand's index finger over that vein, below the location from which you want the phlebotomy, so that the vein goes out a little, and the percussion is struck because from which veins it is that is drawn, as well as a string, and from those is that is full of windiness, and when you pause the phlebotomy over that, it is constricted for him; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is constricted.
And so, for this beware that the phlebotomist be quiet and be solicited in all these causes.
And especially pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one turn, then it is; and if not, you iterate that again another time below that location a little, or over it with pressure, if the location is not abscessed.
And if the location is abscessed or the illness is scared, then you will leave it for one or two days and do not tighten the ligament, because very likely it will hit an abscess cauterization, nor enter into a bath.
And especially iterate the phlebotomy if the mother.
And if the wound is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not draw blood in the quantity that you want, then iterate the phlebotomy in that stab according to rectitude and adjust in the wound a little, and do that with pressure before the location is abscessed, because the location is abscessed in many men requires little wounds.
But if he is already abscessed, then do not iterate over him because it does not excuse you any cause; and pause over that any part of the wound with oil, because it stimulates the blood of the body. And it is better in this location that olive oil and than other oils.
And similarly administer olive oil in every phlebotomy when the phlebotomist draws blood of the prohibition of the body's blood, and do that with theriaca and aloes when it is paused one of those over the location, because the blood is subsided and is rolled when it is thick.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is engendered, because many times it happens, and mainly to him who has not been bled except that turn, or in the wound little, and then you should put together, and pause over the location sponge soaked in water and salt, a little warmed, and tighten that for one hour, because it is dissolved.
And whoever does this should make a tourniquet of that vein by tying it or another vein.
If something black or green remains in the wound for several days, do not worry about it. And if you want to, apply some aloe vera gel mixed with myrrh, or some marjoram juice, or a similar remedy.
And often after such operations, abscesses and bumps occur due to phlegmon of the basilic vein.
And then put your hand over it, and if you suddenly feel softness under your compression on it, then that lump is harmful and bad. So be careful not to apply anything we have mentioned on it, for the arterial blood will flow out profusely.
And make a poultice with something astringent so that the wound is hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
And whoever draws blood from a person according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood, according to how it appears.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and likewise, if you see it is thick, then let it flow out until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, let its acuteness be abated.
And whoever is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one go, let the tourniquet of the vein be loosened and the phlebotomy be wide.
And for someone who is frail, let the opposite be done to him; and whoever draws his blood in several go, let the incision be narrow.
And the best method for phlebotomy of a vein is that it is a transversal section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more agreeable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And whoever is accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, and whoever you treat before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of pomegranates or simple oxymel heated; and draw out his blood in three or four go.
And if it is a fainting of a complexional nature, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh-syrup or syrup of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or aromatized syrup and many other aromatic things.
And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and it is caused by the flow of much blood, then whoever takes bread soaked in wine and aromatized with aloes wood, let him wrap his feet with it.
And use the other causes that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And whoever wants to open his arm and dissolve his blood the second time, whoever it is from whom the phlebotomy is for great evacuation, and whose nature is cold, let him evacuate the blood little by little according to the amount of its virtue in continuous days.
But whoever wants to open his arm and withdraw his blood the second time, and whose body is strong, then let him do it about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to withdraw the blood of his body in the contrary direction of the part to which he inclines, let him be bled on the second or third day.
But whoever has much blood already drawn and is acutely hot and experiences fever, let him have his blood drawn in one go, and let a great quantity be drawn from him, and let the tourniquet be loosened so that fainting does not occur due to the phlebotomist's ignorance and negligence.
And do not let anyone, when you want to open the arm and withdraw blood the second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, press that with force and bend it slightly, for that is very bad.
Let it flow until it is out; or wipe it with Tyrian purple, or with saw-wort, and apply a light compression on it while the blood is coming out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be; do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if you are compelled to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then let him be bled on that spot or in his other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the cords of the arm" is bled in the place of the basilic or of the basilic, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of them.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in warm water so that the vein swells and appears visibly.
And then let it be bound with a bandage with a slight tightness; and phlebotomize according to the small transversal section, not longitudinally or according to length.
And let the incision be wide and your phlebotomy on that joint of the hand be small.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you return the hand to the warm water and let the blood flow in the water until you perceive your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you will be excused from returning the hand to the warm water; and let the body of the blood be put in warm water in winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the other veins, for from there is not a pulsating vein nor nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with a bandage, or your hand, for you put it in warm water, so that the vein swells and it is demonstrated to be safe; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if it bleeds at all, then do not touch it again.
And be careful not to finish your hand with phlebotomy, for from there the nerves of the fingers are bared of flesh.
And then return the hand to the warm water and let the blood flow in it; for if you do not return it to the warm water, the blood will clot at the orifice of the vein, and its flow will be prohibited.
And when the blood is drawn according to the amount of need, then you apply olive oil and salt on it so that it is not coagulated firmly; and likewise, whoever does this on a limb, let him do it with a tight bandage.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the soul.
And do likewise in the phlebotomy of him, as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the vein is for diseases that are below in the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of the legs and arms, and their likenesses of diseases.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient puts his foot in warm water and makes friction on it so that the veins appear; and tie with a bandage around the ankle; and the place of the vein, let him touch it with his finger, and from there let it be branched into the skin of the foot with many branches.
And therefore cut off the most abundant blood vessels, or veins, behind the calf, behind the ankle, behind the foot, because it is better and healthier.
And if you cut off the vessels on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below those vessels on the surface of the foot, and make your incision slantwise across them, as if you wanted to slit them.
Let it be bloodless.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should raise the foot of the patient in warm water and let the blood run out through that opening which should be evacuated.
And if the person who performs the phlebotomy makes a mistake in the first vein, then do it again with a little more blood, because the place is healthy; and do not worry about causing harm, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And likewise do on the other leg.
And the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is behind the ankle below the wild-horse bone.
And the purpose of the phlebotomy on him is for dolour in the hip when it is caused by cold blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly tie his leg from the side of the broad part above the ankle above four fingers in one long slender bandage, because nothing appears except through there.
And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to your ability and according to the cross, and it is better; or slit that by incision or cut that by section, because the place of him is healthy.
And she is in most men hidden; and if you find that, and it does not appear to all feeling, then phlebotomize some vein of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot under the little finger and the ring finger.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you want.
Then loosen the ligature and place a bandage over the site of the phlebotomy tightly and firmly, because usually it heals quickly.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozes are of warts, or blisters, or glass.
And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two methods, because either it is with fire or without fire.
And the vents which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are twelve locations on the body, one of which is where alnocrati vents are placed, and it is in the back part of the head; and the middle part between two parts of the neck; and vents of the chin below the jawbone just below the mouth; and vents of two spatulas; and vents of alohoster, and it is above the end of the armpit; and vents of two little holes; and vents of two little bones; and vents of two joints.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it has not the virtue through those, just as it is through phlebotomy; nor is there any indication that ventilation be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion within when the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts to ventilation for disease or continuous, we administer that throughout the whole month and in its middle and whenever it is necessary.
And therefore when it happens for any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed of the day.
And the purpose of ventilation at the nape is that when it confers heaviness in the head and to that which is bent down in the eyes; but let that be when there is proper evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not proper to use that which is of complete friction, or in which there is catarrh, because it does great harm to him.
And therefore let there be no use of that for the old, and in the heads of which there are cold diseases.
But to him over whom that is continually done, let there be oblivion; and therefore let the person who performs ventilation not pause his hand lightly with the ventouse on the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventilation of alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy of the vein fusca and basilic: and therefore it confers asthma, and constriction of throat, and splitting of windpipe, and cough, and repletion.
And let the ventouse of alkehel be applied lightly, because if it is applied below, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And ventilation of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-fever, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
And let the person who performs ventilation not press his hand with scarification so that he does not slit the artery and ignite the flow of blood.
And ventilation below the chin confers alcolah in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and appearances like those of diseases which are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric which is on both lips.
But ventilation which is done on the two spatulas confers headache, which is caused by repletion of heat.
And ventilation of the two parts within the little holes confers benefit of phlebotomy from three veins, that is, basilic, fusca and cephalic, because it draws blood from all those veins more slender than those larger veins through which the attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the person who performs ventilation not to go too far in scarification, because the place is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is ventilation by which is ventilated above the hips and confers to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers below.
And let the person who performs ventilation make it a strong ventilation, and that it be of blisters, because the place needs strong sectioning; and let them be strongly ventilated with slender ventouses and be scarified by scarification.
But vents of the legs minified by manifest diminishment, because they draw blood from all the body, and confers to old pains in the knees and hip, and in the womb; and they provoke menstruation, and confers to colic and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophens, and behind the navel, and of two little bones.
Yet some weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
And from the armpits to the groin, the jugular vein is close to the arm vein at the sides of the body.
And the quality of the position of the armpit is that you place the armpit at the beginning, and it drips through suction gently, and do not prolong the position of the armpits, but pause them lightly, and let those remain firmly, and so that the humors come to their location through equal movement. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until he sees the place become red and swollen and the blood appears.
And then you scrape and repeat suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
For if he is of thin skin and delicate flesh, you should not cut him deeply, but only slightly, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the wounder to enlarge the incision and take a little, and moderate the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, because in the first cut is opened the way of subtlety to the blood and to his moisture. But in the second it acquires penetration through the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then let there be made a third incision so that he may succeed in his purpose.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood little by little or a little bit, it suffices us with one incision.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, then we scarify with a broad incision. And if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify with a deep incision.
And the term of scarification in which there is the depth of the vein so only.
And if he whose vein is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the armpits should be anointed gently, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer time, so with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of almond, or oil of camphor; and if it is in winter time, then with oil of nutmeg, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar things.
And if the superfluity is thick and tough, then the oil should be of amarant, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to their likenesses.
But if the wounder is of broad pores and delicate flesh, then let oil be prohibited from him; and let the places of the armpits, before the armpit, be washed with lye water or hot water of soda, or water of camphor, or water of cow, or water of borage, and to those like things.
And let him whose blood is of great moisture wash his armpits with sour wine, or water of myrrh and sumach, and like things to those.
And of him whose superfluities are thick, wash the armpits with old wine, or water of sage, which is greater, or of fennel, or of camomile, and to their likenesses.
And let the armpit be kept before bathing; having them administered close to bathing for an hour or two, and let him sleep with the armpit.
What is it that it is necessary to bleed a person who has been bled before being bled again?
Consider at the beginning: if the wounder or he who is to bleed has a hot and inflammatory blood, then let him take frigid causes, so with milky acetous milks, and endive in sour wine, and lettuce, and wormwood, and julep, and to their likenesses.
And give him food so with poults, and flesh of young birds, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to their likenesses.
And of him whose complexion is hot, let him take in drinking essarop with honey, or essarop of wormwood seeds, and sumach, and very odorous wine between white and new; and that he be commanded to use little of drinking and eating, and give his food poults, and cabbages, and peppers, and small birds, and pigeons.
And let him drink more than he eats on the day of bleeding and phlebotomy.
And let him be given in drinking at certain times to some men theriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, as it is musked, or alcelita before bleeding or phlebotomy, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtle; and let not them take those cuts.
But the armpits that are not scarified shall be armpits that are paused over the liver, and on the mensa, and podagra, and over the navel, and in the places of the joints, and the pubis of the groin, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those except attraction of blood from a member, as with pause armpit over mamma in malady of flux of blood of the blood of the nar's; and use that so that subtle thick armpit is dissolved freja, as with pause upon the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member, and cuts it, and eases the pain from which resolves armpit.
And it is paused over the nails when they happen in their bending or breaking, because by virtue of strong attraction their bone bending and eradicates the pain from its place.
And likewise it does when it is paused over the liver and mensa, it must armpit in those who are inclosed.
And these armpits are administered seen with suction only so gently; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of tepid water in maladies of the mensa.
And this is why armpit is filled and is great, so it is water only or water in which are cooked herbs to that convenient.
Form of armpit administered with fire: let the aperture of the orifice be two fingers, according to which we have formed it; and the quantity of the cup be the length of a palm; and be in its breadth, in the place that is in the circuit, the length of him, the puncture be small according to the quantity that enters into him an awl.
Let it be made of ram or citron wood, of thick margins, lion, nails and terses so that it does not lead the member let its position over it.
And let be at the middle of it a transverse rod of ram or iron, where is paused candle with the fire.
And let this armpit be greater and larger than that which we have described; and the small less of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses it.
And the armpits of children and exhausted others are smaller than the armpits of young people and of large bodied people.
And the quality of pausing this armpit with fire over the member is that he extends the mace with decently burning wood before a little candle of wax, and pause that over the middle of the transverse rod in the middle place of the armpit, so that the fire be kindled around it from below so that it is not burned the malady's body.
And then it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the doctor should be over the wound that we mentioned, while we hold the ventouse and do not allow the doctor to see the wound and for the vapor to escape from that wound, then the ventouse will immediately dissolve.
And then light the candle according to its usual way, and repeat that if necessary.
But in ventouse that is administered for pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or wound, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only.
And this is how it is done: And the larger this ventouse is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Leeches are not administered on small limbs but on those where it is not possible to place ventouses due to their small size, such as the fingers, toes and similar; or on limbs that have been stripped of flesh, such as the fingers, nose, and similar.
And use only those leeches that you have found in the double-watered waters of purity.
And then they should be kept in double-watered water for a day and night so that they become hungry, and no cause remains in their bellies; and the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and ventouses; and then the patient's limbs should be rubbed until they turn red; and then they should be placed on the patient.
And when they are full and swollen:
And if it is possible to suck the wound with a ventouse, it is better to do so directly.
And if not, then wash the wound with sweet wine and then with warm water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the attachment of leeches, and it sweats, then you dip a piece of cloth in warm water and place it over the sweat.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder vitriol ground three times, or gallnuts and similar of the astringent causes, over it until the blood is stopped; or place the pods of cooked fava beans over the wound and leave them until the beans adhere to the wound, and the blood stops.
And if necessary, repeat the leeches when possible.
And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then rub the wound with fresh blood or leave a needle in the wounds so that blood flows; and then they should be placed, for when they feel some blood they will immediately attach.
And when you want them to let go, powder them with a little ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will let go immediately.
Thus begins the theory of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; it is restoration from fracture and accidental dislocation in bones.
Or, son, understand that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who have not read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them speak of this chapter.
And for this reason, the manner of the wise in our land is private; and I have not been obliged to do so at any time up until now; and I have not applied that which teaches, except through length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, so that I extracted the science from them.
And I added to it experience and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science and the experience of my life teach me; for I have abridged it for you and freed you from the burden of lengthiness; and I have abridged it at the end of abridgment; and I have demonstrated it at the end of demonstration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as has been done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections of being fractured bones, from which its premise is necessary, before we begin to remember the members are fractured and diverse. Therefore, let us begin the beginning of this chapter with summaries of speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which in the beginning it is forced that the artisans and at station upon the truth of those; so are you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone a fracture or dislocation or twist or displacement, then indeed you should begin at first with phlebotomy or bleeding of that, or any enema, if no prohibited cause, except weakness of strength, or is one to whom it happens infant, or old in decrepitude, or time of violent heat, or violent rubbing.
And then let it be content in food of its own of fresh herbs and of meats of birds and crabs; and forbid thick meats and filling if of foods and of all food that fills the veins with blood, so that you become secure from apostema cauter, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then indeed let the patient be fed with nutritious foods of food mot and gross and heavy in which is viscosity, just as are made foods of wheat cooked in water, and rice, and peas, and fish, and bellies of cows, and hams, and fresh peas, and vi grose and similar to those, and with this regimen the coagulation of fracture is done more easily and better.
And understand that the fractured bones when they are in the elderly and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
But indeed nature adjusts and knits over the fractured bone of every part any cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it together, so that they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits that from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the patient's food, foods in which there are heaviness and viscosity and grossness, just as we have said.
And understand that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the nose; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I have conquered with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from another.
There are many kinds of fractures in the metatarsus. There are many kinds of fractures in the metatarsal bones; some have an arched fracture, others occur in the stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: so it is with the fractures of the sesamoid and splint bones, and also those that come from within and those that do not, as happens when one prepares to write, and there are fractures of fissure, small crack.
And in all species there is pain or discomfort inherent in restoration according to that which will come to remembrance of them in their own places.
There are signs of bone fracture. And by this is known the bone fracture; it is by its crookedness and appearance to the senses, and also by your compressing it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no crookedness in the place that is apparent, nor so by your touching it as you press upon the bone with shaking and the patient does not find great pain, then here there is no fracture.
It is possible that there is crookedness or a small crack, then do not wonder if you find no pain by pressing upon it with your hand and compressing it all over; in this case place upon it medicines of which you have remembrance at the moment that suits the part; and let there be stricture by subtle compression.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or otherwise that does not happen in the sesamoid bones, as the whole part is lacerated from comparison to its like, then know that you must begin from your hour of correction upon it if it happens that there occurs an abscess by cautery.
And if an abscess occurs by cautery, then leave it for several days until the abscess ceases; and then heal that according to any method you can of elevation and comfort.
And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is easier than of the bone in which occurs the sesamoid.
And strengthen that according to that which will come to remembrance of you.
But if in the bone there are sesamoid bones, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, whether it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
And let your position be that by which you hold the member in place according to its natural figure while those parts are extended from the broken member, then you will have to return those joints with comfort and according to any method you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that nothing happens to the patient through your operation of pain or injury; and know according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
And know that in that hour advantageously you touch it with your hand, and if you see here any different cause, correct that and heal that according to the quantity of your skill.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as do foolish doctors who many times cause an abscess cautery through their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen that through their many operations.
And the quality of compression of the broken member is that which you reckon; for know that the broken members are varied in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of them.
And of those which are small as with the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to them, then know that the envelopment is of very fine linen.
But those which are large as with the thigh or leg, then know that the envelopment is of strong linen, for the strong binding connects the large member and strengthens it all around by a healed compression, so that in it there enters no stain.
And then begin, and your evacuation of equitation, pause convenient support to that, over the place of that fracture with three or four envelops according to that the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little by the binding.
And then go to that at the most upper part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen mind so as not to weaken your compression by which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then lengthen yourself by enveloping the place of the fracture a little, and weaken the compression a little by little as you take from the place a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken place with envelopment, and then go to the envelops at the most lower part of the fracture; and let your operation be in compression of the envelopment and in softening of that according as we have said in the first envelopment above.
And then pause between the envelops of lamb's wool or linen with which is healed the crookedness of the fracture if there is crookedness in it; but if not, then do not pause for any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage and then heal upon these envelops decently made splints as soon as in the place there is no inflammation or abscess, and then pause over that which causes the abscess and which heals the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen over it the splints.
And let the splints be of the measure of light cane split and carefully formed; or they are of wood of pine, or of rattan of palm; and let the width of each splint according to that form and figure.
But let the splint that is paused over that fracture be thicker and lighter than the other splints, and the length of the splint according as it is longer to the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen upon the splints with another bandage according to your first compression; and then bind over it with a decent file according as we have said of compression, and let your compression be according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as the fracture is lengthened, so let the compression be less.
And let the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be of linen; and if the threads are thick as we have seen through operation of certain foolish doctors, the threads of cords of linen, and it is a great error when compressing there is inequality.
And thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve by compression with them that which you want, and let there be space between splint and splint the width of one finger.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints then pause under those lamb's wool or woven linen so that it does not injure him.
Sometimes the fracture is by blow and happens disruption in the tendon, and I have come to remembrance in that in the head according to its particularity.
And know that not every broken member is bound by splints on the first day; the cause is because the member, when it is great, do not pause over it splints unless after several days or seven or more, according to your certainty of advent of abscess.
And this is the method of the plaster casts with which the Ancients restored [bones], which are placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of plastering as a remedy for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complications and especially for women and children, because it is that on which no heat or friction comes: and it is to take from the dust of grinding, and it is the core of the flour that passes through the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And cook it as it is, but strain it through an egg white, and make the consistency of it neither thick nor thin; and use that one.
Another method of a healing plaster for fractures and dislocations: Take assafetida, frankincense, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is resin from wild pomegranates, all in the proportion of one drachma each; myrrh and aloe, five drachmas each; aloes, twenty drachmas. Mix these together and add honey or egg white if the patient's complexion is scorched; then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it benefits many people.
Another method of a plaster that benefits fractures and dislocations: Take myrrh, met de altaia blanca one drachma each; myrrh and aloe five drachmas each; acacia six drachmas; armenic bole twenty drachmas.
All of these shall be ground in a mortar with a little vinegar, and strained, and made into a paste with water or egg white and then administered.
Method of plastering at joints and bones separated from their sockets, and for pain incident in those, and to splits and fractures: take soft wool and soak it in sweet wine and olive oil, and place it on the site.
Let this plaster have no virtue of restoration, but cauterize and expel pains properly.
Another method of plastering that restores a broken bone: take stalks of fig and stalks of wild poppy; mix them all and make plaster from them.
Method of plastering quickened administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take resin of alder, of chamomile and violets flowers, of flour of erys, of all these a part .i. shall be all ground and shall be mixed with wine if the member is not wounded.
But if it is wounded, then cook that with water of coriander moistened or with water and use that one.
Another method of plaster even stronger in resolution than this first one, when it happens to the abscess dureness during the restoration of a member: take resin of alder and of larch wood, and of dill seeds, and myrrh, marjoram, violets flowers, chamomile, of all these a part i equal; let all be ground and mixed with water of vinegar or with sweet water or with wine, all according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
But the Hypocras does not dry in the air, let it be placed on the broken member during its restoration, unless a cerot is made of wax and oil and nothing else; and that it be between thickness and thinness.
But it is seen that they are placed on the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness due to small heat are also like those of those causes that we have recounted.
Method of plastering that confers to injury and pain: take milk, of eggs, of hair of a human head or bird feathers, and resin of alder, and salt, all in equal parts; let them be ground and strained and made into a paste.
But the amount according to the skin that was bitten let it be loose, and then let it be dissolved; consider if no pain nor swelling nor the bone broken not is moved out of its place, then you do not remove for many days. And if it happens to the site a violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you cut it off or remove that one in the hour, and replace the plaster on it.
And take linen and sea sponge moistened with warm water, and soak that one in tepid water, and with that wash the site until that swelling and pain is stayed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place on it soft wool soaked in sweet wine and olive oil or rose-water, and let it be bound over it for a night while you are sure of the abscess cauterization, and that the inflammation of the member is allayed and the pain of it is stayed.
And then repeat that gentle binding and small plaster, and do not tighten it by your first compression, and apply gently that one until it is healed.
And if the abscess and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are already allayed, and you have removed the plaster and the binding, then repeat that one just as you did at the beginning equally.
And if there does not happen to the member any cause of those which we have said, then do not remove that one except after three days or four or five or seven; and some times let it be left for xx days according to what you see by the loosening of the member, just as we have said, until the fracture adheres and comes close to the coagulation of the flesh on that one.
And then tighten in the binding just a little more than in your first binding a little, and increase in the thickness of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by its memory.
But if you see the site of the fracture dried and weakened except that it does not have pain, then understand that the nourishment is prohibited from coming to that one; and therefore moisten that one with water tepid due to total wetting that of the member; and let that one be for three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation strengthen the member, and is healed quickly.
But that which the foolish restorers of the fracture of the member see another wetting when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it hurts, and is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they were correct that one would be enlarged by them in their sockets and would have been turned on.
And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that that one does not happen.
Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because of fractures any is done by concussion of a staff, and the concussion hits all the bone within the skull, which is below the bone, just as it does that in the trunk, and for that one this species is named ascial; or the staff hits one part of the bone, and hits the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the lower one of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute elevation.
And the crack of both these fractures is large or small, and the fracture which is compression or traction; and the cause of it is concussion with a club or stone on stone, and to them resembling.
And this fracture either penetrates to the membrane which is under the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague from these two fractures may be large or small.
And a fracture that is hidden in the bone, in the thin layer beneath the hair, and for this reason this type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
And this fracture is caused either by an object falling on it, or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, causing a small piece of bone to enter into the joints within, just as it happens to the fingers when they are struck with a stone or something similar, and resulting in a break in their interior.
And this mainly occurs in the bones of the head, as well as the skull of infants.
And all of these types of fractures are bound together by small threads. And in all of this, you should be mindful of the following:
And you can recognize all these types of fractures by examining their characteristics and through the inquiry of symptoms, as well as observing the discolored flesh that lies above them.
And capillary fracture is known by its appearance over the bone, and it is uncovered and cleaned, and when there is a black spot above it after probing, then the fracture is clear.
In the treatment of fractures, we must first consider the patient's condition, and if you see symptoms that clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting in cholera, and extension, and loss of consciousness, and fainting, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints, and heat in those, and similar symptoms in major conditions, then the patient is not healable.
And if you see no such symptoms indicating bad prognosis, then you can begin the treatment.
The reason for this is that if the wound has come to you in the beginning as it was and it is in the days of winter, then you should study the appearance of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all conditions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should wait to examine the bone until the seventh day, making sure that what lies beneath the membrane is not corrupted, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is crushed into minute particles and ground up, then you should insert the ground-up particles according to what I will tell you.
And it is that you scrape the head of the patient and uncover the bone according to custom and in a way possible to you according to the shape of the wound, and that it lies lighter on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you must examine the bone, or there is a flow of blood or pus, then you should apply something that suits best, and it is that you dress the wound with clothes dipped in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the pustule is healed, and be certain to stop the flow of blood; and then begin on the circuit around the bone and in its ablation.
And it should be according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you insert the bone with a sharp incision, and this is its form: And then administer another incision, slightly wider than the first; and this is its form:
And then you place the bone with a stitch made by the location of where it was incised and ground; and if it happens to you by stitch, then you should apply it according to the manner of stitching. And then administer the incision wider than the first.
And you should know that you need several incision knives, some of which are wider than others; and some are shorter than others, and they are in the shape of aiguille or chisel.
And use them with ease when striking against the incision knife so that you do not hit the head and lead that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill into its circuit before administering the incision knives with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
And they are not named so but because those do not stop at the end of the bone but to the taravel which is round in its extremity or edge over that which is under the head of it sharp resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these drills, each of which suits the thickness of each bone, while it is present in all parts of the head, whose extremity is sharp, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the quantity of thickness of that part.
And this is the form of three types of drills: The quality of drilling into the circuit of the broken bone is that you stop the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers while you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause what is between all traces the amount of thickness of the thread or wire.
And then insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone, and make it more subtle that you can at the end of elevation, as we have said, within that erradiquing the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause by some tools which you have prepared for that, as tweezers and subtle forceps.
And you should be careful that the incision knife does not touch any nerve of the brain.
And then when you have completed the circuit of the bone and separated it from the brain if it is continued with it, and you have extracted that, you should scrape and bite that in the asperity of it of what lies in the bone by another instrument similar to an incision knife, but however, let it be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
And if any of the small bones and threads are broken, then take that easily with what suits you of those tools; and then cure the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of operation is safer and more distant from fear, which says Gualia and the law by great lawgiver; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you in the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, within that when you have uncovered that part and have stopped under it the extremity of that incision knife long and gentle, of which this is its form:
And then you stop over it by what lies in the location of the fracture of the bone and make it according to the shape of the bone that is under it, and insert with the other incision knife wider than the first. And the lenticular crack is lion-shaped and does not insert any cause, and the acute crack is from it on both sides in length, as you see; so that the lenticular crack be adjusted to the brain by the membrane of it inserting acute into the bone.
And then pierce over the incision of one crack with a small chisel within that insert all the bones with ease as it is turned, and you be certain of the membrane not striking in it in any way that you fear, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Then if it pierces any part of the membrane to the bone in some locations of bones, insert that with the extremity of the lenticular incision knife, and loose that from it with ease, for it is loosed from it without harm or fear.
If the fracture does not penetrate into the muscle, and what is severed or damaged in the bone is its surface, and it remains rough and with subtle jagged edges, then smoothen that roughness and remove those jagged edges with a sharp razor, for which you have prepared the number of different quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient way possible, and according to what will guide your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And you will administer in your wisdom with which you shave the bone at the beginning, the sharpest of those razors, and then use it on the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do this according to continuity until you reach administering the thickest and the most subtle of all of them.
But in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, you will administer care according to what you find appropriate for its rectification.
And it is a cause that is not covered on all those who have studied in that art. And we will speak about what we have written about great fractures.
And if the muscle is stretched when you shave the bone, then take a cloth according to the amount of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or doubled, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as you can so that you do not press on the head; and then administer over that a bandage lightly, and do not tighten it except for the amount that the wound has.
And let him stay with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of cauterized pus; and then loosen it and administer medicines with which there is excess dryness, such as linseed poultices and wheat flour, and powder of eggshells and aristology, and similar things to these.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dried; and universally, administer on it all medicine of a property from which it is cleansed and not bitten.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there is no dirtiness of ointment or other in it; nor do you let virulence accumulate in it; for when it is applied on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and harms it, and malicious evil happens on the patient accordingly.
And it happens in the head, as when the bone is cleansed and especially when the treatment of it is lessened, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient that we have said, know that it is deadly unless all is done.
And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine that is applied above it, and it is from the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey one part and rose oil three parts and soak a cloth with them, and then place it over the head; and then cure that with spices of healing that are convenient so that it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts above the most superior part, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous, and not broken, and nothing happens to it except straightness and tortuosity and sinuousness.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert your little finger into his nose, and press that fracture within with your index finger, and with your thumb from outside, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure. And let it be done by you with facility, and guard yourself that pain does not happen to the patient because of this operation.
And if the fracture is in the most superior part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then let it be equal with the extremity of the bone on which there is a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of that.
And guard yourself with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then let it be seven or eleven days after the rest of the cauterized pus.
And then insert at the extremity of the nose a wad of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two wads, if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the calvada of such quantity that it fills the crack of the nose.
And one of the ancient restorators said that the wads be wrapped in butter, and be changed every day, but I have not seen it; they say that the wad should be wrapped in comfit oil with ground powder; and then let it stay so that the bone is firmed and the cartilage is hardened.
And some times let an awl be inserted into the nose, in place of the calvada, as a needle that is wrapped in linen cloth; and then let there be the fracture of the nose most violent and that the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do wads.
And if another cauterized pus happens, plaster the nose with cerot or a poultice steeped in wine, or oil and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if cauterized pus does not happen, then plaster it outside with sesame flour and eggshells ground with linseed oil; and then place over it a wad of linen cloth, and do not tie the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then split them and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and then sew the split, and cure it with that which flesh and hardens it, and with plasters that are convenient for it.
And if a wound happens inside the nose, then cure that with wads and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Chapter .iv.
Of restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
When the mandible is broken and its fracture does not have pus, take heed if the fracture is only outward, and not broken in two and bent inward at the parts within, then its knowledge is difficult.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right part, then insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the index finger of the right hand; and press with that the flexibleness of the fracture within with facility to the parts outward, with the other hand from the part outward of the bone; with that decently equal it.
And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated in two, then administer extension of the two parts according to straightness so that its equality is possible.
And if concussion of teeth to disruption happens, then strengthen those of which you expect that they will break with thread of gold or silver or silk; and then place over the broken mandible cerot, and then place over it a doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a large steed decently made, or a sole wad at the length of the mandible; and then tie that above according to how you are equipped with its application so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to have rest and tranquility, and give him light food.
And if you see that the figure has been altered in any way, then you cover it and loosen it on the third day; and correct what has already changed and apply powder of millstone, albumen of egg, or flour of beans after removing the cerot, and place over it lamb's wool.
And then when it stays in place and the plaster is adjusted over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for often this fracture is tight in three weeks.
And if a ulcer occurs again, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the ulcer closed.
And if the fracture is compound, then you consider whether the bone is split or shattered, then you subtly move those splinters with what is convenient for that in removing them with instruments.
And if the opening of the fracture is tight, then you expand it with phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and there is no pus remaining, you close the opening of the fracture if it is wide; and if not, place one of the appropriate plasters over it and it will heal.
Chapter 5:
Of restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
The collarbone of the front part is often broken by the muscle, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
Because it is either broken, or separated, or it separates into two parts other than splinters; and it is easier to restore; or it happens in it splinters, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is compound.
And the operation on it when the fracture is compound is that you have two ministers present so that one holds the assistant and follows the collarbone that is broken, and the other pulls the collar bone towards that part.
Then bind the fracture with the threads so that it is made in its form according to how it used to be, and there is not a little protuberance or concavity in it.
And if you see more swelling, then put under the nape of the patient a pillow of cloth or wool, and let the size of it be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and draw the pillow with your hand so that you bind the fracture according to how it used to be.
And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the outside parts because it is reached by the chest, then let the patient be inclined on his neck, and place a pillow under the muscle of him that is half in size.
And the ministers press the muscle of him to the lower parts so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated above the chest in it, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with threads.
But if you feel splinters of the collarbone and they are swollen, then let that be split over there and pull out those splinters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for that, after you have placed under the collarbone the instrument which serves the head; and that instrument is of wood or iron whose form is thus:
And it is similar to a spoon whose concavity is thus; and its breadth be according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But its length be according to what is to you possible to the operation; that it has two ends thus, and one end is ample and the other tight.
And if the opening of the fracture which you have split when you have pulled out the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is fear of pus, then you adjust the two lips of the fracture with a suture.
And if the opening is small, or you fear pus, then you fill the fracture with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the split of the fracture.
And if pus occurs, then pour cloth into vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over that.
And all, that the stake is not swollen over the broken bone; and then let you see the patient every day, for when the binding is softened or you see the stake already swollen, then you correct that and strengthen the binding.
And then let the patient sleep on his neck, and place under his nape below the nape of him a little pillow; so that with that is elevated the support of him from that side, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is elevated above the chest; or let the arm be bound to the neck of him.
And do not loose the binding unless pus occurs in that place or pus clearly, until 12 days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the binding and restore him and leave until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some times in some men it is made within that time.
Chapter 6:
Of restoration of fracture of the shoulder.
Spalla is broken in the wide place of it and not broken of it but the edges.
And then when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and not congealed but by touch, then according as the figure of the fracture is removed you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of art which is to you possible.
And then place over the place powder of millstone with albumen of egg and lamb's wool; and then place cloth doubled; and then place over it slender stake of wood according to the quantity of the spatula whole or but a little.
But if below the stake is concavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you bind that concavity with lamb's wool, and then push the stake according to equality.
And then strengthen above it with long poultice about constriction moderate and firmness of the stake until it is not swollen from there.
And consider the ligament every day; and whenever it becomes softened, ligature another turn and tighten it and tie it if it is dislocated from its place.
And let the patient lie on his side.
And the spatulum is restored in 20 days or so.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you shall dissolve the ligament, and you should know that it is of the bones, of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone and put beneath the tendon, then you shall split it, and ostiac it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of suppuration of an abscess if it happens here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
The feet sometimes are broken in one place and here and there; but the ends of them most often become shattered and comminuted.
And of its accidents when the middle of it is broken there ensues a sinking to the parts within and pain occurs in it, and difficulty in walking, and cough, and great vomiting and bleeding; and a hollowness is declared in the bone broken and is not concealed from sense.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid upon his back, and place beneath him a cushion; and press upon the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him with the hands of two men, and apply underneath in the operation of him and in the setting according to all manner that it is possible for it and convenient to it, until he return the form of the bone according as it covers.
And then place upon him plaster and tow, and place over it a board of subtle wood of willow or of alder or of a kind similar to them in lightness, since you wrap that in cloth; and then subtilize in binding that over the bone broken that it not be dislocated; and go with ligature according to roundness to the back sometimes, and tighten that with decent tightness; and then consider the ligature at all times, and when it becomes softened, tighten that.
And if necessity provokes sloughing or putrefaction or pain or suppuration that occurs in the place, then you cut and unbind that and remove the plaster and rectify what occurs by reason of it with manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if you see to it the face; and adjust the tightness of him until he is healed.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places which accompany the back; and of their ends from the part in front, contriction does not occur to those except by reason of what are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not concealed from sense by reason of the inquiry of it with the fingers.
And the restoration is that you swallow the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner, until he return according as he covers, and then plaster and tighten the bone broken with splint, if it occurs to him.
And if the fracture of the ribs is sinking to the parts within, then occurs to the patient vehement pain and piercing, thus with piercing that occurs to him who has pleurisy, and by reason of what the bone puts the membrane; and occurs to him difficulty in handling, and cough, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And then theants are engendered in it with evil geniuses.
And of them I say: lay upon him viands that engender inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly be inflated and extended, and the fracture be pushed to the parts outside.
But we shall eat it so that it not be cause to generate suppuration of an abscess, unless it occurs; and if it occurs, then help it.
And said some of them that it be laid upon him wind-pipe and then that suck with strength; and is similar to rationale, but nevertheless it is feared that the wind throw the superfluities to the place by reason of the weakness.
And said some of them: let the place be covered with wool which is already soaked in hot oil, and let poultices be laid between the ribs until it is full, that the ligature be wrapped when you wrap that according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured by cure of pleurisy with food and medicine.
And if cause vehement constriction to the patient which does not suffer it, and the bone puts the membrane with piercing pain, fear about the patient; then let the instrument be laid upon the place, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that we incise the bone with facility, and extract it.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with cauterization, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.
And if occurs inside suppuration of an abscess, then cut and apply poultices in rose-oil and place over the place, and let the patient be cured by it that occurs to the suppuration inside.
And he is laid upon his back on which he slept until he is healed.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and it happens to them attrition, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. And if it occurs to one and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see the fingers soft and stupor and dead and cannot move them nor extend them nor tighten them, and when you tighten those with your fingers or prick them with an awl and do not feel in those pain, then know that it is not healed, and in the midst of dispositions it is mortal.
And if you move them and feel in them constriction with the fingers and piercing, then know that the kernel of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured by cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like that and wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the feet of him.
Now if you see that they are already soft, occurs to him what occurred in the fingers, and then when he lies upon his back, has windiness and ejaculation according to his will, and sometimes is laid upon his back and wishes to urinate and cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not labor in his cure.
But if does not occur any cause of them, the cause is better and less remote.
And his cure is that you pierce to the suppuration of an abscess which you pause over the vertebra attritted with hot oil or with leaves of holly-bush set; pause over it some times the day until the suppuration of an abscess is settled.
And then pause one of the comforting and fomenter plasters, and tighten over it with ligature; and command the patient that he use repose and tranquility and that he not sleep on the part from which he has pain until he is healed.
And if occurs by reason of the attrition of the bone, or any cause that is already separated from him, then let it be cut over the cavity and that ostiac the bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing if it is large; and then cure that with something incarnate of the gums, until he is healed.
But if the bone of the buttocks is broken, and it is the end of the tailbone, then you should put the little finger of your left hand into the anus, and bite the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible in a second position; then place plaster and splints over it, if you have those, and tighten it.
And if you feel broken bones in it, then you should open it and splint it, and treat the wound with the treatment that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On restoring the hernia.
The bones of the pelvis are twisted, and if they are broken, their fracture is only in their extremities, and they are inclined towards the interior; and there is pain in the affected area and a puncture wound, and the leg is paralyzed when it is fractured.
And its restoration is that you should extend your hand over it so that it covers the fracture, depending on how it appears.
And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then you should bite it according to how it appears to you through a second bite so that it is joined to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the hip joint or what inclines downward to the inside, then you should have the patient lie on his belly so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have bitten it, place plaster over it, and also place splints made of wood or rope over it, and tighten it so that there is no fear of puncture from the fracture or removal of the splint.
And bite the cavity with something that fills it so that it takes on the tightness according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if there is an abscess that has formed, then you should cease from extending it and restoring it until the abscess is dried up, and place over it what dries that up according to how it is preceded; then return to its restoration, and tighten it thus.
And if they occur in the bones or are crushed, then you should treat them.
Chapter 11.
On restoring the fracture of the arm.
The arm is what is between the elbow and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, and the first is that you take a wooden splint according to this shape:
And let there be ties on both ends of these two strings, and let it be suspended from the elevated site.
And let the patient walk on a crutch, and let him stretch out his broken arm over the splint so that he reaches the tip of it at the site where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And let some heavy weight be suspended over it, or let the servant extend it downward; and then the doctor should press the fracture with his hands, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient be reclined on his neck and let the servant suspend the arm by the shoulder with a string; and then command two servants, one of whom holds what is over the fracture with his hands, and the other the lower part of it; and each of them should extend it to his side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten over the fracture with one string and another string over that, and let each of the two servants extend it to his side.
And therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it must be paused at the tip of the string and the other below the fracture beyond the elbow.
And likewise if the fracture is near the shoulder, then let the string be paused at that site and over the shoulder.
Bite it with ease and without labor, and then when it is bitten according to how it should be and is applied well, tighten it if there is no abscess.
But if there is an abscess, then cease the tightening on the seventh day, and place soft wool soaked in wine and rosewater over the abscess so that it reposes, and then tighten it.
And the way to tighten it is to place plaster over the fracture and then place a covering of new cloth over the plaster, and then adjust the arm around that arm, and let his hand hang open over his muscle.
And place the cloth and tighten it around the arm so that the arm is in the place of splints, unless there is some cause from the broken bone that prohibits it.
And then use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture that splint that is wider and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from the entire side.
And then tighten over the splints with the tightness that has been said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your tightness over the site of the fracture be stronger. And when the fracture is more elongated, then let the tightness be less.
And therefore if you see the position of the splints and the tightness thus as we have said in the time in which you restore the member to its setting, then you should do it.
And if you fear an abscess, then let the tightness and the splints be ceased on the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the string in all parts for three days so that there is no occurrence of pus or inflammation; or let food come to the member because of excess of tightness, and then rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are over-confident that it will not occur, then do not loosen the ligature but rather after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
And place over the arm a full cloth that has been bitten, and consider at any hour of night or day that it is not loosened nor dissolved, or that the figure of the broken member is changed, then rectify all with your skill.
And let the patient's food be according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle in the beginning while it is commenced, and then let it become coarse, and then tighten over it.
The custom of the arm and of its bed is that they are strong for 40 days, and then let them be loosened and let bath be administered and medicine be applied which rectify it.
And if the fracture is dried, then you should not loosen from it the string and the splints until 14 days or two months.
Chapter 12.
On restoring the fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two rays, one of which is small and is that which supports the fingers, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one, from the more distant part.
And the stronger of them is broken only, or the weaker, and they are broken together.
And when the small ray is broken above it, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
And when it is broken below it, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And another of that disease is when two of these bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small bone above it, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in order to restore it, to put a small extension on it with ease while that [bone] is healing.
But if the large bone is the one that is broken, then it must put on a more violent extension.
And if both bones are broken at the same time, then you must put on the most powerful extension.
And you must put the shape of your hand for its restoration and extension stretched out over a pillow, with the palm of your hand at the ends above, more elevated than all the others said, and the finger auricular lower than all the others said, and let the patient be lying on his back on a raised bed.
And there must be a pillow under him in the height or slope of him, so that the patient doesn't roll around.
And then the assistant extends the arm at the lower joint with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extends above similarly.
And then the doctor applies poultices to the bone as he reduces it to the best figure that he can.
And if in the making of the bone there are knots, then you pierce and reduce all weight in its place with your strength.
And if it appears in him separate knots that pierce the tendon and you don't have hope in its restoration, then you cut on it and treat it according to the manner which we said above.
But if the fracture is with pus, I have already written about that topic particularly, and so take its cure.
And if a wound happens at the beginning of your restoration, then you line up a cloth with rosin and white wax, made medium between thickness and thinness, and stretch cloth over that with subtle pressure until the wound yields; then remove the cerot and apply plaster prepared from mortar ground with oil, and put on splints; let the splint which is laid over that fracture be wider and more sturdy.
And know that the number of splints on the arm vary according to its different dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or two bones together.
And then put your compression over the site of the fracture more strongly and violently, and when you loosen the compression at the ends above the fracture or the ends below it, put on the compression a little more gently according to how it is remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture must be soft moistened cloths, and not hard or rough, and the fiber with which it is tightened must be of a medium between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the bandage after a few days. And if any cause happens which necessitates a re-setting, as we have written about the happening to the member, then you must put on the member with water bath until that swelling ceases.
And loosen the member not constricted so that he can rest, and then return the compression.
And if the compression is already loosened and the bone is already reduced and like those, then reset all that with your strength.
And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of compression, then you must loosen that a little and let it be for some days so that its nourishment can run to that, and then tighten that.
But if the patient does not have any of those causes which we have said, then there must not be loosed for twenty days or around that time.
And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its strength from a moving activity, and do that sleeping on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or around that time, or rather it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and dispositions of strength.
Chapter 13.
Of restoration of fracture of the finger of the hand and of the fingers.
Know that to the finger of the hand and to the nails of the fingers there can be many fractures, and there does not happen to them except for great violence many times.
And when it happens to the hand fracture or sprain, then let the patient be lying on his back and his hand over that stretched out.
And then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor applies poultices to them as he reduces them to good conjunction.
And then you must put on plaster and bandage, if there isn't wound cauterized; and then put splints over that according to the quantity of the site, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
But if the fracture is in the joints of the fingers you must put on bandage, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm fractured; then let it be tightened with long cloth.
And let the splint of horn be with cloth in which is raised, so that the horn is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to how it is commanded.
But if the fracture is to the outer joints, then you must put splints over that and another splint on the joint below the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straight; and then put on the compression as the hand is rotated between the fingers with bandages.
And if fracture happens to any of the nails of the fingers, then if it is the thumb it must be reduced according to how it is commanded and then let it be tightened with the palm, and if you want, put a little splint on it straight so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the index, or middle, or ring finger, or little finger, then let it be reduced and tied to the finger which is that, or they are all tied according to continuity, and a small splint is better over that, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider in its restoration, and then that wound cauterized and opposed — by your operation — with what happens when any cause of those happens, according to how its narrative is repeated.
Chapter 14.
Of restoration of fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh many times is broken and is declared in the feeling according to how it is converted to the joint in front and the most upper.
And its restoration is done so that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and let the patient be lying on his back and on his face.
And then the assistant extends all of the bandage to its joint according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
But if it is propinquitous to the hip of the thigh, then let the bandage be propinquitous to the groan at the joint of the patella, so that the extension is made in that, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is propinquitous to the groan, then let the bandage be made propinquitous to the groan and the extension at the joints below.
And then the doctor reduces the bone with both of his hands as he reduces that according to its natural resemblance and the bone is conjoined by good conjunction; then you must put on plaster and compression if the wound doesn't happen to the member. But if pus occurs in it, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
To create a splint: Cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it over two or three times, and apply a poultice to draw out any superfluous fluid; then wrap the leg so that it extends from the toe to the root of the head.
And insert a long needle between the head and the leg near the jaw at the point where the jaw is most prominent, and let the ends of the needle emerge from the highest point of both sides; then turn the needle around on the leg and head so that any superfluous fluid drains from the bandage.
Then place a wooden splint over the fracture on the head and another over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the cavities between the leg and the head with soft rags so that the fracture is bound up.
Then begin by binding the fracture strongly with three or four bandages over the site of the fracture; and as you draw closer to the site of the fracture, your bindings should be looser and softer and more pliable.
Then extend the needle to both ends at the lowest point between the leg and the head until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that they are not drawn out from their position.
Then let the binding be over that, in such a way that no corrosion or abscess or swelling and its likes occur to that member; and if any of those things do occur, then release him from that binding, and rectify what has occurred completely according to what we have said several times.
But if a piece of bone is protruding from the bone, then you should cut it off according to what is possible for you; and if not, then leave it and treat it with that which precedes the remedy described until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the head is bound with splints other than those described above so that they are tightened around it; as we have said before in the case of the helper and the arm.
But however it is restored in that way, the patient does not experience any limp; and if it is restored alone, or rather the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that he limps from whichever one it was restored.
And know that the head is bound for 40 days or a few months or more, and all of this depends on the differences in the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the jaw.
Know that the fracture of the jaw is painful, but it occurs in many different ways.
But if a fracture does occur to it, then it is no more than a crack or break in its parts; and that is due to coldness or heat, and over that all is affected by sensation.
And its restoration is achieved by having what is broken in its parts glued together with the teeth, within their limits, and joined together according to what is possible through equation and facility and fabrication.
Then apply plaster and place over that a round splint if necessary; and tighten it with bindings according to what is convenient.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recounted in the other fractures; as well as the abscess and its likes which oppose themselves to everything according to what is convenient for it until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named by name the leg; and the other is slender and is named the shank.
And it occurs to each of the species of fracture that which occurs to the two bones of the arm; and for that reason its restoration is achieved by having both bones glued together, as well as the arm being bound up, and the operation on it is the same.
And if the two bones are broken apart, then the leg is completely broken.
And if only the more slender bone is broken, then the leg is broken in front.
And if only the thicker bone is broken, then it is broken below, and that happens for causes which are not up to you.
Then administer extension and equation and connection of the splints according to that gluing.
But however, if the fracture of the leg is jagged having many projections, then let the extension be less and more pliable, and draw it to you with your strength.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm; and it is when you glue the splints and complete all of your operation that you will take measures of wood from the pine tree which is paused below the causes which are paused in solitudes, and they are made evenly with white palm branches; join those to which there is a small thickness, and it is not wood of the hands, and let its length be according to the length of the leg, and from the head to the most below.
Then wrap over each bandage two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they are of the head from the most below to the location of the ankle of the foot.
Then tie the two splints in three locations at both ends and at the middle location, for with this binding the leg is prohibited from bending on either side, and it stands in good position.
And already a staff of wood according to the length of the leg has been administered; and let it be paused on it so that it conserves that of movement.
And mainly you should do this in fracture, and when it is glued properly.
And consider the leg in each day and study it with that final study, and keep an eye out for abscess and inflammation or other causes like them; and when any of those things occur, then release it from that with what is appropriate to achieve healing.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
To the ankle fracture does not occur at all; but to the bones of the foot fracture occurs in some ways; and to the toes of the foot few fractures occur, and they do not occur to them except for attrition in the parts of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot indeed fracture and those bones are raised up on each other, then let the patient stand on the ground prepared thus.
Then pause the foot of one over that which is raised of those bones, and press them, and glue them within so that they turn in the locations.
Then apply plaster and stop it above, and pause below the belly of the foot a little table to which are two tops placed.
Then tighten that with the foot with descending binding, since you have wrapped it with bands and with other causes of which it is necessary.
And when three days or four have passed, then release the binding, for you will find the bones glued together, or they are broken or displaced, and that operation on them is achieved thus.
But if some toes are broken, then restore them and glue them thus with oil and with the remedy which you have used in restoring the toes of the hand. Then pause the cut stem according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little lower than the foot; and then lower the leg to this table which has been described to you, and tighten it with a decent grip.
But if what is cut from the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each finger a number of splints equal to the number of fingers, wrapped in linen, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the ends of the table with a hole through the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you to not forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been described to you in other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and apply yourself to every accident with what covers it.
Chapter .xviii.
Of fracture of the head of the femur and of the bone of the penis and of the rod of the man.
When the head of the femur is fractured, then have her lie on her side with her hips turned to one side, and let her hand be held behind her back.
And let the midwife fill the hip with cotton, and have a needle made of bronze in the head of the bone; and let the woman be bound, and lift up her hips little by little, for all this is forgotten until it comes before the head of the bone and the fractured bone returns.
And then place powdered herbs on her hips, and when she wants to urinate, loosen the hip with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it and return it according to how you moved it at the beginning, and then return it to its first position.
And do this for seven days or around those, for that is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and place it over the head of the bone a catheter made of linen; and insert the entire bladder into the head of the bone, and then insufflate air into the catheter so that the bladder is inflated within the head of the bone, for the fracture returns.
And then let it be filled with cotton and stored for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in its restoration and stitching what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which few indeed, especially to one who has some study and use of this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions a direct path in its restoration and in its tightness, and therefore understand well.
But in the rod of a man when it is fractured, take poplar bark, and place the rod in it; and then place a covering of linen on it, and let it be wrapped, and then let it rest for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Chapter .xix.
Of restoration of fractured bones when they are with pus.
It is convenient for one to whom fracture with pus occurs, and especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the adductor, or similar to that, that you cure it and bleed it immediately if the conditions of phlebotomy testify to you as we have said above.
And if the pus flows out with blood, then have you cure it to retain it in place as you powder over it powdered quicklime, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then let you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, within which the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause harmful accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered armpit, then you should perforate and reduce it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the alignment with your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits and whose width is according to the amount of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take one of these three or four according to the quantity required in the cure in every kind of fracture.
And it should be rounded and have little roughness so that it is not bent due to pressure on it during the operation.
And its upper part should be thick, and its lower part thin and pointed at the ends; and it should be half as wide as its length between the points.
And this is its form:
And it is named in Greek "labris velens atelarem", which means a slightly curved palette.
So that its end may be placed elevated above the prominent end of the bone.
And press it into a hollow space so that it returns the bone and is aligned with some adjustment.
And then try to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin, and does not accept the instrument for good extension, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can do it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the saws which we have mentioned; or cut it in some way that is possible for you.
Then scrape away anything that remains on the bone of roughness and fine flakes.
And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels intense pain as a result, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus you will confer great benefit on the patient.
When you have completed your restoration of the bone and then submerge a cloth in black styptic vinegar, and especially if it is summer, do not apply wax or any other cause in which there is oil, so that no putrefaction and corrosion occur on it.
And then administer stabs in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered unless you insert the tool with forceps and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to tighten the wound with the fracture, for many times they have done this foolish doctors and caused on their patients death or corruption or putrefaction, which is madness. And if your grip is looser, softer, and different from the grip of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or evil, and you fear some bad accidents that we have recommended, and feel pain in the place, then do not place any stabs on it, but make a bandage of hard cloths in place of those.
And when a day or two has passed and the wound begins to heal, then remove the cloth that you placed over it with vinegar, and then administer poultices according to which of our remedies we usually use for wounds, thus with poultice tetrafarmacon and similar to those.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is healed and closed, and so that the member is prepared in such a way that putrefaction runs from it into its parts with ease.
If several days have passed and the wound is not healed or closed with a scab, then you should know that here are small worms for which it is fitting to pierce the wound with a needle. And of those worms, separate the ones that are apart and remove them; but those that are attached to the member and cause pain, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
And if it happens to the wound that pus or blood flow from it, which are signs of corruption or putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies according to what is appropriate for its cure, of which a description precedes in their chapter.
And from this in which you should be wary and make your judgment: when a large bone is broken, it protrudes above the member as well as the bone of the thigh and the helper, and resembles those of the large members, and do not presume traction on it, nor its extraction because many times it has happened due to that death; leave it alone unless it putrefies, for very often it falls by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Chapter .XX.
Of the cure of a nodule that happens in the track of any fracture.
Many times this nodule happens in the track of healing of a fracture, and mostly it is near the joints, and the figure of the member is obstructed by it; and very often it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the nodule is recent and administer on it remedies that have dried like aloin, and myrrh, and mithridate, and sarcocolla, and similar to those; and take some of them or all of them, and moisten them with vinegar or with milk, and apply that to the nodule on a piece of cloth, and constrict it over it for good contraction.
And leave the constriction so that you do not remove it for several days; and then remove it and repeat it, until the nodule is healed; or tighten over it a sheet of lead descending, because lead has the property of healing everything that is inflamed in the members.
But if the nodule is already turned to stone and tight and it causes necessity to cut it away painfully, then split it through the part of pus above it, and remove the superfluity and prominence, or cut it with any forceps until it is healed; and cure that as it is healed.
Chapter .XXI.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then something happens to the member subtile and frail, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then something happens to the member subtile and frail, then it is not done except for many causes: one of which is abundance of swelling of the bandage and of its ligature not according to how it should be; or due to superfluity of constriction of the bands within which the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or due to abundance of pressure on the member; or due to movement beyond its time.
And the cure of this is to make the patient eat and warm his chest so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath, and apply hot poultice on it.
And then apply a poultice on the member so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continue embrocation of it with warm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of broken bones when they are healed crookedly and the operation of them is prohibited by that which covers them.
When it happens to the member already restored near the healing of it from crookedness and protuberance to the broken bone and knotting, and it is because of that which feeds the form of the member, but indeed the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, however it does not cover that you receive the word of him who examines that member be of newly broken.
But there are foolish doctors and restorators who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy presenting great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if the limp and the knotting are recent, then they should be bathed in tepid water in which soft herbs are steeped, such as mallows of altaia and its root, and mallow, and similar to these; and let an ointment be made with a softening liniment just like diaquilon well made; or let mucilage be made from the root of altaia and let it be mixed with egg white of silk or with olive oil of ceramic, and let it be plastered with that; or let fat figs be cut up into pieces with dove's dung, and similar to those of the medicines which are named mother's milk consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction which should be with moist hands, and let the member be moved in all directions at all hours.
But if crookedness has gone ahead and is made strong and turned into stone and has caused the need for a cure of it with iron, then let the pus be cut away above and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what is superfluous of the knotting of that metal with the bone be cut away with fine instruments, and let facility be administered in that by solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocation is displacement of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is marred, and brings great pains and injuries upon the patient.
Therefore when dislocation happens to anyone, then let it be immediately reduced, and not delayed that reduction, for if it is delayed the place is apoplectic and very strong with that dislocation is made difficult.
And because of that it should not be stretched or bent in the hour of apoplexy, for many times it brings on spasm and pains to the patient.
But when that happens let the patient be placed in the bath and let him rest until the apoplexy is gone; and let the member be fomented with warm water and oil, and let it be reduced by ease.
And let every member be cured with that from which the memory will come back to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocation according to that which precedes in fracture, from the upper part of the body first to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both mandibles are dislocated if not tight; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: that they are pulled out of their place by little movement, and are made soft a bit; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and completed, until they are soft at the joint where saliva runs from the patient and he cannot hold it nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
But when the dislocation of him is slight, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and completed, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister hold the head of the patient, and let the doctor put his finger of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth of him if the dislocation is on one side; or that he puts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the others are outside with which he holds them; and command the patient to cease his mandibles and stop those from any part; and let the doctor grip the mandible and press the mandible in until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of him is difficult and especially if both mandibles are dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And therefore when it returns and is pressed, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not made soft, then place upon those powders of cloth with cerot, and let it be made of wax and rose oil; and let it be bound by ease with gentle ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head stand between two pillows so that he does not bend to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to chew for any cause; having his food be porridge of lion, until when pains are pulled back and the mandibles are knotted, then let him chew what he wants.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and waking up, until the mandible is knotted and healed.
And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when dislocated at any time and not turned to their places, then many times it happens that fevers and great thirst occur, and very often the belly of the patient is swollen, and very often he vomits pure blood.
And when you see that, then know it is perilous; and many times that person dies who experiences that in a few days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Collarbone is not dislocated on the side through its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and that is declared by sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient hangs over his back and extends his arms. And let the place be pressed by your palm with strong compression, for it will return.
And let the plaster and powders and strength be paused upon that.
But the extremity of that which seems the shoulder and is continued by that, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and pressed according to what we have said and according to what is your apparatus.
And let the plaster and powders and compression be paused upon that, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And by this method of cure the extremity of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which the first is that it is dislocated at the joint of the head to the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle and that is done tight; and it is not dislocated to the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts by the nerves.
And it is mainly dislocated and protrudes out of the lower parts where there is a tremor, and it is mainly dislocated in those where the flesh is thin, but in those with a lot of flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And soon after some people are hit or injured, and the muscle of them is bruised with a bruise, and it is cured by what has already been dislocated.
Now, when you have spoken about what you were doing over him, then continue with the treatment of him.
And it is known that the dislocation is in the lower parts where there is tremor; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you see a clear difference among them; and you see in the head of the muscle a hollow and under the tremor due to the touch of the head of the muscle like a pea, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated above or below, and you clearly see the touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is quickly reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And its reduction is that the minister lifts up the patient's hand to the parts above; and then places his fingers under the tremor of the patient, and raises the joint with strength in the direction of its location, and the minister lifts up the patient's hand and stretches it out upwards; and then he lets it drop because it returns quickly.
But if it does not return from what we have said and many days pass, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and a poultice that softens and liniment should be applied as if his thigh was frostbitten, with mustard, and fennel, and melilot in water, and should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid on his back and placed under the tremor of him, with a pad that is half-way between being lifted up and tightened, and then the doctor puts his thumb on the ball, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not pulled down to the lower parts; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not pulled down to the lower parts, because it immediately returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce that second in this way: and it is that you make a man who is taller than the patient stand on that side, and he stands on his part, and inserts his muscle under the tremor of the patient and lifts the tremor of him to the parts above while the patient is suspended in the air; and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of his belly. But if the patient is thin, then it should be suspended by someone else for the sake of heaviness, because the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced in another way: and it is that a long post whose head is rounded in shape, like mortar, not thick or thin, be placed under the patient; and after he is placed on top of the head of the post, lionskin blankets are placed under him; and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and then his hand is extended to the lower parts of the other side; and his body is extended with strength from the other part, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if its reduction is difficult because of all the causes we have said, then use this treatment: and it is that you take a post whose length is two cubits, and width of that is four digits, and thickness of it is lessened in the amount of a thumb, and shape of it is like this form:
And then on the rounded head lionskin blankets are placed so that the post does not chafe the patient.
And then the tremor of the patient is placed under it, and his hand or arm is extended over the post to the lower parts; and the post is tied around the armpit and arm and the end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed over a step of a ladder according to its width; and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and his other body is suspended from the other part, because the joint enters immediately.
And when its instrument is completed according to any manner that is possible for you, then you place under the tremor a pad of wool of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from moly with honey over all the muscle, as if it was rolled on top, and then tie down the tremor with tightness decent; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and his hand is connected to his neck, and he is left, and his hand is not chafed for seven days.
And let the food of the patient be little while his member is comforted, because it is easier for his healing.
And then food be given more generously after seven or eight days and exercise be done; and if it is堅固 and not softened, then he is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times because of moisture that happens to him or for another cause, then in that let cautery be administered with three holes according as it is said before in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and then after seven days the bandage is loosened and the joint is not closed, and the plaster and tightness are removed from him several times, and it is not closed, and there is no strength in his cat and he cannot lift that arm to the parts above, then know that his nerves which are at the head of the muscle are cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint never will be set in its place.
Of that which is dislocated at the feet and breast or behind, its reduction is made by pushing and extending with hands as it returns.
And then the other tightness is administered, and that is cured within as it is healed.
And if the healing happens to be delayed in the member and delay in its movement, then the patient should take baths many times as that heaviness is relieved and he returns to his nature first.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of curing of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the part in front of the part behind, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is hanging down or touching under according to what figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, that is manifestly declared to you, because the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the muscle.
And let your elbows be extended and the dislocation reduced at once before it comes to an abscess, because if it comes to an abscess, its reduction is difficult indeed and rarely healed at all; and especially when it is behind, for it is worse of all kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and often results in death.
And its restoration when it is possible to reduce, is that the patient's hand be extended with two hands; and his arm be spread out, and the doctor's hands be on the elbow and under him, and he press the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the palm of his hand as he pulls upwards, until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in front, then return it by folding your hand with his hand, while you strike the joint with the base of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a strong extension and forceful motion.
Two ministers should extend the arm, while two other ministers hold the patient's head in place, so that it is not moved by the extension.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, while a long folded cloth or bandage is wrapped around his hand or wrist.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it to help lubricate and facilitate its movement; then he should forcefully push the joint while returning it to its proper position.
And after its reduction, the patient's arm should be placed on a poultice made of ingredients that will help draw out and reduce inflammation; it should be tightly bound with a bandage, the arm suspended from the elbow, and left for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper position, you should loosen the bandage and leave it alone.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you should reapply the poultice and bandage, leaving it for several days while it is reduced; then loosen and remove the bandage.
But if there is a problem with the reduction of the joint, and its condition is such that movement is not possible, then apply moist heat and gentle friction, along with compression, while it is elevated; or place on the joint a liniment made from a fat that is suitable for ointments; then bind it, and leave it in place day and night. Then remove the bandage and place him in a bath; and when he is dry, gently rub the joint with mild friction, then reapply the liniment made from rose oil three times, once each day for three days. Corruption has already occurred on the interior of the tooth because of the water used for bathing.
And if you wish, place on it the udder of a cow that has been made warm and soft with milk, then bind it tightly over the joint; do this several times, as long as the poultice remains moist and reduces in size.
Chapter .XXVIII.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow joint.
The elbow joint is sometimes displaced, and its reduction is easier, unlike other joints; however, speed in reducing it is important at the time of displacement, before the site becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
To reduce the dislocation of this joint, you should have the patient's elbow placed on a table, while one minister extends his arm and another doctor places his hand or palm on the joint's prominence; then the doctor should push the joint back into place.
However, if the palm is already pressed against the elbow joint's belly, then the patient should rest his arm's forearm on a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurs above the elbow joint, then the patient's hand should be placed intrinsecally on the table so that the doctor's hand can push on the joint's prominence.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; otherwise, loosen the bandage, let the poultice draw out inflammation and leave it in place; do not repeat this treatment, or you will not be able to bear or reduce the joint until several days have passed.
However, the joint will bend according to its degree of displacement; and if the patient feels no pain, but his hand is limp and cannot be strengthened, then know that the nerves are either torn or cut, and there will be no remedy except to strengthen it with a cautery near its attachment and apply pressure strongly.
Therefore, when the dislocation has been reduced, place on it the poultice we have recommended, and leave it in place for three days; then loosen and remove it, and exercise the patient's hand.
But if there is any stiffness or pain in the joint, then gently apply warm water and friction several times while elevating it.
Chapter .XXIX.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the knuckles.
Sometimes the knuckles are fully displaced.
And when a knuckle on the back or underside of the hand is displaced, then grip it and push the joint back into place with your fingers, while returning it.
Then support the knuckle' head, suspend it from the part to which it is displaced, and leave it in place for two days.
Then suspend and extend the joint until it is straightened out on that day.
And when evening comes, loosen it according to that narrows and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, then tighten it at night; do this for several days until it is tight.
And when doing this, if it is displaced on the underside of the hand, then grip it and push it back into place to that side, while performing its first operation; then it will be healed.
And similarly do this when it is displaced to other sides.
Chapter .XXX.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the shoulder joint.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the shoulder joints or neck, and the bones stick out from their sockets, then there is no cure; death overtakes the patient.
And its sign is that the patient's mouth is turned outward without his will, and he cannot hold it in; also, sometimes only some of his limbs or two arms or two legs, or one of these, are affected; or sometimes a shoulder joint is displaced from all sides, as the joints are pushed out by all four parts.
Then it is pushed out to the back and is called dislocation.
But its treatment is to consider whether the dislocation occurs from youth, because in that case there is no cure or remedy for it either.
But when it occurs from hitting or striking or similar to these, the Ancients have written their ways of treatment with prolix speech, from which we return with great profit; but I have simplified that which few have described of the excess of its parts, because of my proximity to its intention with which I have exposed and formed it with various instruments.
And none are cured except those that occur precisely in the shoulder joint with what I have described.
And that the patient be extended over his face, with his armpits pushed against a wall, and his arms stretched out below him so that he does not drag his feet.
Then a straight stick is placed upright in the ground at his head's end, and another stick placed under his feet at the other end of the bed.
And one minister holds the stick, and it is not secured in a hole; and another minister holds the other, then formed similarly.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and let them tickle the lion's tail firmly; and extend the end of the rope to the stake which is the head of him, and tie that in him; and then tighten the other rope over his hips and the heels of him, and tie it to the stakes on his feet; and then adjust all the ropes and tie them to the other stake which is by his feet.
And then the minister should extend the rope to the tip of the stake, and not be untied the two stakes and the ropes from their places where they are tied, but rather they should be loosened as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms over the spine with strength until it returns to its position, or that he lies on a table and then adjusts his feet onto the table as he returns to his original position.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in proportion to three fathoms, and dig into the wall of which we have said is near the patient a place in which the end of the table can fit. And then place half of the table over the spine, and the doctor should place his feet over the other end, and tighten well until the spine is constricted and returns to its original position.
And if you wish, open with a turn which is wound around the hand; and it is that you place in the ground under the head of the patient at the end of a stake, the length of which is two fathoms, and under his head at the end of a stake of three fathoms; and let the distance between each stake be one palm, and it is already made on each stake a hole in which runs a rope, and each is very firmly tied to the ground so that it does not come undone.
And let there be another stake which is round in which is the turn, and let it be wound around the two stakes.
And in its end is a hole in which the rope is formed, the length of which is one palm for that with which it is wound; and in the other two stakes are similar to that.
And then tighten the ropes which you have tightened in the feet of the patient in the stake which is under his head, and the ropes which you have tightened in his thighs in the turn which is under his feet.
And then tie each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor should smooth out the spine as we have said.
And then after the spine has returned and the place is smoothed, then cover that with a plaster made of egg white, and then stop it; and then place over the plaster a board of table which its breadth is three inches or surrounding, and the length of it is the quantity which covers the location of the hernia, and over the end of the spine.
And then let it be tied with a rope as we have said, and use for the patient subtle food until he is healed.
And if any swelling remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then cover it with medicines that soften and smoothen with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recounted; and a leaf of lead is already administered in that area.
And sometimes a swelling occurs in the back of the two spines, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already swells for which one should not be made to bend with this medicine, for fear that he may die from it.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle do not end in anything but dislocation only, and it does not happen to those which happens to the other joints of small removal and concavity.
And the joint of the bone is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated from the inside parts, or from the outside parts, or from the front parts, or from the back parts.
And most often it is dislocated from the inside parts, and seldom from the front or back parts.
And the sign of its dislocation from the inside parts is that when you adjust the hip of the sick man with the sick man, it is longer and the heel is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the sick man cannot bend his foot due to the tongue, and it is the location which has the tongue apposed by apostema cautery, because the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation from the outside parts is that its accidents are contrary to those accidents.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation from the front parts is that it stretches its thigh according to compliment, but it does not bend that side without pain which is in the heel; and if it tries to walk and cannot walk over that side to the front parts; and his urine is retained and his tongue is apposed, and it should have walking over the instep.
And the sign of that which happens to dislocation from the back parts is that it does not stretch the heel nor can bend that side which bends the tongue, and its thigh is shorter than the other one, and the tongue is softened, and the head of the thigh is under that location.
But the reduction of the parts of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and it has already been administered by you, according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure at all; and therefore one should not be made over that.
But in that one of which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocation, then you approach that to what you want to turn the joint and extend it to the inside parts and outside parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will surely return and does not need another cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the thigh of him from the lowest part, or with his hands, or with a rope which is tied over the thigh above the heel; and another minister extends his hand of that above the nails that touches his nails under his tongue; and then tighten with lion-skin rope over the root of the thigh, and let another minister press the end of the rope.
And let its extension be from the inside part to the anus, or from the back part to the front part.
And let the extension of all those in one way be while the sick man is raised by his body from the ground and that he dangles hanging.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns in that way which we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all kinds that are of their own cure.
In the reduction of it, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is from the inside parts, let the sick man be raised on his side; and then place the ropes over the root of the thigh in that location between the head of the thigh and the location which is under the tongue; and then extend the rope above from the part of the anus to the highest part of the furcula.
Then another strong person should grab the patient's arms, push on the large part of the patient's hip, and stretch out the parts on the outside with great force, because that will return to its place.
And this species is of more gentle cure by which this member is reduced compared to the others.
But if you are excused and do not obey this cure with this species of cure for everything, then make sure that both feet of the patient are tied together with strong, loose laces, on both heels and on both toes.
And let the length of each of his parts be the quantity of four fingers, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
Then let the sick person be suspended over the head of the bed, and let them be in a horizontal position; and let their length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
Then command a strong young man to reduce the hip joint, and let another young man support the sick person, and let the other young man push with strength and reduce the hip, because the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the outside part, make sure that the sick person lies on their side as we have recommended in having a hernia; and let the laces be tightened around the sick leg properly and around the foot.
Then let two boards be placed, one under the foot of the patient and the other under his head; and let boards be placed close to each other under the pillow on which dampened cloths are wrapped, so that the sick person does not get hurt because the board is between their thighs, so that the extension to the outside parts below is not pulled.
Then let each assistant extend their part, and let the doctor with his hand guide the reduction according to the article.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then let the leg be extended slightly, and it is according to this measurement of the story on the pillow; and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand over the sick hip, and let him grip that with his other hand, and with that grip, let him extend that to the front parts at the toe.
And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then let the sick person not be extended to the front parts and be elevated above the ground; unless that it is placed on a hard cause, as well as how the movement will be if his neck is dislocated to the outside parts, according to what we have said about his movement on two axes; and let him be on his back, and the laces be extended, according to what we have said, no more.
And make sure compression is administered with a board on the location where there is pain in the joint.
Therefore, when the reduction is done according to what you have — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and let you extend two legs of the sick person, and when you see those angles and the sick hip expands that angle and you stretch without excuse, then know that the member according to what you return — and then you adjust both thighs and apply plaster and expand with bandage so that the joint is not damaged in any of the parts; and let the sick person rest for three or four days.
Then untie the laces and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those angles in a straight line, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the sick person get up.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch that according to your first stretching, and let him rest for three days.
Then untie that, and make that person delay in walking on anyone for a few days, until it is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
The toe is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the bottom parts more than the back parts; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the sick person to apply their leg with their hip; then know that the toe is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the sick person stand up straight, so that he extends his leg, if he can on that; attach two fingers to their face, and place their foot between their feet; then make adhere the toe of their foot with your palms, and hold those between your fingers over their toe with strength, and let another assistant extend their foot while the toe returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the hip with a non-laborious elevation.
Then plaster that and make adhere the leg to the hip, and then bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie those.
And do not use the sick person's leg for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comforted.
But if its reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension with laces of which in the cure of the hip preceding narrative there is mention.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the instep.
The instep is sometimes soft due to minor damage, and sometimes it is dislocated, and its dislocation is done either to the inside parts or to the outside parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the instep swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of its softness is gentle reduction, and it is extended with ease with the hands and made straight while returning.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to compliment, make the sick person stand up straight, and let one strong and powerful minister from behind hold the instep in the middle location of him.
Then you with your right hand hold their foot from the highest part, and with your left hand from the lowest part of the foot in the location of the ankle.
Then pull their foot to you with your right hand, and then twice with the left, and then extend with the left; and push the instep of the foot with the right because the leg is not labored.
And do that two times according to what we have counted.
Then push the instep of the foot to the leg on the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore, if it returns in one or two times according to this way, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; and otherwise, repeat the operation on him because he will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it by what we have recommended, then make the sick person lie on their back on the ground, and tighten a rope tied in the ground tightly, and let it be between their thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that the leg does not turn.
And then the minister of the patient should have his thighs extended, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or with the bandage that is wrapped around the ankle; and each minister should be extended against the extension of their part, and the patient should be retained between the thighs so that the body is not pulled down below its extension.
And then the doctor should reduce the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh down, because the dislocation will return with ease.
And when the dislocation has returned and you have seen the health of its reduction, then apply a plaster and bind that with strong bandages, and tie the foot to the leg.
And beware of the nerves that are behind on the ankle, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and it does not lead to pain.
And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage softens, tighten it.
And then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. But if he is forced to walk within that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive a cure.
And if pus occurs, then you should administer to him in the manner that we have narrated before, at another place of cure and fomenting, until it is healed.
Chapter 34.
Of cure for dislocation of the big toes of the feet.
Let him who is dislocated be reduced with little extension, and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in any knuckle of the big toe, then let him sit with his foot elevated on the ground or on a table, and be in that position as if he were walking.
And then you stand up and place your foot on what is below the joints, and then press it with your weight until it returns, and see that it is already reduced and there is no swelling in the joint.
And then place below his foot on a table that takes the whole foot, and which has two ends, and then tighten it with decent and firm compression for three days; and then loosen it and let him rest from walking for several days, until he is fully healed and recovery is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with a wound or with a fracture, or with any other impaction.
When one of those happens, and you see yourself in the cure of that and the restoration of him, several times death succeeds.
And therefore you should not presume in the cure of him, but he who is wise in the art, longsuffering, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient or presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning of medicines that soothe cauterized wounds, let the patient come to divine judgment, unless he to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, from wickedness alleviation, and in which some hope appears. And then endeavor immediately to make the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into a cauterized wound.
And then if the member returns as we want, then administer treatment that yields cauterized wounds and cures the wound with what suits it of the drying remedies.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the bones are separated, then you see the statement of them, and do in what we have said in the simple diseases of that which precedes in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear as my prophecy has preceded you; for what is better for you owes to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your true body, those in your time. Thus end the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God be blessed. Amen.
