O, sons, when I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion in it, and by its expositions and declarations, it has become clear to me that you will complete with this treatise, which is a part of the action by hand, i.e., surgery.
For the action by hand is prohibited in our realm and in our time is deprived of all prestige, while greatly risking the science of it, and its traces are obscured; and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they altered and led to those errors and hesitations that closed their minds to it and diminished its strength and skill.
And it has become clear to me that I will animate this through the arrangement of this treatise in that second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it might come with the forms of the tools of cauterization and other instruments of the work as is fitting for addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which there is no good craftsman by hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be practiced beforehand in the science of anatomy, which recognizes Gaulish in that it knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and have the knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of those, and their emanation.
And so Hypocras says that by name is much, but in the work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said that in the introduction to this book; for whomever is not learned what we have said of anatomy, it is not permitted that they might fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without experience.
For I saw a foolish and experienced physician pierce a scrophula on the neck of a woman, and piercing some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died in his arms.
And I saw another physician who extracted a stone from a man who had proceeded in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and drew out that stone with a piece of the bladder, and that man died on the third day.
And I had called to extract it, and I saw that for the size of the stone and for the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and there came to him a broken black slave; and preparing with his ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the plague with powders and splints with strong compression, and did not allow the wound air.
And then he discharged it according to his desires, and then bound it, and then let it remain for some days and commanded that we loosen the dressing; and it became so that the thigh and leg were pustularized, and came to ruin.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the dressing, and achieved tranquility and eased of his pains.
But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it and the corruption did not cease wandering in the member as the patient perished.
And I saw another physician who pierced a cankerous ulcer, and was ulcerated for some days, as the wickedness of it increased with its lord.
The cause of which is that the cold choler is pure, and then it does not come to him from iron at all, but that there be some member suffering from it.
And so, sons, it is necessary for you that the action by hand be divided into two divisions: one is in operation to him who is associated with health, and the other is in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And I have already discussed that in every chapter of this book in which there appears operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish might not hinder your way and disgraced you.
And thus take up your arms with solicitude and the protection of God, and your patients with gentleness and firmness.
And use the better way by the grace of God and to bring about health and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult cure, and take up your arms from what makes you fearful so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your saintliness.
Gaulish has already said in some of his books: "Do not heal evil ill, so that bad physicians are not named."
And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered from the head into feet, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of cauterization, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of plagues, and of extraction of arrows and like things, all chaptered and ordered from the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torque and like things; chaptered from the head into feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
We will say the quality of the humors of that cauterization and of the pains of it, and in what condition cauterization is prohibited.
So I say that the speech of the quality of the humor of cauterization and the pain of it is long speech and prolix, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and many have spoken greatly of it, and from it are disagreed, and for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing prolixity.
And so I say that cauterization confers to all universal complexions, which are by matter or without matter, excepting two complexions, which are complexions of phlegm without matter.
In the complexions phlegmy and dry with matter discorded; for some said that cauterization is beneficial to it, and others said the contrary of that, that cauterization is not convenient in ill of which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient that ill of which is phlegmy and dry be healed.
And he said the contrary of that, that by cauterization is made humor in all ill which is phlegmy and dry that one sees in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and his humors to the complexions of fire, you rub the body of man dry.
And I say by the speech of that, that experiment that to me some times have discovered.
However, let the one who comes to this topic not be ignorant of what is already written and practiced in the chapter on cautery by various authors, and has understood the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and their causes, and their accidents, and the space of time of them.
But in other complexions you should not be afraid, especially in wet and damp diseases, for all doctors have agreed about them and are not in disagreement that cautery is beneficial for those.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness is that cautery with burning medicine is that fire is simple, whose action only affects the part being cauterized and does not affect another part except for a little harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches all parts, and strongly brings about a difficult-to-cure disease in the part it affects, and strongly helps it.
But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except that it expels the surplus. And it is known to us through experiment and through the length of service in the study of art upon the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that my free time was not read in this pause, a secret hidden from you by fire, and the quality of its action on bodies and its expulsion by which you expel diseases, with philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to perform cautery, and pause in the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, in order that the harm by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and feverish, which do not endure delay so that malice does not come, which is greater than a little harm due to the passage of time.
And therefore do not wonder in your minds, children, that this is not considered except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is that for that disease which is healed by cautery, there is no reduction of time at all, and they pause in that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think, for cautery is not but in the place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moisture which are the cause by which pains come.
But cautery surpasses medicine in power of its strength and value of its action, and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the disease may return at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the strength of it, and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of surpluses in him, and what comes to him in his acquisition in food and likeness of these causes; unless the disease for which cautery was administered was a subtle disease in a part of few surpluses and moisture, so that cautery for pain and its likeness in it, it is possible that the pain will not return in him, but this happens in small things.
But the vulgar saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not to what they understand about it, for they believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause except cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not but when we administer remedies in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and at the end of the cause we administer a man cautery, and it benefits for that. And from here we understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not do that, unless it is absolutely true, for I have already proven and proven to you that this is not but in some bodies without the others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you perform cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it is ignited according to the quantity that you want due to the redness of gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you apply an igniter over it, gold melts by the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman catches them due to the occupation of that.
And for this, cautery with iron is done more lightly and closer to the rightness of operation.
And I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that I may ask for what I want from him.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to moisture and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, it is the cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called headache, from the parts of the temples and ears flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and toothache and of the jaw, and generally of all disease that comes by frigidity, as well as paralysis, stroke, and likeness in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first of all you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine, the head being washed clean, for three or four days according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then let him lie between your knees on a low bench and let him lie on his feet.
And then pause the edge of your palm palm up to the point above the nose between the eyes. But however, when your middle finger's location is reached, signal that location with the tip of the thumb and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then pause it on the marked location, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be constrained little by little, and you revolve it.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the location, and if you see that some quantity of the head is already uncovered, as well as the quantity of hair, then lift your hand again, and if it has not returned to its original location with that iron, with another one, if it is cool, enter until it is seen by you that which I have said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location and let it be for three days.
And then pause on it cotton dipped in vinegar and let it be on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then heal the location with four-part thuốc long into it has healed.
And they said that when the Roman plaster is open, so many honeys are put in it, because it is better and more beneficial.
And they said that the jaw should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone is burnt.
And then scrape off what is burnt and then heal it.
Others said that the cautery arrived at the end, passing through the strong bone while the bone collapsed, and this is the form of small alphecati. And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head expire.
And when there has been a wound open for a long time and it is cured while still unhealed,
But I have never seen these two species of cautery in anyone, except some people according to the way of fear; and that person, for me, is better off healthy than ill, because the head is devastated by the solution of its continuity with it as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a foul nature.
And the first kind of cautery is more safe and better for me; and that person uses it and works on that with health.
Chapter Second.
Of the cautery of the head
When in all the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses lances and cupping glasses and head purges and plasters and poultices and hot stones and bandages and similar things, and especially if he has already been cauterized by a cautery which did not help him for any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is foul and finds great friction there, then cauterize it with another cautery under that one a little. And if it is necessary to cauterize under the head and it benefits him another form of cautery by which the wound is held, then cauterize with a cautery on the crown of his head where the scalp is split. The scalp is split and the amount we have measured is uncovered from the bone and that is cauterized with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called a vein — and it is the place where the ventouse is placed. And put your hand on it, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through that finds much more pain than from any other cautery of the head.
And I say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery by which they cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle cautery than that by which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is how it is done:
Chapter Third.
Of the cautery of non-ancient migration.
When a sudden pain is in the front of the head, or pain is stretched into the eye, the head must be evacuated by cleansing medicines, and other treatment must be administered, which I have written about in the beginnings of illnesses; and if all this does not help, cauterization of it is in two ways: either by acute burning medicine, or by iron.
But a cautery by burning medicine is that you take an onion, and cut it up and season the ends of it on both sides with salt. Then pierce the place of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it penetrates under the scalp and is hidden.
Then tighten it with a binding bandage so that it presses down strongly and leave it there for three hours; then remove the onion and treat the wound with ointment, and leave the wound for two or three days, then put your hand over the place while immersing it in warm water so that the place becomes swollen.
Then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to do this with some other burning medicines which I have written about in the two tractates of burning medicines.
But the cauterization by iron according to this way: heat up an iron cautery and this is how it is done:
And it is called closed claw nail, because the head of it is like a nail with some curvature and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
Then put your hand over the place of the pain — so that the iron which is underneath is not burned — and move the iron little by little quickly.
And if the quantity of it which is burned by the thickness of the scalp is according to the size of it, and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned which is underneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
Then dip the wound in salty water and put it on the place for three days; then put a bandage moistened with wine on it and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cautery and beware of incision of artery in this non-ancient migration.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the cautery of ancient migration.
When you cure migration with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not help, and you see that for the illness which is not sufficient to it what we have said about the first cautery by medicine or the cautery by fire, then wherever you ignite the cautery-scalpel so that it turns white, measure on the place of the pain a length of line of which the size of the finger is, or whichever, and put your hand aside for a while and tighten it so that you pierce the artery and it comes into the bone.
However it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the jaw, which is worn down because of mastication, and that the vein not be burned and the nerve which controls it, and that no spasm come upon it.
And if it is about the custody and caution of flow of blood from the artery which is split, because in its splitting there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is unskilled and inexperienced; and leave the operation at the beginning.
And I will come with remembrance of the regimen of accidental flow of blood from the artery according to its way in this free book.
And if you see that this illness does not help this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have measured, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you want to administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stretching of the artery with cautery having two points, and this cautery is better and more certain.
Chapter Fifth.
Of the cauterization of pains of auricles.
When in the auricle there is pain because of friction and it is cured by lancing and by the other treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is that one which has the name puncta, and this is how it is done:
Then pierce the ignition and let it be carried around all of the auricle as it is turned, or in the circuit of each of them if the pain is in any of them. Apply the cautery at the base of the ear slowly, little by little, until you have felt the area with the tip.
And if the cautery makes points on the entire ear, and he feels that, then cure the places inside which are healthy.
Chapter VI
Of cauterization by torture.
Torture which is cured and treated with cauterization is only of the humors which come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the humors which come from dryness or from nervous spasms.
When you treat that kind of torture with poultices and clysters and washes, and your treatment doesn't work, then you should cauterize the patient in three places: the first at the base of the ear, the second a small spot below his temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And apply your cautery against the direction in which the illness is traveling, because softening will not come except through the part that appears to be healing.
And the way of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the right side of the highest part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head; another at the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger nail, and apply your hand with the cautery inside until the amount of the half of the size of a peppercorn is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery; it is a kind of scalpel, the shape of which is in front like a table. But indeed more subtle is that one little bit here and there; and where it cuts through excessive thickness a little.
And then cure the place with that which is in front processed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and your treatment doesn't work and the patient doesn't have a fever, then cauterize that in four places: especially on all the horns of his head; and with cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the groin. And the way of cauterization is done according to what is above the finger nail.
And indeed it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and that is the most rear; and indeed let it be cured with what processes.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization made for oblivion caused by phlegm.
Let the patient be given in the beginning large poultices and purging pills, the servant cleansing agents.
And then scrape the entire head of the patient and apply over the groin a poultice of cedar described in the treatise on poultices.
And apply that several times, for that is the way of cauterization. And do that according to the order of which I have already said.
And if he is healed by those, well and good; and if not, then do to him three cauterizations in the rear part of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck. And apply between each cautery the thickness of a finger nail, and then cure the cautery with that which it produces.
But if you feel an increase and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cauterization in the middle part; and if you feel a greater increase, then cauterize that on both horns.
Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the shape given before.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of parasites and of softening of all the body.
Let the patient be cleansed in cleansing of the head with poultices and with that which we have said; and then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with cautery in the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the rear part of him, and do to him three cauterizations on the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body of trops and the illnesses tolerate that and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and lastly with cautery inside until the peppercorn mot of him burns, and raise your hand. Then cure that until it is healed; and let that be cauterized olive-colored.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And therefore let the brain of him be cleansed at the beginning of his illness with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
And if the patient is a child who does not suffer medicines, then administer to him washes and masticables, the servant cleansers, before the days pass, with the benefit of foods.
And then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous way; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on each horn of his head cauterize it. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And let it be cauterized olive-colored according to how it was before.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this way.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess of decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink that which cleanses the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then scrape the head of the patient; and then make a turpentine decently made of pine resin over the circle, and then apply that to the middle part of the head.
Let the patient be in seclusion for sixty days, and let him be kept in all parts.
And then apply a poultice; and it is also worthy of being bled from the ear of sheep. And scorch that over fire with moderate heat according to measure, which he endures when it is within him. And now you will tie it in the middle of the head, in the circle, and loosen it so that it is relaxed.
And do this to the patient once a week, with the other treatment until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize the area by making small points according to his pain, unless you have your hand on a cautery in such an order: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then put that cut in a soft bandage or gauze.
Chapter 12.
Of cauterization of water descending in the hole.
When to you is shown the beginning of water in the hole by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink that which purifies the head of him, and guard that from all moisture.
And do that sweat in a bath for a few days.
And now command him to wash his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and now cauterize that with two cauteries over two temples if there is the beginning of water in two holes, or on one side if there is the beginning of the water in one hole.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the collar bone; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
And guard you from flows of blood when he is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood from him, stop it with some medicine which is possible to you.
And I come with wisdom which is in extraction of arteries and with incision of those and cauterization of flows of blood.
And sometimes he is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Chapter 13.
Of cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the holes are ancient frequently and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous flowing phlegmatic, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of beginning of water falling into the holes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if there is need of addition, then cauterize that in all sides of the hole's mouth on the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of cauterization of stink of nose.
When you heal him with that which we have said in the division and your healing does not help, then prepare and give the patient the clysters for three nights; and now wash his head, and cauterize it with an olive cautery. And now cauterize that with a cautery of cloves with two cauteries over the two eyebrows below the hair one small.
And guard you from the artery, lest you light it.
And of the cautery of cloves this is the form.
Chapter 15.
Of cauterization of softening of eyelids of holes.
When the eyelid of the hole is softened by illness or by moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows one small with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much with your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is inflamed.
Chapter 16.
Of cauterization of the eyelid of the hole when the hair is turned to the parts inside and it pinches the hole.
When the hair of the hole is turned to the parts inside so that it pinches the hole, cauterize in those according to two methods; for cauterization there is with fire or with burning medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to look at his hair as they cut them so that they are elongated and singed; and if he pinches that, then you strengthen his holes with a bandage so that they are not wounded until the hair is born.
Therefore when they are born and singed, then put the head of the patient in the hand, and now sign over the eyelid of the holes of him with a tent, with a mark which is according to the figure of a dead leaf; and let the mark be near to the hair.
Then put soft bandage in alum of wool or in poultice of poppy over the hole.
And now heat the cautery, of which this is its form.
And now cauterize over the figure which you have marked, bit by bit, in few turns, until it is burned the surface of the collar bone which is as if with a leaf of myrrh, all appearing properly.
And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the hole already contracted and the hair of it elevated from the puncture of the hole.
And therefore lift up your hand and lay him for three days, and now put over him a bandage with linen until the scar is healed. And now heal that with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hair returns for any cause then let its opening and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cauterization over that all as you did first.
But if the hair is in the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural location and singed and let not the hair pinch the hole.
The cautery with burning medicine that you command the patient to look at his hair so that they are elongated and singed; and now let it be made of linen the form of leaf of myrrh.
And now take of soap mixed with honey and of oil of castor bean one unc. .I. Take that, and now mix those causes together, and do that with fomentation so that it is not cold; and now spread of that over the linen which is made thus with the form of leaf of myrrh, and put that over one hole or both; and put under the hole a soft bandage in alum of wool, and let the head of the patient be in its hand.
And put it over the medicine and press that one bit and not wound him until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for bite is in it as if with fire.
And therefore when you perceive that the hole is bitten, then look at the medicine and take it away with your hand; therefore when the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the hole with water; and now consider if he sees the eyelid already lifted as it is washed after constriction with fire or with incision, for then let it be; and if he returns to that of the medicine over the location in which the medicine has not acted and not become black until its action is done and is contracted.
And now put over it a bandage with linen until the collar bone of the constriction is healed, and now heal that with ointment dafinicon or other until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to guard with diligent vigilance that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes swollen after a few days due to some injury from hair in the eye, then apply your medicine again to the place where the eyelid is swollen, and proceed exactly as you did at the beginning, and gradually improve until it is healed.
And this is the form of the myrrh poultice.
And know that men's eyes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore your incision should be made accordingly.
And do not hide the path of rectitude from him who is being taught this art.
Chapter .xvii.
Of cauterization for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not perform your cure, then know that you should cauterize it according to this manner: order the patient to rest his head in your lap, and have someone else hold his head steady with their hands so that his head is neither moved nor shaken.
Then place a piece of cotton wool soaked in honey or in the mucilage of psyllium over the patient's eye.
And heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
which should be hollow, thus in the shape of a cane or of an owl' s feather, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it may be solid all the way through to the other end. And if you want it to be hollow inside, then make it thus with an opening.
However, what is hollow is better for your work.
And press the fistula if it is open, and draw out from it pus and fluid to dry up that place. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the matter from it.
And then place the cautery which should be well ignited, and hold your hand close to the cautery near the nose, so that your hand does not shake or the patient be disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the margin of the eye and corrupt it there.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it thus for three days, and then place over that place cotton wool and wrap it up with a bandage until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then apply to it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is appropriate in that chapter.
And there is another manner of cautery for a fistula which some first mentioned: enter the fistula and open it up, and then place in that fissure fine lead subtilely formed thus: melt the lead and pour it into the eye; hold your hand steady with good retention so that the patient is not disturbed by the molten lead entering the eye, and see to it that you apply over the eye cotton wool soaked in honey or water, for the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a marvelously wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a cut to the nose and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to its proper location.
Chapter .xviii.
Of cauterization for a split nostril.
Many times cracks occur in the lips, and more often in children.
Therefore when you cure those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat the cautery like a small knife thus:
And its hollow should be according to the thinness of the blade.
Then place that edge carefully into those cracks until the cautery penetrates the edges of the crack.
And then cure it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter .xix.
Of cauterization for a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is a boil and it has burst, and it is aged, and suppurates and there is a fistula, and you cure it and your cure is not effective, then know that you should ignite the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place the iron hot into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron penetrates the root of it; do this once or twice, and cure it with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and scrape away the corrupted bone according to what comes in that chapter.
Chapter .xx.
Of cauterization of teeth and of softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are shaken, and you cure them with medicines and your cure is not effective, then order the patient to rest his head in your lap, and heat the cautery, of which the form will come immediately below, so that you place the cotton wool over the tooth and push into it the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand close so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth from which it came.
And then raise your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the shaken tooth is strengthened, and the softened gum is hardened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter .xxi.
Of cauterization for toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or it is cold or red, or the cure with medicine is not effective, then the cautery is in two ways: with a cow' s lard, or with fire.
The cautery with lard is that you take lard of cows and melt it in the hollow of iron, and then take cotton wool and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then dip that in the hot lard and place it on the painful tooth until it is numbed.
And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the lard and place it on the painful tooth, and hold over that hot iron until the iron penetrates the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cautery with fire is that you take an iron or needle and heat it in the fire until it is red hot, and there is no thickness in it and the keenness of the fire does not penetrate the mouth of the patient.
Then heat the cautery thus, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is numbing; do this several times because the pain will be reduced or in that day or the next day.
And know that by pressure of that cautery that the patient fills his mouth with good breath and holds it for an hour, and then spits it out; this is the manner of the cautery.
And cauterize it as much as you can.
And this is the shape of the tube:
Chapter .XXII.
Of cauterization of hernia.
When hernias are from phlegm and cold humors, and are not cured by digestion with medicines, and you see that those are lightly digested, then you should burn the cautery as much as possible, having two ends so that the smoke of the cautery rises through one end into the hernia, and the other if it is needed for that, while you wait until the hernia comes to the surface.
And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to the amount of the hernia, and let it sit for three days, and place a bandage soaked in hot water over it while it is still warm from the fire.
And then cure that with ointment, poultices and linen until it is healed.
Chapter .XXIII.
Of cauterization of sore throat and of contraction of the larynx.
When moisture comes upon the throat of the lung, and especially when that is caused by a coldness of the complexions, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the root of the larynx in the place which is affected.
And be careful that the cautery does not reach the larynx or burn it, only a little bit of it.
And cauterize that with another cautery according to the joint of the neck at the lowest vertebra. And the cautery for that should be a peg made in the way previously described.
And then cure that with what is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter .XXIV.
Of cauterization of disease of the lung and of cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are from cold moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the breastbone in the places affected by pain, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and the cautery should be pegs made according to the previous form.
And if you want, the cautery can be punctured with the cautery which is called puncta, the form of which is prescribed in the section on ear pain.
And let there be holes in them; and then cure that with what is prescribed until it is healed.
And if the cautery has three ramps, the cauterization can be done with that in one go: with one cautery you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter .XXV.
Of cauterization of the head of the larynx.
When the head of the larynx is dislocated because of slippery humors and it does not return to its place until it has been reduced, and especially if it is displaced by a slight movement as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and then let the patient return his head onto his chest or onto his side; and then lift up the larynx which is in the front of the larynx to the parts above with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the front.
And then burn the cautery having two pegs; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the larynx so that it penetrates into the other side; and then the figure of cauterization will be made with four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to that count, for which there are eight cauteries.
And then sprinkle salt on the cautery and then make the patient calm down, and the member should not be disturbed for any length of time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is at the front and it is done, then cauterize the muscle with pegged cauteries or with punctured cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is reduced and the patient is healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When moisture comes into the stomach and it is multiplied within his complexions and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confer with them, then let the patient be laid on his back, and extend his arms and his legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery under the chest according to the length of a finger with a pegged cautery, and two cauteries under the sides of the cautery so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and they should be spread out so that there is no burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the larynx.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape, and if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this shape:
And let the stomach be punctured at where that is frightened by this cautery: and you feel on the stomach a point according to the quantity which you want with tenting, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with what is prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of cauterization of the fretted liver.
When there is pain in the liver from coldness or from moisture or from gross fullness so that it has been driven out of its normal complexions by excessive egression, and it is cured with what we have said and does not confer with them, then let the patient lie on his back on a pillow, and feel with tenting three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed over the liver below the hypochondria, so that he lies in the bed of a man.
And let there be space between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move your hand with the cautery.
And if the quantity of that which is burnt is to the quantity of the thickness of the larynx, and it is not pushed back; and if the patient stands on his feet, then let him sit down, for he has already extended his legs, and lift up his arms.
And you are able to cauterize these cauteries with a curved cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful that you do not overdo cauterization, and let the larynx be burnt throughout all its thickness so that it penetrates into the intestines, for the larynx here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of perforation of the liver with a cautery.
When there is ulceration or abscess in the liver and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient has increased weight and pain is sharpened.
If it is in the tunic of the heart, then the pain is great and sharp, and often doctors tire themselves out trying to cure him.
Therefore turn the patient over on his stomach and feel around for the boil, then ignite the cautery which is similar to a rag, the form of which is described in the other page. And cauterize with this cautery until all of the pustule is scorched, until it reaches the brain, until it draws out the pus.
Then cure this one as well as the others after they have healed.
And don't use this type of cautery except when the study of medicine prolongs it and in the cases where you know from experience that many illnesses have been cured; but sometimes in some cases you should try this type of cautery, even though you may feel it is too hot for us, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
On cauterization of ulcers.
The ancients said to cauterize ulcers caused by cold humors according to this method: take an aristology root that is long and dry, about the thickness of a finger, and it will be found;
And then immerse it in oil and heat it up, and then cauterize with a cautery between the collarbone at the top of the chest; and with two small cauteries lean slightly towards the end that is below the beard, and with two cauteries lean towards the fifth rib and the armpit, leaning a little towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and with one cautery between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the hips, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And don't press your hand down on the cautery, but rather in the nature of the pustule in the way that it appears.
And the ancients also said that some men use an iron cautery like a ray, and they ignite it and put it in between the ribs so that it reaches the pustule and draws out pus, as we have said about the pustule of the heart.
But when doing this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear because it will happen at once in the location of a fistula for which there is no cure.
Chapter 30.
On cauterization of meles.
When you cure the illness of a mele with what we have said about curing it in the division, and don't trust your treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct; the first is that you make three or four cauteries that are parallel to the length of the mele according to the figure of the cauteries of the heart, the figure of which has preceded.
And between each cautery let there be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be as we have said about the cautery of the heart in the same way.
And don't press your hand down on the cautery, and let the patient lie on his back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery while holding two windings, and this cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle; and raise up the pustule which is in the bend of the mele where the patient's left hand lies.
And let your elevation by which you raise up the pustule be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then intertwine the two windings and ignite them while pushing into the pustule from the other side as well.
And then pull out the cautery; and so there are four cauteries made.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three windings.
And then you cure the cautery after it has stopped giving out pus for many days because only then are the other causes that precede in the cure effective.
Chapter 31.
On cauterization of hydrocephalus.
Cautery should not be used in hydrocephalus but rather in the armpit properly.
When you cure hydrocephalus with the methods of cure which we have said in the division and don't trust your cure, then let them be cauterized with four cauteries around the armpit and a cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the heart, and another cautery on the mele, and two cauteries between the shoulder blades of the two sides, and a cautery in the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the pustule.
And then pull out the cautery after it has been in for a long time.
And don't evacuate the patient from the cure after the cautery so that two intentions are added to it and healing is accelerated for him by aid.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be key-shaped according to what is above it, and that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to what precedes it.
Chapter 32.
On cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are full of pus and water, then let them be cauterized on the bottom of the foot at the place that is between the auricular and annular fingers, and raise up your hand with the cautery and don't twist it; and then raise up your hand without turning it because the water will run out.
It is cauterized in this form: and then make two cauteries on both thighs, and in each thigh there should be made a cautery with the end of the cautery cut into it. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one above the knee and the other below it, and on each thigh two cauteries.
And then let the wound be left open after its cure for a long time so that no water runs out of it.
And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
On cauterization of the body of the belly.
When the body of the belly is weak and swollen due to cold humors infiltrating it and digesting it, then let them be treated with the methods of cure that we have said, and if they don't trust those methods, sometimes the patients suffer cautery from hot humors; therefore cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, and with a cautery in the shape of a circle, and with four cauteries around the armpit, and with a cautery like a key, and a cautery over the navel, or with two cauteries.
And if the moist humors are abundant and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize him over the navel and over the intestines, and put two cauteries tightly on the stomach close to the groin because this is a perfect cure for stimulating digestion of which there is no error.
Chapter 34.
On cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in nature a long-standing hemorrhoids or of gross humors infiltrating or of moist and corrupt humors, and are cured with what we have said in the division and don't trust your cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the pus below the small shoulder blade and triangularly below it; and cautery above the navel, going through two dents.
If you see that the patient's stomach is swollen and their food is not digested, and their face is swollen, then cauterize the area above the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned before; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the gallbladder using a nail cautery, and leave the cautery in place for some time, and then heal the patient until they are cured.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the translation:
When you are making an incision on the athayl, then you should ignite the cautery which is similar to a needle. Then insert that burning cautery into the athayl incision and hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if they are several trops, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and then heal those with that which you apply to them within the area until they are cured.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery upon something, it is more beneficial for healing.
Chapter 36.
Here is the translation:
When nature does not comply with the method we have described in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, let him be healed by cauterization.
Therefore, when one sees a fistula in the natural passage, and it is old, let him draw out the corruption and corrupted moisture from it, and then let what is most appropriate be to probe that with a thin needle, and thus know the quantity of its depth with the already mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cautery which is similar to a needle. And then insert that cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe entered.
And repeat with the cautery on that until the corrupted matter is burnt, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And be careful of burning nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you are certain that it does not penetrate.
And then heal the place until it is cured.
And if the place is sealed and the matters are cut off from it and remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
And if the matters are not eliminated from it, then know that they are penetrating into the flesh or causing corruption in its interior, or something of those causes will bring recollection to its place.
Chapter 37.
Here is the translation:
When in the warts there is pain from friction or from great wetness, and because of that the skin of the patient becomes inflamed, then let him cauterize that upon the warts with a cautery on each wart with a nail cautery, by which there will be recollection.
And let them cauterize it strongly with the second one a little lower down, so that there will be three linear cauteries, and then they will be more beneficial for healing.
Chapter 38.
Here is the translation:
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to friction and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that in the most inferior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and with another cautery on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let it be a nail cautery as it has been described.
Chapter 39.
Here is the translation:
When there is friction and moisture in the membrane, and because of that it is prohibited in pregnancy, and the menstruation of the woman is corrupted and delayed, and there is pain due to the holding of them, then let the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let it be a nail cautery.
Chapter 40.
Here is the translation:
When moist mucous humours are poured out at the part of the elbow, and it is caused by the settling of its own place, and the sign of this is that the bone is prolonged beyond the others when compared among themselves. And the place of the dislocation is blocked in where it is bent.
Therefore, let the patient be cauterized on the part of the elbow by the patient with a circular cautery, after you have probed around the circuit of the part as it is turned, and because of that the part falls on the middle of the circle.
And let it be the cautery of which has been described in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if that cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be done according to the amount of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that until it is cured.
Chapter 41.
Here is the translation:
When there is pain in the part of the elbow, and it is caused by friction and moisture, and the patient is cured by that which we have said and does not comply, and it is old, then let him draw out the patient from thick humours with putrid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with medicines that burn, or cautery with fire.
Let it be done according to two known manners, of which is one that you cauterize that on the part of the shoulder with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do it in those good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if it is a large nail cautery or olive-shaped.
Let it sometimes be the cautery on the middle part on the head of the elbow so that there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, that it may be a containing circle and burn the thickness of all the tendons.
And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is attached to the anus and not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the place to which you direct the patient's attention that hurts; and with one cautery over the ankle for four days a little bit towards the wild side.
And if you are using a knife cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
And if you direct the patient' attention that the pain is extended into the place near the feet, then cauterize there where you direct with a cautery for three days or four or more if needed.
And if the patient directs your attention that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife cautery.
And in every cautery beware that you do not go too far with the cautery to the point of burning nerve or major artery, and that because of this to you is the patient badly harmed or paralyzed.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the ankle and went too far in the cautery, and the bed fire got into the leg, and it was perforated and rotten all through the leg. And then he died a terrible death of stomach ache, and then came his death.
And if the pain is in two places, then cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise say in the cautery of anus cautery, of which this is the manner: make it like a ring of iron, of which the thickness should be half a palm; and its hole according to the thickness of a finger bone or less a bit.
And within that circle there be another third; and the space between them be the length of the nail of the thumb; and those circles be open on two sides; and the length of those rings be the length of one or two nails, and make on the edge of those rings decently bent apparatus in the form of circles; and this is the shape:
Then let it be heated in the fire until it reddens and shoots out sparks, and then let it be placed over the part of the anus where the patient lies on his side. And so cauterize that with three round cauteries in one go.
And let it lie there for three days; then let that be plastered with pitch and let the wound remain open for a few days; and then let that be healed with ointment until it is well.
Albucasis says: O children, we have used this type of cautery sparingly for fear of it, and because few have been found who know how to use it.
But those who are good at cauteries and understand them well will find the spot of him who suffers from them.
But cautery with healing herbs is that you make two circles having a perforated armlet in which there will be the hook of the iron door; and the length of the parts in their naturalness are two nails or quarters those.
And if the space between them is the thickness of the thickness of a finger; and they are open below and above, and they are such that they contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
And then place over the part of the anus where the patient lies on his side, and press your hand upon the part of the anus; then take a tail of water and pour it between the two circles, and let its quality be heated little by little with fire, and suffer the patient to feel the biting and squeezing of it — for he will feel biting as well as squeezing — until that biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all around the anus with warm water.
And let it lie there for three days and place pitch over that so that the blackness of the biting is softened, and let him lie that way for some days, and pus will flow from him; this is the last in healing.
And then heal that with ointment until it is well.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make him lie in such a way that water contains him just as it is done to the anus with ointment.
And this is the manner of hot water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise on the refining of medicines. Take of alkali and of unslaked lime of both half a part one, and pound them and place in a new pitcher of which the bottom is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into him.
And place below the bottom of the pitcher another pitcher hollowed out, and pour over that alkali and quicklime with warm water in which you collect that with your hand by good compression, and let the pitcher that drips from him pour hot water into the lower pitcher.
And then adjust all that water and pour it over the other quicklime and another alkali renewed, because that hour is a strong fire-damping, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cautery of the other members, for that operation makes fire.
And with some medicines by which is cauterized widely, as well as theriac and honey of honey and soap that are mixed.
And Gualia heard from one of the ancients the operation and the cure by which is cured pain of anus and sciatic nerve, and magnified much from that, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed in a day so with a bath and eye-water, for he felt that very much from that.
And let it be taken from certary berry, and if not, fig juice; and let it be pounded with a little salt and let it be placed over the anus where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
And let it lie for the amount of three hours, or for the quantity that the patient feels biting of it.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is heated, immerse him in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it does not hurt anyone to use cautery with these medicines except that the body be evacuated.
But Ja Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized, he should be given a bath; and let the cautery be done to him according to this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the big toe and the toenail.
And then take dry goat horn and inflame that with fire; and then place it over the wool and let it lie until it is softened. And then repeat that, and do not cease doing that until the biting of the pain came into the anus and ceased.
And this manner of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter 42.
Of cautery for pain in two places.
Some pains are in the back from many causes, like from constipacion or piercing or from excessive evacuation, and for such causes resembling, from infusion of warm and moist material.
And cautery does not help except in this one kind which is made by infusion of warm material.
Therefore, let him, then evacuation of the patient with pills that are made and resemble them, that they are made over the back in the place where there is pain, three lines according to the width of it, for you have a tent in each line, cauterize or perhaps, according to the amount that he sees of the tolerance of the patient and of its strength.
And a cauterization should be performed with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries in the shape of a nail:
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gangrene.
This disease often occurs in young children, and the sign of its beginning is that constriction occurs on them in the armpit, and elevation and movement in the groin.
And you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the bones of the neck that is already starting to stick out above the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery in the following shape: that takes up the entire width of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize around the edge of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And let the points be close to each other.
Then heal the area inside with what we have said.
However, be careful that the cautery is not administered to gangrene that was caused by a spasm of a nerve.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when gout from a cause of friction is healed with the manner of healing and the pains are not removed, then it should be cauterized.
And you cauterize that in order to create an evacuation around the edge of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And let the cautery be olive oil, and this is its shape:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains are pushing into the veins or the other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize that over each vein with three or four cauteries of the entire width using this olive oil cautery.
And if many cauteries of these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but merely touch the surface of the skin lightly.
And if the pains are pushing into the vein and the spine, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called sciatica, then point with the cautery around the edges of the joints where they are as they rotate, point in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the edges of the joints over each knuckle and over the palm.
And if the pains are pushing up the fingers or the muscles, then cauterize all of the edges of the joints.
And do not evacuate the patient of good food and medicine, for if good food and medicine are taken and gangrene is evacuated with this cautery, then it will heal, God willing.
Chapter 45.
Of cauterization for broken bones.
When you see a break in the angles and tears inside the intestines in front of the chest, and this is how it starts, then order the patient to stop eating for one day and to use laxatives so that the split ends from his belly.
Then follow the patient between your hands over his spine, and command him to have his belly inside that is split or for the intestines or hernia to appear.
Then return that with your fingers and show the break on the bone of the arm by indicating the end which is similar to the upper half of the circles of the parts of the body.
Then heat the cautery of which this is its shape:
until it becomes red and blistered. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then pause the cautery over that indicated with your hand with a straight cautery, and hold it there until you see the bone of the arm inside the hollow of the elbow; and repeat this another time if you have not achieved anything in the first attempt at the bone.
And carefully observe the effect of the hernia during the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn the hernia so that over the patient it does not come to death or another great malady.
And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will not succeed.
And let the cautery of children be subtle according to their age and size.
Then heal the spot of the cautery for three days with wine until the scar of the burn is healed.
Then heal that with the other remedies until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the spot is sealed and healed over.
And let him stop eating according to the length of time of his healing, which is how the belly splits, and that the hernia does not come out again from the effort of healing.
And then when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a decently made bandage and have that for another 40 days.
And let him abstain from work and from eating and drinking violently, for when he uses this healing remedy entirely it will heal.
And I will direct the healing of the breaks in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and let it not be tight, then cauterize that break with a red-hot cautery according to its quantity, and heal that with what we have said, and do not press it.
And now I will say the first one that is to be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, for it is indicated with the touch:
And there is stopped a line that goes through the length of the split above the hernia, and another line below it; and when you pause your hand with an iron cautery, however, the first cautery is milder and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization for torpor.
When you see in any members swelling or pain and the pain persists for a long time and there is no improvement with remedies, then let it be cauterized with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery of each member be according to its magnitude and smallness, its paleness and darkness, the location of torpor and pain in it.
Then if it is healed by the first cautery, let it be; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for usually from those pains there are punctured in a member that member is healed by the cautery.
Chapter 47.
Of cauterization for leprosy.
Let the lepers be cauterized in some places with a cautery for great healing, and maggot if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
And when you wish to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is dry and has that cured with what we have said in the division, and do not let them, nor this, and fear over the patient that the corruption does not understand all his body and all his complexions, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: with one in the middle of the head, and with the second below it, from the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and with one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finish your hand with the cauteries a little inside where it imprints on the bone, and of it are displaced the skins, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize over the wound as it has been preceded.
And if the leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries on both knees, and with two cauteries on two spine of the neck, and with six cauteries on the spines of the back, and one large one on the spines near the tail, and one on the tailbone, and with two on the hips, and one on each hip, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and cauterize him on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and on every talon of his feet, and on the sockets of his hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the talus that you do not burn those.
And sometimes one cautery is applied on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the anus.
And know that as you apply more cauteries, it is more beneficial and more conducive; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as the eggs do, because his body is already stupefied.
And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the specifications of the tools.
And then cure the cautery with flour of ground oats with honey and with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 48
Of cauterization for stupor.
When a member is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the tendon a little. And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a stupor is cauterized which extends to the hands and feet, and to the spines of the back, and sees the movement of the nerves which move that member, and the stupor is restored.
Do not presume about this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves which move all over the body.
Chapter 49
Of cauterization for albaras that is morphea.
When albaras is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize it with a cautery, a little according to the thickness of the tendon, so that the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color of it changed.
And then cure it with flour of oats and lentils with rose oil and leaves of alder, and with pigeon's blood or thrush's blood; let each be a portion and all mixed together, and then let it be bound up in a cloth and placed over the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 50
Of cauterization for cranc.
When a ulcer is formed and you want it to fester, then cauterize it with a cautery of circle in its circumference as it is rolled over.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but for me this has not been seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have seen it some times.
And it is more appropriate that it should be cauterized in its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with pointed cauteries.
Chapter 51
Of cauterization for adubilati.
When some adubilati is delayed in maturation, and also because of the superfluousness they make that, or due to the condition of the patient, for he is old in decrepitude, of little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten in the maturation of adubilati; then cauterize it in its circumference with small pointed cauteries; and then let it be bound up that it will hasten in maturation.
But if you want the piercing of it with cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it: and apply that to the middle place of adubilati so that it may penetrate the tendon.
And if the cautery in that place which is lower, so that the body of the arm is relieved; and then cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 52
Of cauterization for corrodent.
Corrodent is a corrupting ulcer walking in the member, which corrodes that as fire eats dry wood.
Therefore if you see that corrodent in the place which suffers cautery with fire, then you ignite small and large cauteries according to what is appropriate in that place where corrodent is.
And then cauterize it all over so that you eradicate all of the corrosion and not leave any cause of it.
And then let that be bound up for three days, and apply over the cauterized places a poultice of mixed oil so that the scars are all eradicated and all corruption.
And then cure it with generative ointments.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow and is healthy where there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which is rotten in the places of corruption.
And corrodent is treated sometimes with sharp medicine because it is a middle place for cautery. But still cautery with fire is the most efficacious remedy.
And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you see it has a tendency to fester.
Chapter 53
Of cauterization of claws and of the others similar.
Many times it extends to the parts below the foot of the patient who is called claw, and it is a great cause, penetrating, which pierces the foot; and cauterize in those is according to two manners, therefore cauterize with fire and cauterize with water mixed with tail.
But cauterize with fire is that you ignite the cautery bent similar to a pen of vulture, which is made of iron according to the amount which contains the claw all over, and let it be of subtle edges.
And then apply that ignited over the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circumference of the claw so that the cautery extends to the depth of the claw. And let that be bound up for three days until it begins to emit arm. Then apply a plaster made of wild mallows bruised with salt, and let the plaster remain on him for one night, for that will draw out from its roots.
And then heal the wound with generative ointment until it is healed.
And if it does not turn, and you see many times a swelling on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cautery with water through a cannula made of reed or iron or vulture's feather, and place that over the nail; and drop a little water into the cannula, and hold your hand there, and you revolve it all with compression of your hand, and press the edge of the cannula to the root of the nail, and draw out the water through the root of the nail; and let the patient bear the biting of the water for an hour, and then pull that away, for the nail with its roots will be drawn out.
And thus you do with all those who come to you, no matter where they are in their bodies.
And then heal the pus that the roots of the nails are drawn out with ointments that generate flesh.
Chapter 4
Of the cautery for trembling.
When you have a tremor caused by friction on the nerve, or from fever caused by friction, or for other similar causes, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or with five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and cauterize in the feet of him, and on his stomach with olive oil.
And the trembling of him will cease and hasten the health from the disease of friction.
Chapter 50
Of the cautery of white spots on the body.
When in the body white spots appear and pustules are broken which are made from thick corrupt matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, let that be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with a branch of myrtle, the extremity of which is spread with fire; or with long-leafed nettle; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of their emission according to this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken by doing those, and healed from those.
But let that be done rather with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 60
Of the cautery of a flow of blood caused accidentally by incision of an artery.
Sometimes there is a flow of an artery which is cut under the skin, or under the incision of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and others like it, and that is difficult to stop.
Therefore when it happens to anyone, then you tie it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and place on that your index finger, which narrows that a little within so that the flow of blood is stopped under your finger, and does not come out.
And then place on it olive oil cauteries few and large, by many numbers, and exhale over them so that there are many sparks.
And then take one small or large according to the site and the place in which the artery is broken, over that vein hasten the pus that you have stopped with your finger, and cauterize it so that that blood is bound and restricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery tightly bound on the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease doing that again and again until the blood is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerve which is there, and that another malady come on the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to restrict the blood in those except by one of four ways: or by cautery as I said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted, its extremities are burnt and the blood is restricted; or that it be bound with a ligature or with a band by strong compression, or that there be laid on him medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they are compressed with a compress by decent constriction.
But he who administers decent restriction to him with bandages and compression with garments or by position of burning causes and of others like it does not confer but tar.
But if that happens to anyone and the physician is not present or medicine, then open with your index finger over the orifice of that vein as I have said, and understand at great constriction on him until the blood is stopped from the supreme part of the artery; and on the artery let your finger not be bitten; and from over the artery let it be sprinkled with water rubbed by much rubbing so that the blood becomes congealed and engrossed; and cease doing that only when he needs cautery or medicine.
Of incision and piercing and opening and of phlebotomy and of sores and their likes.
We have already said in the first chapter of all diseases in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and we have ordered the chapters from the superficiality of the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter by that medical way so that it is alleviated for the patient, then on him who has demanded it.
And before I begin that, let us understand that in this chapter is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for that which is in him great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is evacuation which is by blood from which life is removed, or by sprinkling of the vein or incision on an abscess or opening of an ulcer or piercing of stone or like things. And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their legs death comes.
And I admonish you that it does not fall on you in which there is excrementation, for some times by habits of men many diseases happen. And from them there are who go away by their disease and death comes to him, and so by the vehemence of that which finds him of his disease, and by length of his disease, and by disease it is fear which means death.
And from them is he who gives to you his word and promise, you waiting for that health, and his disease is harmful.
And therefore do not consent to him who comes to you in this manner; and your caution be greater than confidence and your rashness; and assume no cause on that unless certain science verifies it for you, and to which follows laudable success.
And use in the cure of all your diseases of prediction and indication of him to whom is converted health, for in him is your help in acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh children, may God guide your understanding and not hide from you direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
And you have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to that which preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head into the feet, so that it may be to you lightened what you demanded of that and of which you have necessity.
Chapter first:
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this sickness many times is due to the nursing and when the nurse squeezes the infant's head it becomes relieved.
And sometimes because of a hidden cause which isn't cleansed.
But I have not seen this sickness except in infants; and to all those whom I saw it befell death, and for this reason is to me left working on them.
And I have seen an infant whose head which was filled with water, and his head always swollen as much that he could not move himself because of the great size of his head, and more than the moisture increased as much that deadly fire.
And this humidity either is aggregated between the skin and bone, or is aggregated below the bone over the brain.
Because the operation on him if the humidity is between the skin and bone and the pustule is small, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in its breadth, and let the length of the fissure be about two inches so that the humidity may flow, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the pustule is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, sign of it is that you see the comissures of the head opened and the water is squeezed when you compress it with your hand to those openings, and it isn't hidden from you. So that you make in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
and then extract all the humidity from it; and then close the fissures with bandages and plasters; and then anoint over it with wine and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the ligature and cure the wound with tentwires and ointments, and bind up the head with equability; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And is another manner of incision which consider the appearance of the size of the pustule and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the pustule appears and the gathering of water, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you not cut the artery and it would bring forth blood streams and kill the patient through that blood flow with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When due to some catarrh or phlegm to the ears or feet, and it is old, and does not confer in that the cure of the medicines, then the last cure for this is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to cut those which the patient's head passes through it, and then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then bind up the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where pulses the vein, and the places of each upon the places which are near the ears depressed, and as much are hidden except in some men.
And then mark upon the artery with a tentwire, and then cut each with the spatula of each part cut through to the bone, and let it be for the breadth of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts beneath them.
And let the length of the incision be about two inches and a half, for when some vein is cut the blood flows out with pulsating emission, which leaps forth by frequent leaps.
But if the artery does not appear to the feel, then let you measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three inches and a half, and then mark with tentwire, and do this through to the bone.
And that which should come out of blood is quantity of wine ounce., and strongly it comes out from him more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the strength of the patient and of the gathering of the artery from him.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if remains on the bone some cause of the brain, then cut it so that it does not bring forth pustule cautery.
And then bind up the wound with plasters and with ligatures of cloth, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter iii.
Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When due to some happens emigration ancient or catarrh gotten because of humidities phlegmy and for quality in the lacerts from the temples, or gout ancient violent and similar to those, and is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not confer, then we have shown in these sicknesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cautery of them as we thus show.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of them is that the patient passes through the temples; and understand to the artery apparent in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden except in few men by violence of rubbing.
And if it is hidden to you, then the neck of the patient be bound up with some cloth, and then rub the place with rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until you appear to you the artery evidently. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scorch the skin with it with facility until you come to the artery; and then you go on it gently and extract it from the parts uppermost as you have extracted it from the skin and discovered those of the tunics which are below that, all over the part.
But if the artery is slender, then wrap that with the extremity of the needle, and then cut from it one part according to the quantity for which are drawn out the extremities of him and are contracted, and no blood will flow, for if not are cut they would not drive away the blood at all.
And then evacuate the blood with wine ounce. in three.
And if the artery is great, then let you ligature that in two places with strong thread of linen or with cords long, and do not cut him putrefaction before the solidification of the wound and bring forth flow of blood.
And then cut the superfluity which is between two ligatures, and do this in that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cautery it with cautery within the bone with cautery knife so that they are cut through to the extremities of him, and be in place of that wound done.
And is better work unless the patient has fever or is of heated complexional for cautery is of those causes which aid to the phlegmy humours, and therefore is better in youth.
And here is the first sentence of your text to translate: "E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e apropri sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat."
And if while you are working you see bleeding from the artery, then you should try to restrict that bleeding, either with a cautery, or by plugging the wound and tightening your hand around it until the bleeding stops. And if you don't have any of those available to you, then place your finger on the site of the bleeding and hold it there until the blood congeals. Then use a piece of cold water to stop the pain and tighten the wound up tightly with a bandage.
And when you are removing an artery it is best to cauterize the vein with this two-pointed cautery; after you have probed both ends and found that they are not connected, light them both until they are red hot so that as they cool down they will shrink around their edges and close off the part in between.
This is how the cautery should be made:
And it should have two equal points. However if it is sharper than two points, that is better, because when you press the two points into something they will close off the flesh more quickly.
So if there is any thickness in them, it is necessary for the fire to spread into those parts and cut off the flesh more quickly.
And this action is better in all actions and the most gentle.
And it should be the distance between the two points, equal to the thickness of your finger.
Chapter four:
Of the treatment for acute and acidic wounds in the bowels.
When they are acute and acidic wounds, and it is the cause of those veins which appear on the forehead of the head, and there is no use in applying any medical treatment to them, and you see the patient's face turning red and feeling as if it was crawling with ants, and his eyelids become swollen, and his eyes damaged by the intensity of the tears, then the old treatment for these is to apply a poultice.
And you should command the patient to shave his head, and then cut three gashes in his forehead evenly spaced according to the length of his forehead. And if the length of one finger is two fingers: the first cut should be evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tear ducts, and the third from the other side.
And be careful to avoid cutting into any arteries that are on either side, and stretch your hand out along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each cut is three fingers length apart.
And if you have a sponge or dry rags that you can use to soak up the blood.
Then insert the sponge between the two acute ends like so, and this is how you should make the cut: from the temple towards the second cut. Scrape away the flesh between the two cuts with a chisel, and then push down on the cut from the middle towards the second cut. Then press it down and insert another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other, into the first cut again.
And hold the sharp side against the flesh attached to the bone, and the blunt side against the bone, and push it down so that it reaches the middle cut, and sever with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the bowels.
But make sure the cut is continued past the bone, and then do the same in the middle cut towards the other cut.
And when the blood has stopped flowing as much, press out the places where the blood is congealed.
Then insert some old bone into each cut, and put on a poultice made of ground up eggs in wine and oil, so that it does not develop an abscess.
On the third day loosen the bandages and give a strong poultice of water or tea, and then treat it with basil oil and other remedies so that the wounds heal.
Chapter Five:
Of the treatment for wounds with a cautery and to the bowels that descend from the sides of the head.
When the cauteries are applied and continue, you see the patient's eyelids become swollen, and their eyes weak and painful, and an intense throbbing pain in the head, then understand from these signs that the matter and cauteries are coming from some small veins that descend from the sides of the head.
And the best treatment for these is to command the patient to have his forehead shaved, and then cut a single gash in the middle of his forehead, starting from the left temple and ending at the right temple, so that it reaches the bone, and stretch your hand out along the tear ducts which are swollen because of the chewing.
Soak up all the blood with a sponge or dry rags, and then pack the wound between the two lips of the cut with old bone or lint. Then press it down with a poultice made of ground up eggs in wine and oil, so that it does not develop an abscess.
And when you have removed that and see that the abscess has diminished, then scrape away the bone so that it starts to produce new flesh, and then treat it with an astringent remedy which causes the flesh to shrink, as if you were taking flour from wheat and gum arabic, mixing them together in equal parts, and applying this poultice on the wounds of new flesh.
Chapter Six:
Of the treatment for what is cauterized in the ears.
All cauteries to the ears are one of four types; some are made of stone, like iron or vitriol, others from plants like celery or peas, and some are caused by something combustible, like water and wine, and they resemble each other.
And so when a stone cautery is applied to the ear or some other cause that does not form in the ear, and you see the cautery, then hold the ear to the sun, and if it seems hot, then distill something into it made of oil of violets or myrrh, and then apply the extract on it, and make the patient sneeze a few times. Then put on the edge of the ear some lint or wool, and stretch out the ear to either side, because many times it is torn by these causes.
And if it has not been torn, then apply an extract to the cautery with a tool called a very fine curved needle; this is how it should be made:
And if it has been torn with a needle, then it is; and if not, then apply the extract to it with a very fine hooked needle.
And if it has not been torn by that, then make a tube of wire and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close up the opening of the tube with wax and warm oil so that there is no discharge except through the tube. And then pull out your breath with strong suction as you have seen with us.
But if it is not removed in this manner, then take a little bit of lit charcoal or a burning brand and place it at the end of the bone and then wrap a bandage decently over that spot. Then insert it into the hole in the ear with ease, and dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not removed with all the causes that we have recounted, then you must cut it before it becomes an abscess or ulcer.
And the way to cut it is that you first numb the patient's ear with wine and then draw out the blood according to his condition, and then fold the ear between your fingers and turn it upwards, and make a small hole at the root of the ear above its gray part in the spot that has been well pinched. And the hole should be moon-shaped so that it reaches the stone; and when you have found the stone, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the hole quickly, and heal it until it is well.
And if the cause of the ear is one of the fats that have grown and become inflamed, then administer treatment and remove it; but if it does not obey your treatment, then take a thin spatulum according to this shape: and use it to perform the incision of that fat which has grown in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in a little bit, and then pull it out with pincers or with a thin instrument, or with an incision as we have said, for it is easier to remove it.
But in the water that has entered the ear if the patient uses a sneeze at the beginning, and fills his ear with an old cloth, and then spits over the ear where the water is, and if it is removed by this, it is good; but if not, then take some thin stones according to the length of your finger, heat them in the fire for a little, and let the patient insert one of these into the hole of his ear and suck with another stone over the stone that is inside the ear. So do not stop this until all the water is removed.
So do not stop this until all the water is removed. And when the water is completely gone, take some paper or a piece of cloth, and insert one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burned.
Then insert another piece of cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is removed; and then use the straw as we have said with the stone extractor.
But in the extraction of a bee that has entered the ear, if it is small like a fly and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing whose cause appears in the membrane of the ear, then administer its removal with instruments and pincers, and the cause of it is usually pus from all the other causes that affect the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm that has grown in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillation, and your treatment does not succeed, then see that you examine the ear in the sunlight.
And so if you see there any cause of the worms, then pull it out with instruments or with fine pincers; but if you see no cause, then take a straw which is narrow below and broad above, and whose shape is as follows: And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck it out with a strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
But if it does not obey your treatment, then stop up the hole around the straw with wax as we have said; then administer distillation as the ancients have practiced in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatment of distillation.
And your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear is done with this instrument of which the shape is as follows: And make it of silver or brass, narrow below and broad above, with a small hole in it, and flat on top.
And so be careful that it is in the cavity of the straw, where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it decently at its end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the straw or suck in some herb, or whatever medicine from these into the straw — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with a grip above and squeeze it with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the straw and the patient feels the oil within him.
And what has been poured into the ear has already been warmed by fire a little. And be careful that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not endure that.
Chapter 7.
Of the treatment of pain in the ears.
Many times some children suck from their mothers' bellies and do not pierce them, and this happens in some men as well, with pain in the middle of the ear due to cold or due to a wound in that part; and this pain is sometimes caused by an obstacle in the hole of the ear, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the middle, which does not affect the membrane, is in the more difficult dispositions to heal.
And when you have achieved the membrane, see that you hold the ear towards the sun and examine it. And so if you see obvious swelling, open it with a thin spatula of which this is the shape:
If its end is narrow where the width is small, and one side is pointed and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two edges so that it does not injure the ear.
And if the pain is due to a wound born in the ear or in its middle, then open it with fine pincers and cut it fiercely until it is entirely exposed.
And if the pain is in the hole of the ear, then take a thin rod and heat it in the fire for a little, and then insert it into the middle of the ear.
And so if you have felt swelling with ease due to an obstruction, release the pressure of it with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place over the ear a bandage according to the amount of the width of the wound which you have wrapped around it; and do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the wound; or take some cotton wool and soak it in vinegar and powder it with ground pepper and use it; and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then remove the cotton wool and replace it with another one which you have soaked in rose oil, until the ulcerated part has healed; and then treat it until it is well.
If there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the wound, and use the other treatment which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of Athaizeel, which extends to the eyelids.
Athaizeel, which affects the eyelids of some people with moisture, and others with dryness.
Therefore, if you have them, take the am tenhalhas or am onci, and cut off their branches from the roots, and place it over the affected areas after crushing it.
But if there is pain with bleeding, then you should cauterize it with a very thin anticular cautery.
And the best cauterization is to cut and pull them out from their roots, and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
On the treatment of grandeyssa that affects the eyelids of men.
In many cases it occurs in the eyelids of men for some reason which is similar to grandissia in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called grandeyssa.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the treatment for them is that one should consider whether the grandissia is proceeding from something appearing on the eyelid and spread all over it; and the cause of this is leukemia.
Therefore, cut a slit in it according to its width, and then dig out all of it with ease so that it comes out, and then suspend it with am onci and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then you should sew it up; and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer from it because the eye restores it and the flesh grows back.
And if the grandissia is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then cut off the surface within it, and then suspend the grandissia with am onci, another that you should dig out from its roots, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is cut open because of this, then it does not matter.
And after the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and treat the wound so that it heals.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of axcirnah above the eyelid.
Axcirnah is a disease which affects the membranes of the upper eyelid, and mostly affects children, harming those whose eyes it occurs in, causing them to close their eyes because of it.
And because of this, you will see them all the time on their faces, and they sleep with their eyes closed; and the eyelids below are wet, covered in inflammation, and an apparent protuberance is visible on their eyes; and when you press it with your fingers, you feel it inside.
And one way of treating it is for the patient to place his head in your lap, and then place a cloth on him and make him take a cold bath, and make a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach all around, and then place it over the affected area and press it with your fingers from all sides so that it becomes attached; and then cut out the middle of that humidity with a pointed instrument making an incision according to its width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomia.
But in the case where you split the cord all the way so that it reaches the arcernach, for in most cases the arcernach comes about through an incision according to the shape of white grayness.
Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers on the outside and twisted between the right and left hand so that it is dispersed.
And be careful not to push into the incision with the instrument so that you do not reach the eye and loosen it.
But if you do not see arternach at the beginning of the incision, but you push into the incision with ease so that it occurs; and then extract it as we have said before; and then soak the cloths in water and wine and place them over the affected area and press them hard.
And so that it is crushed with salt and placed over the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity is removed.
And then treat it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs on the wound, then treat it with mild poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On ways of testing the eye.
When the eyelids of men are touched by being pressed down beneath their natural margin and worn out, then these affect the eye and cause ways of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or by an acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is caused by incision and suturing; or through cannas as the eye doctor says.
And so that you place the patient's head in your lap; and then turn the eyelid of the eye to the left with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part where pus is below the eyelid, and let the needle pierce above it, and what is - near the margin of the eyelid in which the hairs are - near the hairs, and pull the fiel towards the upper parts of the eyelid, and turn that to the eye doctor.
And then cut into the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs with a pointed instrument inserted through the tear gland into the smaller tear gland; and then extract the fiel and place small pieces of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and then bandage it over the eyelid with a tent, and it should be as if there is a leaf of mirt.
But however, it should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for that is different in men, for from those there occurs an incision of the eyelid a great quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then cut with the instrument over the two lines which you have drawn, and begin from the tear gland into the smaller tear gland. And if your incision is near the natural hairs as it is the thickness of a hair.
And then insert the needle in one of the two angles of the cord, and then dig it out completely, and then sew up with sutures the two lips with a thread or fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the hairs over two eyelids because of some viscous causes, if you want to do so; but if not, do not treat.
And then let the sewing of the hairs heal within three or four days, and then treat it.
And if you wish, let the wound heal after its sewing, and treat it with what dries it out and constricts it, for the eyelid is elevated because of the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of humors; but sewing is better. Therefore, know this as well as the antiques of taxanir.
But nevertheless one should be concerned about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
There is another way in the eye, and it is that you make on the eyelid a shape like a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and gathered hooks according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do this with hooks, and it is not sutured, then take a needle with thread, insert the one end into the middle of the figure, and the other near the larger tear duct, and tie both threads together evenly, and then with these elevate your hand with an equal elevation, elevate all the lid over which it is shaped as we have recommended.
Then tie the two lips of the wound together with a suture, and heal what is inside until it is well.
But if there occurs an abscess on the incision or wound, dry out that abscess with cerotum and similar ointments, and with poultices.
And in some cases the eyelid where its skin is converted, then it is necessary for you to use that which we have said of incision; but suturing in each case is more artificial.
To cauterize with a red hot iron is according to this form: And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure within as I have recounted; and then through art make two thin cane or two astles whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose breadth is less than the breadth of a spatula. And you have already cut into the extremes of each part, where you have threads.
Then tie each one with subtlety over where the superfluous eyelid skin is, and compress the cane of each part with a strong compression, and leave it for several days, for the lid will die through the compression and become blackened and rot inside until it falls off on its own.
But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers, and heal the wound inside until it is well.
Therefore when it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hair doesn’t poke out.
And this is the form of two cane which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
Of the elevation of poking hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough and poking hairs in the eye, then the operation in this case is that you take a thin needle and insert it into that delicate thread of cedar and lion, and then tie the extremes of it in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you tie another subtle thread underneath it briefly, and knot the extremes of that if you want to.
And then place the patient’s head in your lap, and be near the window so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which has the need for ingenuity, and make that penetrate the eyelid quickly while you extract that one above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair inside out and insert it into the eye, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
And then pull your hand with that one so that the hair is pulled out with the eye with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled out inside-out and the hair is not extracted, you will pull out the inside-out one to the sides with the thread which you have tied around that one, so that it is extracted from the eyebrow above.
And you will wash that one with the vision of the eye, for then you will pull out the inside-out one and the thread, and let each one and close the eye, and leave the bandage for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows on good flesh.
And if the hair is longer, then you tie a long one of the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that one, or let the one you have inserted be elevated in order to lengthen it, and then you elevate that one.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the cure of the ulcer which comes in the eyelid above.
When there is an ulcer in the eyelid, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, from poor healing of the wound or from incision or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this ulceration or is natural or accidental, and it is done by healing of the wound or from incisions or cautery, or by similarity to them badly-cured.
The manner of the operation in this case is that you split that healing and separate its lips, and place it in what is between those one fold of linen thread, and tie those ones so they are healed.
And do not use curing of it from the causes which dry out and constrict; for if you do that, return to ulceration worse than never before.
Use on that which softens as it is fenugreek, and moisten with the water in which are soaked fennel and aniseed, or anoint with oil of myrrh, and submerge that one in the bandage, and heal with that.
And the chief point of your cure is that you pierce with all ingenuity which is not healed according to the form it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is not but some rectification of ulceration that does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter .xiiii.
Of the cure of ulceration which is done in the eyelid below.
This ulceration which is done in the eyelid below, which is aptly named ulceration; and it is of one natural, another accidental.
But accidental is done by wound or by incision or cautery or by others similarly.
And the way of the operation in this case is that you take a needle with which there are two threads, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct on the left side to that on the right, so that the thread passes through both extremes of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh at the sides above with the needle and cut it with tweezers, and insert it with spatula wide. And therefore if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, well and good; but if not, take the bandage and place that on the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split the two incisions at the sides of the eyelid below.
And let the extremes of the two incisions be at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and be an angle made by them when they come together.
And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
And then stop the flesh that one by the quantity which is the width of the sharp eye below it, that one which bends the eyelid.
And then tie the separated parts and sew those with silk thread; and then heal those with what we have said of the soft medicines and of the poultices so that it is healed.
And if ulceration comes by incision or suturing or cautery, then split with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid according as it was before. Then separate the clitoris between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of hernias when it is above or below, let the operation run in him according to how it is prepared in the form of hernias and that varies in many ways.
And the wise artisans always prepare an engine in whatever way is possible for them to bring back the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what he needs of the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter .xv.
Of the cure of hernias that is in the foot.
When this adhesion happens to many men and it is solidified the eyelid up above with the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore you must insert the end of a needle underneath the eyelid, and lift it up from there, or extend that with ointment.
Then you insert the adhesion with thin spatula, which is not acute at its edges, having a small one that the patient is not disturbed because of the operation, and leave the spatula so it does not cut the eye with its acuteness.
And your insertion should be gentle enough that it excises the adhesion with ease so that the eyelid is returned according to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it, or distill in it thyme dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a sponge, and put over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then on the third day use binding causes so that it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of the cure of hernias that is in the foot and it is due to cold humor.
Know that the nail is according to two ways, either it is nervous and it is similar to a thin hard cipack; or it is not-nervous, similar to white congelated humidity, which when iron touches it, either is cut from it or the iron is put in it.
And both species do not heal except from the major lacrymal gland as long as they gradually cover the sight and prohibit light and movement of the eye.
But the way to do the incision in it is that the patient leans his head towards you, and then open the eye holes, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with iron of few folds and extend that to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert under the nail hair of horse or ox or cow, or similar, or strong gallbladder, or fold the end of the needle little by little and put that in the edge of the nail, and pierce that with the needle and bind it with gall the nail; and extend that to the parts above, and excise with the hair the side of the nail which covers the pupil. And thus you follow that with the hair until its end.
And then you insert the remainder in the root of the lacrymal gland with thin spatula or small tweezers, and cut the meat of the natural lacrymal gland so that by incision of it it does not receive continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail with only iron extended as we have said and then it is excised with lion spatula of which this is its form:
And guard that with the lion spatula which is flat and long or with tweezers you extend the nail with spatula, with gall or with iron of few folds, by which you insert under the edge of the nail, and be careful that with the spatula it does not touch the tunica cornea and there will be in it rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then the incision is put in the eye a little of salt pounded or of soda ash made of vinegar, and let it be in it until the next day, then cure that with water so that there will be healing.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it nor is it fixed in that then many times this specie of nail is cured with medicines and it is healed thus as eye and composed in division.
And if you want to excise that then open the eye of the patient and take lion spatula of iron sharpened according to this form: By spatula made of iron which is flat and long or with tweezers you extend the nail as we have said by thinness. And if you see that it is rarefied and withdrawn in which root there is inflammation, then distill from your mouth in the eye of soda ash made of vinegar or with white vinegar or salted water, and put a poultice on the eye until the next day.
And then repeat the operation on it until everything that is of it is healed except that an ulcer is in the eye because then you will cut that and cure the ulcer at the beginning so that it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on it until it is healed.
The eminence of the meat of the lacrymal gland if it is known in the eye for great harm then let it be suspended with iron; and insert that from that one part, and do not finish the incision so that you do not incite flow of tears.
And then distill in the lacrymal white vinegar made of vinegar until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the cure of hernias that is in the foot and it is due to hot humor.
Sometimes in the eye of man there is born red meat and it is over-grown so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or squeezes on the eyelids and strongly press the eyelids to the front and is assembled to bulge of marble.
But the operation in it is that the patient leans his head towards you, and then open the eye holes of him and collect all that meat with convenient tongs for that, and grab it with a pair of forceps or with a basket; and then excise the meat at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and be careful of the eye that you do not cut that because of your operation.
And let your incision be with which you insert those or with lion spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail or with small tweezers with which is collected ash according to that then this chapter.
Therefore when your incision is finished and all that meat is excised then fill the eye with salted water or distill in it red powder and similar to that of burning medicines, and put over the eye dry cloth wadded with white of egg so that there will be secured from ulceration.
And if for some cause of nail-growing there is a wound cautery and you fear ulceration cautery then cut the eye and cure that ulcer with what it comes to the ulcer, then repeat on it operation until it is healed, and similarly make in the meat which happens in the eye of this specie.
But nevertheless you should not move the whole treatment of that wound by natural or accidental means, using iron and not putting your hand into any of those operations until you see that member suffering that operation.
Here is the translation for the next line:
Here is the translation for the next section:
Here is the translation for that line:
Here is the translation:
And you shall command the patient to rest his head in your lap, and you shall suspend those veins with one or two fingers according to your judgement; and that finger should be of subtle composition according to this form:
Or two fingers gently on a body according to this form:
And the veins should be bound with gentle forces, with gentleness, and the blood wiped away moment by moment, until you see those veins being sucked back into the wound and becoming relaxed.
And be careful not to injure the wound with the spatula; and if your operation is in the afternoon facing the sun, and be steady in your operation so that you do not insert anything except those veins.
And when you have finished, then you shall distill in the wound head vinegar or wine so that with its sharp nature it may corrode what is sucked out of the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to collect it all at that time, then you shall dress it with whatever alleviates his pain, and let him rest for a few days until his pain is alleviated and he is healed of the wound.
And repeat this according to how the matter requires until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter 19.
Of the reduction of hernia in the nose.
When you cure hernia with cautery or sharp medicine according to how it is preceded in the narrative and it is not healed, then do not leave anything in him but split over the hernia after removing its maturity, and draw out all the moisture which is in him and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And therefore when the bone is exposed and you see in it corruption or blackness, then you shall scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named from a hard head, and let it be made of iron, and the head should be round like a needle which should be made pointed by filing or honed to a fine point (thus as it is in the following form).
And place that on the corrupted spot of the bone, and you shall turn it between your fingers, and press your hand gently bit by bit until you know that the corruption is removed.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh grown in it and the body has withdrawn from the sania and healed after 40 days, and it is not renewed and there is no hernia and no accident happens to it, then you know that it is healed.
But if not, then there should be nothing left in it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and that you scrape according to bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take trible according to this form:
Let its outer edge be triangular, and its shank be pressed inward toward the outer edge thus.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand with the forceps so that it penetrates all the bone, and he feels the patient through pressure as he tries to stop the wind coming out through him.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines thus as it is described.
Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which poured out to the sides of the foramen returns into the nose; therefore it is pus that lies heavier on the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the eminence of a wound.
When the wound protrudes in its entirety and no harm or diminution happens in the bleeding, then you should lax the patient, and then you should hold him by the neck and suck out with good suction; and then place ventouse on the neck with scarification and sucking with strong suction; and then place liniment which is made of copper scale and aloe and myrrh, and then tighten the dressing over the wound with fine powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take rags of linen clothes, and each cloth be folded in four folds; and make those into powder.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need. And then tighten over that with a hard cloth with strong compression; and repeat the ventouses with suction without scarification; and then stop the ventouses and let the wound rest day and night.
But if in between the ligament is softened, then you should be made to be tight.
And then stop the ligament then day and night as we have said.
And if you see the wound already reduced, well and good, and if not, then repeat the dressing with the powders and the compression and the ventouses until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the incision of the eminence of the tunica uvorea.
When there is disruption in the tunica uvrea, and it is eminent and protruding out of the eyelids thus with a grain of sand, and its form is like that of a man, and you want to incision that, then the operation on it is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvrea from the lower part toward the upper part, and then insert the other needle in which there is a double thread of the tear duct, and make that penetrate and let the first needle follow its disposition; and then incision the location of the double vein and lift with that the part of the uvrea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that gently.
And then pull out the needle and place over the wound wool infused in white vinegar and let it rest until the thread falls down with the uvrea.
And then cure the wound with that which comforts that as long as the wound is healed.
And several times gather from all sides with a circle of cloth over the wound tight incision great, and then let it be pierced by the spatula subtly so that it comes to the membrane of the wound, and let the white moisture run, and let the wound descend inside.
And then tighten until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of a hernia.
This illness which is called alconati is not anything but a wound which is situated in the wound like water descending and is not that.
But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient lean forward over the hard bench and straight, and then take his head in your hands from two parts and hold him thus so that you see the wound coming to the upper parts, and then let it be dried and not descend, and let there be light, and the patient sees the causes thus as he looks.
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
But if the descending is not prepared to the sanity with what we have said, then do the patient sit between their own hands and take a thin spatula and put it over the skin covering a little bit of the conjunctive membrane into the area (enter the place you want), where the sanity is spilled out.
Then when it is spilled out, then you distill in the hole water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And let it be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter .XXII.
Of the cure of water descending from the hole.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which it is convenient to pierce with language declaring according to health.
Then you should make the patient sit between their own hands on a chair and open their hole wide, then tie it shut tightly.
Then place your left hand close to the eyelid of their eye, if the eye in which the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if it's the right eye.
And then with your right hand take alum if the eye is left; or with your left hand if the eye is right.
And then place the end of alum close to the edge of the eye by the thickness of the tear in the white of the eye towards the smaller tear duct, and push alum with force and rotate your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and you feel that alum has already reached to the cause of vision.
And so that the measure of the path of alum is of the distance from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the edge of the eye; because you see with it the pupil with the vision of the eye for the clarity of the conjunctive membrane.
And then place alum in the location where the water is, and then you drag it downward another time, and therefore if the water descends at once, then you see the patient on which eye he breaks his sight at once, and alum in their eye.
And then rest for a while; therefore if the water has descended, then you open that other channel before alum is pushed out again.
And then when it is dried and doesn' t descend, then you pull alum out with ease, and rotate your hand little by little around it, and then dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma, and with that wash the eye inside; and then stop the eye outside with cotton or a stop made of lamb's wool infused in rose water and albumen of egg white.
But us, who are from our time, put it on that combed with albumen of egg white.
And if it doesn't obey you with alum to the instrument of the eye because of its hardness — because some men have an eye which is very hard —, then take the spatula which is named albarida, of which this is the form:
And then pierce with it that conjunction, and don' t push your hand into the hole too hard, and it is enough if you make a way to alum in a subtle place.
And then put alum in as we have said.
And after you have completed your work, the patient should be prepared for a sleeping descent, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And place in nature for him so that his nature is made smooth, and don't turn his head to the right or left at all.
And then let him rest according to his disposition on the third day.
And then release him from that dark room and wash his eyes with warm water, and let him see some things, and then return to rest on the seventh day.
And don't do this in the hour of the cure or at once the infusion. Before you take him away for so that the water can leave freely and gently with a little precaution.
But if pus occurs in the eye, then open the eye on the seventh day and correct it with water that reduces the pus.
Then you wash his eyes and place over his face orally so that the heat of his face rules his eye for a few days, him existing in the dark room.
And then let him walk gradually and talk with people.
And know that in surgery not all pupils are excused from vision some channels, and then you should be careful about the operation.
And it is already known to us from some of those who are in the Artach , and some say that made fire in Ayrac when the magdaam was perforated with which water is sucked out.
But however I have not seen it done in our land, nor has it been read in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaam for that which is above those who ignore them:
And they are made of ram or of iron properly, and the extreme parts of them with this subtlety triangular, the acute extreme so is the form.
Chapter .XXIV.
Of the cure of swollen nose.
When in the nose are grown diverse meats united of which is some cause which is attached to scorpion of mots feet, or to polyps, and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented. And from it is swollen meat, scaly, of dusky color; and from it is that there is lion meat not of dusky color.
Then in that which is in these meats not fraudulent or cankerous, you should make the patient sit between their own hands and placed in the sun, and open his nose, and push your finger in those meats. And then pull it out to the broken holes, and then you burn that which you have understood with a subtle instrument of one hole in which know all meat is removed; if from it any cause of which the incision is possible, then you do it with the ease of one of the subtle instruments. But if it bleeds with pus or occurs in the eye, then you place on it that which you have; or is of malignant apostemas, then cut and cauterize that in which it is cut pus and are healed the holes altogether.
And then let it be drained from the nose also after the incision with wine or water or vinegar. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then know that it is healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate according to that which is covered, then you know that inside it is swollen meat in the bones of the nose from which no incision has been made.
Then you see if in the one which there is any thickness, and nipple on it with fingers, and place between each nail the quantity of the finger or less, and push into the nose and enter an extremity of the needle in the nose for the ray or another cause by which it is possible to it.
And after that is done, let him breathe in so that it goes into the channels of the nose, and he breathes out over his throat, for troops look like this action do children in schools, and is a distant cause to that which wants to be done.
Then tie the two ends of the gallbladder, one end coming out over the nose and the other going into the nose, and administer a cauterization of flesh with the nails that are in the gallbladder, and do this until you know that the flesh is cauterized at the nails of the gallbladder.
Then extract the gallbladder and in the nose apply an abstraction of blood with a cautery, and do this for three days or more until the cautery has corroded all that is rotten in the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, insert a lead cane into the nose for several days until it is healed.
But if you have a more effective cure, use that instead.
And this is the form of the instrument for an emetic that draws oils and medicines into the nose:
And do this with silver or brass, which should be similar to a small lamp, also with a small cavity and the spout similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the spout of the emetic instrument should be flat and uncovered; it should have a handle at its rear end, with which you can draw oils or waters that you want from suckable fluids and causes.
Chapter 25.
Of wounds in the ends of the nose.
Many times a wound occurs in the ends of the nose, and it increases and swells for several days until something is put on it to heal it.
And by that time you should have applied the beginning of its appearance, and you should have removed all of that. Then apply over the site a cautery or burning medicine which is in the location of the wound.
But if its beginning is delayed until it has become magnified, then consider whether it is suppurating, hard, of dusky color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron, for this suppuration often brings great harm to the person upon whom you are doing it.
And if the suppuration is of a painful nature and not of dusky color, and its beginning is possible in everything, then evacuate the patient and do it without fear, and treat the site with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by pus or by similar things.
Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer about this operation except in some men.
Therefore, when for some cause of those you consider that it is fresh pus with its blood, then join the two lips of the pus with a suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then cut each party of the visible tendon within which the blood flows. Then join the two lips with a suture and strengthen those, and over them pulverize dragon's blood and pounded vinegar, and place over the powder a pad of diaphoretic plaster, or one of the other plasters of consolida tion, and let that lie for two or three days, and then remove that plaster and change that plaster, and let it lie until the wounds by themselves are healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have mentioned in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with gallbladder as we have made known to you.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts within.
Many times in many men in the divided parts of their lips there are some suppurations hard and resembling grass, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Therefore you should convert the lips and cut each one of those hardnesses throughout its whole part, and then fill up the incision with powdered sage within so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the site with something that is astringent until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of incision of the flesh joined in the gums.
Many times there is upon the gum joined flesh which the ancients called albus, therefore you should suspend that with an ointment or have that with forceps and cut that after its root, and let the pus run or the blood.
Then apply over the site powdered sage or other styptic or astringent powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it secondarily, and cauterize it, for by cauterizing it will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of extraction of teeth with iron.
When upon the surface of the teeth in the divided parts within and between the gums are joined rough, sharp, and some times black escorsions and the teeth are made green or yellow, and within the gum is seen corruption and the teeth are made black.
Therefore you should make the patient open his mouth between his hands and push down his head toward his chest, and cut the teeth in which those escorsions appear and the causes seem like sand so that no cause remains within, and do this of the blackness and of the yellowing and of the others until they are cleansed.
Therefore if that which is in the beginning of the root is rotten, well then; but if not, then you should repeat the incision over those another day and the second and the third until it comes to its final state in whatever you want.
And know that teeth have need of many different knives with diverse shapes and figures according to the preparation for your operation. And therefore the knife with which the tooth is cut from the divided part within is another than the knife with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of knives should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter 30.
Of uprooting teeth.
Let the tooth be cured from its pain by all means and delayed in every uprooting of it, for there is no cause that supplants its existence when it has been uprooted, for it is a sublime substance within which is an excuse in its uprooting.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth uprooted, you should certifiably know which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth and you uproot it and then the pain does not cease until the painful and sick tooth is uprooted, for we have seen this through operation of the barbits.
Therefore when you are certified which is the painful tooth and know it well, then cut in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some verticity, so that it is dissolved from the gum throughout its whole division, and then maul it with your fingers or with slender forceps little by little within until you have reached it.
And then pull out the teeth with force using a strong plier or instrument, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that he does not bite you, and then treat the tooth according to its position so that you do not break it or cause the patient greater pain.
And if it is not dislocated, then take one of those instruments and put it under the tooth from all sides with ease and force its removal so that it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn down, then you must cover that break with a piece of cloth and grip it tightly at its base with tweezers so that it does not break when you are tightening it with pliers.
And you must open it carefully with an incision all around the gum and be very careful not to break it or tear it apart, and return to the patient so that he suffers less pain than before.
And be sure not to do what some ignorant barber-surgeons do in their foolhardiness and audacity during tooth extractions; for they do not administer what we have recommended, and many times they bring on great diseases in men which are more difficult to cure than before, and the roots of their teeth remain whole or partly intact, or they extract them with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed.
And then after the extraction let the mouth be washed with warm wine or vinegar and salt.
And if it bleeds profusely as it often does, then mix some powder of alum and sprinkle it on the wound; and if that alum does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the pliers and tweezers with which you pull out the tooth at first should have a long shank, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when you use them to work.
And let their shanks be as short as possible so that when you grip with them they do not bend; let their shanks be short.
And let them be made of Indian iron with straight shanks and let the shanks have teeth that mesh together and grip tightly; some of their shanks are shaped like a stork's beak, which is hooked, and they grip very tightly.
Chapter 31.
On the extraction of teeth and the breaking of the jaw bones.
When you must extract a tooth that is broken, then you should put on the site a poultice for one or two days until the site is softened; and then insert a forceps or pliers whose ends are shaped like a stork's beak or hooked, the shape of the pliers:
Their ends should be serrated like a file or chisel.
And if you do not obey my instructions with these forceps or pliers, then you should cut into the gum and expose all the flesh, and insert the instrument called an awl, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And let it be short with a thick shank, and not bent so that it does not break.
Then if by doing this the root is exposed, well and good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its shank end in which there should be some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and more slender end.
And now help yourself with this instrument which has two ramps whose shape is as follows: and with other instruments which are used in tooth extractions; for the aid is made with this instrument which is shaped like a large needle, and this is its shape:
The triangular end should be curved or cut short and have some thickness; let it not be bent so that it does not break.
And another variation on the instruments for teeth is to make them similarly to the others.
But the clever and skilled practitioner in this art finds for himself methods according to what his experience and diverse illnesses teach him; for there are illnesses to which the ancients did not attribute or assign proper instruments because of their various shapes.
But if the jaw bone or any other bone is broken, or if there is pus, then let it be treated at that site with what is appropriate from the instruments and pliers we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots; and help yourself with an instrument whose shape is like this:
And let there be some thickness added to it little by little, and let it be bound or held in place by the mouth so that it does not slip or leak until the bone is healed; and then dress the wound with appropriate remedies for that.
But if there is a small ulcer in the bone, then scrape away that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form because of their shape, and especially when this occurs in women, and especially in old women, then consider: if the tooth is attached to another tooth, and there is no space or room for it, then pull it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you cut it down with that instrument whose shape is like this; and it is similar to a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian iron with a very sharp end.
And make your incision in it which you will use to cut into it in several places because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not affect any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is expanded with file, then file it with an Indian iron file whose shape is like this:
And let it be all of Indian iron and very sharp; and let it have many small points like a file with which the tooth is filed little by little in several places with ease, so that no other tooth is affected and it does not break. And then line that up in its width, and cut that away with some razors.
And if that tooth whose part is broken and touches the tongue, then let you file it down until the sharp edge of that fracture is filed down and smoothed, and let it be flattened so that the tongue is not cut or speech impaired.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
When the teeth have received a concussion and removal due to impact or biting, and the patient cannot chew on it, and you have treated that with astringent remedies, and your treatment has not worked, then so that they do not become loose as they are bound with gold wire and not with silver wire, for silver becomes blackened but gold does not; and let them be bound, and after several days, but gold will not darken.
And let the wire be of such thickness and coarseness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the twist is that you take the wire and wind it twice around two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two twists of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or more, in such a way that the thread comes to the healthy tooth from the other broken tooth. And then repeat the massage in the area where you started, strengthening your hand with skill and wisdom so that there is no discomfort.
And tighten the string with which you draw the teeth roots so that it does not leak.
Then cut the ends of the superfluous thread with forceps or tweezers, and place them in each spot with gestures, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth so that it does not cause harm to the tongue. Then let that remain tight like a Roman bow.
But if it is loose or torn, strengthen it or them with another thread in the same way at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the direction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thus with their threads tied:
And when one or two teeth are pushed back into their sockets and have grown back as we have described, and they hurt again:
And it does not happen unless by a skilled and wise artist.
And sometimes it is necessary to use a bone from a cow, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth is lacking, and strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the beginning of the swelling that comes in the tongue, and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes below the tongue sometimes happens naturally or accidentally as a result of a plague which is already consolidated.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, his head being in your lap; and raise his tongue, and then cut that nervous ligament according to the width by which the tongue is released from its bondage.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and it has become so because of the consolidation of plague, then you apply an unguent and cut it where you cut the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And beware that there be no fissure in the membrane of the flesh, and that you cut through here with an incision and blood flows out.
Then wash the trace of the incision with wine vinegar or with pure wine, or with water mixed with vinegar; and then place a cotton swab under the tongue, or a bandage which the patient keeps under his tongue every night so that nothing else is consolidated there.
But if blood flows out, place a mixture of vitriol over the spot; but if pus flows out, then cauterize the spot with a red-hot cautery which is appropriate for that. And then let it be cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes it happens under the tongue an abscess resembling a small lump, which prohibits the tongue from performing its natural functions, and when it is enlarged it fills the mouth.
And the operation in this case is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it dark or black in color, hard to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch that because it is rotten.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, and there is moisture in which there is humidity, then you put an unguent on it, and cut it with a sharp blade, and cut it throughout its entire length; and if blood flows out during your operation, then you place over it a mixture of vitriol so that the blood is restrained.
Then return to your work until you have finished it, after which wash it with wine vinegar and salt, and let it be cured by the other cure for that until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the extraction of an abscess from two ears and of that which is found in the gullet, and of the other abscesses.
When you find in the gullet a swelling which is like glands which are similar to cotton, and they are discharged from the outside and are called two ears, and when you cure them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; before you remove it let that mature, and then either you will draw out that or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root of it is fine, then that is what should be cut.
And the operation in this case is that you consider before your operation whether the abscess has rested after being cauterized completely or if it has diminished by any lessening; and then cause the patient to sit facing the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open his mouth, and the assistant holding with his hand press down the tongue of the patient from above with a noble instrument, of which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or of copper, and let it be fine like a needle.
Then when you press down with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and put over that your iron weight, then take unguent and smear that on the root of it, and draw out that to the outer parts as much as you can. Another thing which you draw some cause from the membranes, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing which you draw some cause from the membranes, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form: It is like forceps except the ends of it are curved so that the orifice of each of them is in the direction of the other, being sharp, let that be made of iron hardened in vinegar.
But if that instrument is not at hand, then cut that with a blade of which this is the form: And let it be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And after you have cut one wound, cut the other according to this way of cutting, and then wash the wound of the patient with water mixed with vinegar.
But if blood flows out, then wash it with water of a decoction of bark of a pomegranate or of bayberry leaves and like that of the causes of stipting within so that the flow of blood is restrained, and then let it be cured by that until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the gullet other abscesses, and those two ears as well; and cut those according to what we have said in the cutting of two wounds equally.
And there was a woman who had an abscess which was found in the gullet of her, that abscess tended towards a dark color, with little feeling, and it had closed the gullet of her, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and already prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she was already nearing death if she did not last for one day or two.
And the abscess had swollen so that it had formed two bumps within which poured out through two holes.
Then she cut it with a sharp blade and inserted one of the tips into that abscess, and drew out that, and tied up is from her mouth a great portion, and then she cut the other wound as we have said before, and then she closed his mouth, and pressed down his tongue, and then she smeared the unguent on that abscess.
And then she cut a great portion from it, and there flowed out from it only a little blood. Then the bleeding of that woman stopped, and she immediately began to drink water and eat food; therefore I did not cease cutting out that boil several times over a long time, and then the boil appeared in another place where it was cut out, as it was growing.
Then I bandaged and cauterized his boil, therefore on the next day; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to him.
Chapter 37.
On cutting out a boil when it is suppurating.
When pus comes out of the boil and it is suppurating and long, then it is called a furuncle; and if it is at the top thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
But if it is healed with the water that we have mentioned in the previous chapter and does not respond to your treatment, and you see that suppuration continues, then be careful about cutting it, for there is danger to the patient when suppuration continues.
And when you see it according to what I have said about its whiteness and length, then make the patient fast and press his tongue with an instrument of which process has been mentioned in the incision of two teeth, and stick it into the gum and cut that with one of the two instruments of which are spoken in the incision of two teeth.
And you must not cut it unless it is above its natural limit; for if you cut more, you will hurt his jaw.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two teeth, and heal it until it is cured.
But if the patient is afraid of having his jaw cut, then use the cauterization without fear, and the manner of the cauterization in it is only with acute water; and you must place the head of the patient in your lap, and press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take the water we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and do this with a live coal, and pour that not thick nor subtle into the cavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the end of it be hollow like a spoon, in which the medicine is put as in a spoon; and place the instrument with the medicine on the boil, and let the patient lean over on his side so that saliva or mucous from the mouth does not fall back into the wound.
And with your hand hold the medicine and press it onto the uvula through the space of about a half-hour until you see it blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the jaw, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the jaw with the cloth into a tube as far as the jaw adheres to that tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula; then let it be for three or four days.
And if you find that the medicine needs to be repeated, then repeat it; and after the cauterization, cleanse around the uvula with a cloth dipped in water, and cleanse what is inside the mouth of the medicine, and let it be washed with soapwater, and let it be healed outside with ointment, and inside with gargles until it is cured.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision, and less painful from fear.
Sometimes the uvula is healed in a way that is more subtle than cauterization and incision: take gallnuts, hyssop, oregano, ruda, scilla, arabic alkanet, camomile, bromine and other herbs like them, and mix all those ingredients, or some of them, into a cake; and let the cake be cooked in a decent pot, and let there be a hole in the middle of the cake, on which is placed an instrument made of silver or iron.
And let the end be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the uvula over the glottis, until the uvula becomes very foggy.
And after that repeat on it several times until it is dried up; and beware of doing this cure during the day when there is a suppuration of boils, for then it would be too much on the boil; so you must not do this.
But if you do not have this instrument, then take a reed and tie on the end of it a cloth of hemp, so that the mouth of the patient is burned, for the cloth of hemp prohibits the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and from other causes.
Sometimes there is adhesion in the throat, or thorn of a stone or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is evident from those, on which the eye falls, when you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is revealed to you what is in the throat.
And what is not apparent and hidden in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for it is certain that the cause of the throat is brought up by vomiting; or that the patient licks a piece of soapwort or a leaf of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or that he takes a piece of dried sea sponge and chews it hard with his teeth, and then makes him vomit so that what is in the throat is extracted. And if he takes a piece of eel and chews it, and then vomits it out, or takes an onion and chews it and vomits it out, then it is extracted.
But if it is not extracted with the causes we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
Let it be thicker than a little finger, and let the end of it be hollow which you insert into his throat with ease.
And let him raise his head up, and beware of the touching of his bones in the throat, so that it does not push it into his throat, or that he touch with his hand.
But let him insert that end gently into his throat with his knowledge of the location of the cause and push it inwards, and pull out his hand with the instrument upwards, as far as it is prepared to be extracted.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood-spitting annexed to the throat.
When blood-spitting is cured with what we have mentioned in the division of the cure with medicines and does not respond, then consider after that in the throat of the patient towards the sun, for you will see that his tongue is swollen with the instrument which I have recommended.
Then if you see the blood-spitting, extract it with a small needle or with decently subtle instruments.
And if you are not able to extract it with that, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient, and after that place in the cavity of the tube an iron needle which has been heated, and do this several times (until the blood-spitting is stopped and comes out of the throat) and let the patient abstain from water for all the day.
And then take a washcloth soaked in warm water, open their mouth with it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not give them anything to drink for one hour or so with your hand, for the blood will flow immediately when they feel the water.
But if it is not cured with what we have recommended, then smoke the patient with camphor or assafetida using the instrument which we have recommended for smoking the uvula.
Do this, depending on how far gone they are.
And there is another way of operating on this: that you take a vessel in which are burning coals and the vessel be covered with a covering in the middle of which there is a hole; and the end of the instrument be placed in that hole; and then let the smoking take place; and let the patient place their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the smoking is not wasted until you know that the smoking has reached the blood, for then the blood will flow immediately.
And if it does not work, then repeat the smoking several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and let him eat salty foods and lard, and do not give them water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the gullet when it is seen; and it is like tweezers, except that there is some curvature in it. And it is placed at the gullet, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is gloved, in which there is tightened with a thread, so that when we press any spot, it does not leak.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the discussion on ulcers and their treatment.
Ulcers are of many kinds, according to what is remembered of them in this book.
And they are diverse in their penetration and section by two methods: one is by the kind of ulcer within themselves; and the other is according to what we know of their moisture.
And the second method is according to the locations in the body where they occur, for the ulcer that occurs on the head is different from the one that occurs on the tail; and the ulcer on the fleshy location is different from the one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
And there are some ulcers which do not penetrate but rather mature the pus within them, or else they are fulfilled in themselves.
And there are other ulcers which are not cut open unless their pus matures within them and they are fulfilled: these are the ulcers near the joints; for when an ulcer comes near a joint, its nature is prolonged through that which it affects of its parts, and corrupts the tendons or nerves of that joint, so that it causes contraction in that member, or else it affects the main member, and if you delay piercing it, it matures in the main member; or it is near the tail, therefore do not pierce it unless it is matured, lest it corrupt the parts within the tail, or unless it is made in the end of it so that it does not corrupt the parts within the tail and is prolonged to the parts within the tail, and a fistula be formed, or that it be made in its term so that it may not be healed. But know the time of piercing the ulcer, and then it is when it has matured.
And know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and also the lessening of heat and pulse, and the sharpening of the tip of the ulcer, and the other signs.
And know that piercing occurs at the bottom of the pus-filled location of the ulcer and from the pus coming out of the eminence of its cure.
And piercing should always be according to the length of the flesh or body, if the ulcers are on the ends of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the strings of the nerves, of the bowstrings; and finally, in all similar locations in which there is no reflection: for in those where there is a reflection, use piercing according to that member.
But when the ulcer is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay piercing it until its digestion is confirmed according to its fulfillment, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus within it will be prolonged and there will be much corruption, and often its lips are hardened and its depth increased.
But some ulcers are pierced according to the breadth of the flesh or body, or according to which member is in need.
And you should administer small piercing in small ulcers, and in large ulcers great piercing and wide or many piercings according to the difference in the size of the ulcers.
And there are those in which the vein is hollowed out and has been cut, when it is done so that bread is made, and it is made in a term so that it may not be healed, just as that which occurs in pustules and blisters.
And there are those in which it is cut with three angles; and there is that in which it is cut like the leaf of the myrrh tree, just as in the ulcers of the armpits.
And there are those in which round section and moon-like section are administered to them, and they are similar to each other.
But that one to which there is no head as in superficial ulcers, you should pierce it with superficial piercing or flat piercing only.
And when the ulcer is large and has collected much pus, pierce it and do not be afraid to draw out all the pus in that hour; take some from it at one time, and then close up the ulcer for another day, and then take more at a greater time, and do this repeatedly until it is healed.
And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit is often resolved by the discharge of pus, and often the patient dies, and you should operate on them.
Keep this chapter with great caution, and then with your piercing by which you pierce these ulcers, wash the sloughs and consider therefore whether the slough of the ulcer is small or it is a flat section, then administer the oils of lard or of rose; and if the ulcer is large and its fissures are many, then pause the nail in each crack so that they may be filled.
And if in the ulcer a part of the vein is cut or it is hollowed out within its circuit, then you should complete it with lard fat or cloth made from linen, just as when you have drawn out pus or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process it and heal it with what you will, according to its signs.
But if there is blood flow in the hour of your operation, then administer warm water and wine mixed with a cloth made from linen, and place that on the location of the blood flow many times.
But if the blood flow persists, then you should administer regimen and cure, and apply powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and in division.
But if it is in the winter time, and the location of the ulcer is the location of many nerves, then you should pour powders into wine and oil and place those on the locations.
And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should apply powdered herbs mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and let this mixture rest on the affected area for three days as we have said, and then you should open the blister and clean it and apply what is suitable for its healing.
And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of blisters in general, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each type of blister and how to treat them specifically.
Chapter 41.
Of the incision of blisters which come on the nape of the neck.
On the nape of the neck, there are small blisters, and they are made up of layers of membranes which are formed; and the layers are very thin.
And from them are bumps, and from those come blisters containing humidity similar to lime. And from them are those that contain humidity resembling powder, and resembling them; and from those are the ones that are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of these there is no fear, as the extraction of these does not cause a pulse.
And the operation in the incision of these is that you should press them with an instrument, the form of which is shown below, while knowing what they contain.
For if what it contains is humidity, then you should split it with an incision according to its length and a superficial cut according to this form:
And you should start the incision along the line from B to G. Then, when the humidity is discharged, you should scrape away the membrane that contains the humidity, and do not leave any cause of it behind, as returning troops will come back if anything is left behind.
Then you should immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that, and leave it for another day, as it will eat away at everything that is left of that membrane.
Then you should apply Egyptian ointment to the wound again and again if it needs it, until you are sure that there is no cause for the membrane left; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the blister contains a fatty nodule, then you should incise it according to this form: by making an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut between the two lips of the incision and pierce it all the way through, and exert your strength in pulling out the membrane that contains it.
But if your pulse feels disturbed, then do what I told you at first.
And similarly, do the same with the stony blister in terms of incision and treatment as we have said; and an incision on a stony blister is lighter, as it contains less blood and humidity.
And sometimes some of these blisters occur on the nape of the neck in some people, and they do not contain humidity; the cause is that one struck an old woman on the nape of her neck and found the blister there hard, rough, white, and unable to be pierced, and if someone struck it, it bled.
But in other types of blisters on the nape of the neck, this is not the case as in the blisters that occur on children's heads due to the roots of the ears, but the incision of all of them should be a superficial cut.
And make the incision of those from the lowest part of them so that the body is separated from the lowest parts.
Then heal those with what is suitable for their healing.
Chapter 42.
Of the incision of scrofula which occurs on the neck.
These blisters often occur on the neck, armpits, and angles of the joints; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck are often generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and similarly with nodes and blisters on the head as we have described.
And the nature of these scrofula is variable, as some are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, if you see good disposition in the touch, and the color of what is manifest is close to the color of the neck, and is spread out to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or the pulse, and is not deep, then you should incise it with a superficial cut from above to below from the line from G to B, and pierce it completely, and cut off all its lips as we have said in blisters on the head, and extract it little by little.
And be more careful so that no vein or nerve is incised.
And be careful not to cut with the scalpel so that it does not touch your hand with the incision, or the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to be incised; for if you incise a vein or pulse and prohibited from your operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and tighten the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the blister is relieved and the wound becomes soft and starts to discharge. When the blood has been stopped.
Then return to your operation until you have finished.
And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause for the other small scrofula, so incise them and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, then you should not incise that scrofula from its roots. First, fold a piece of cloth tightly and place it over the blister so that you see it falling down by itself without causing harm.
Then fill the wound with old oil which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
And if you have incised that scrofula completely, then you should tie the two lips of the wound and cut off as much pus as possible so that no surplus remains.
But if you see that surplus has remained due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you must incise its root, and pierce it and administer cauterization and what is said.
And those of the scrofula that contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial incision where you see the location of its maturation, and stop the piercing from what is the lowest part of the body as we have said.
Then administer cauterization, oil, and similarly to those, so that it eats away what is left of the cautery. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then heal it with generative ointment so that it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the incision of the pimple of the blister which occurs within the neck.
They have tried this incision on the pimple, and we have not seen anyone in our land who it did.
And this is the inscription of its name.
But in men who have a fever, then the extraction of the pimple should be avoided, as long as all the veins and the major nerves of the neck are not cut off.
But in those who have sores in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the brain, one must use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss that is made by piercing.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must cut the epiglottis below the three circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section according to the width in that which is between two circles in terms of quantity; the section should be in the soft tissue, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for sectioning, because it is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are light.
And if the doctor is fearful, one must sometimes extend the string of the larynx with an instrument, and then split the string so that it reaches the larynx, but avoid the blood vessels if for any reason you see them.
And then cut the palate according to what we have recounted; and it is significant about the section of the larynx by the flame which is from that exit, having been split apart and through the absence of the voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is past in which piercing is feared, sew together the two lips of the wound of the palate, and sew only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow within so that it may be healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of our speech, which we have recounted, is an explanation; that some of these sores have oppressed the larynx of the patient, and the patient has come inside to death, and his throat is choked, and someone goes to cut the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound's location by any respiration, and be saved from death.
And for this, I command that the wound remain open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and its malice lasts for three days; and therefore, then I command to sew up the wound, and cure that within which it may be healed.
And what I have seen by my servants is that a servant pressed a hot iron to his throat and cut into it a part of the stalk of the lung, and I was called to his cure, and found the mucous membrane as if it were that of a corpse, and discovered the wound and found the blood which had been oozing from the wound.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor an artery, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured that within which the fire healed.
And I did not accuse the servant unless he had spoken with his voice, and then after some days he returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the sectioning of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of sectioning upon a sore which occurs in the exterior throat, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This apostema named hernia of the throat is a great sore according to the color of the body, and occurs in women.
And it occurs in two ways; for it is either natural or accidental.
And the natural one has no means of being cured.
And the accidental one is according to two ways; of which the first is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to a sore which is made by knotting of an artery, and in that there is fear. And let him not make presumption upon it with iron unless it is small. And you probe it and investigate it with the finger, and if you find it to be similar to a fatty node, and not suspended by any of the veins, then you cut it as well as the nodes, and extract that with what contains it of the membrane and bursa; and if not, then it is probed throughout its being, and the place is cured with what means of cure within so that it may be healed.
Chapter 45.
Of sectioning of the species of nodes.
The nodes occur with many species, and I have already spoken of all their species in the division.
And let him who doubts the difference between a node and an exit wound.
Therefore I say that with an exit wound there is heat and fever and violent pains within so that the ebullition of superfluity is allayed; and it is fulfilled putrefaction when the fever, pain and heat cease.
But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that leon which is in the proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its commencement is with a cough and it occurs thus with phlegm, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species; for some are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of humidity are many, according to what I have spoken in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, let him probe it and investigate it as to its commencement with an instrument which is called an intromis, according to what its form will come in the chapter which is next.
And it is the manner of investigation of sores and of all nodes; and it is that you take this instrument and insert it in the most humid place which you find in the sore, and you rotate your fingers with it little by little within so that you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
And then close your hand according to the measure of the size of the sore, and extract the intromis and consider what has been oozed in its trail.
And if the oozing humidity has ceased, whatever its color is, then you cut it with superficial section according to what I have said in the other sores.
And if from the trail of the intromis there is no oozing humidity, then know that it is fatty.
And dry over it with section having the form of crosses according to this form: in this way as you have taught him, and suspend that with hooks, and cut the membrane of all parts with facility, and guard the membrane or sac, if you can, over it, and extract that pus with the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it will happen thus, and then you extract it at intervals within so that from it no rupture any cause.
For if from it any cause does not cease completely, a little or much, the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that from it any part has ceased a little, then complete the wound of some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which seat the sore cauterize, and cure that by another cure within so that it may be healed.
And if it is a great node, then you cut the two lips of it and cure that with what encases.
But if the vein is pulsating contrary to it, or not pulsating, then you cut and plug the site of the wound which is vetriol and let it be for two or three days within so that the swelling of the wound ceases and the ebullient of the blood; and then return to sectioning where it is broken from the node.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary in sectioning and piercing.
Of those are the forms of the intromises, and they are of three species; of which one is large, and from them is medium, and from them small.
The form of the large intromiss is this:
The method of introducing the needle is as follows:
They are made of iron, copper, or curved extremities, decently heated so that the instrument is quickly inserted into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of experienced healers, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Berid.
And they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experienced one is as follows:
The form of the medium experienced one is as follows:
The form of the small experienced one is as follows:
It should be used for abscesses and exit wounds and fistulas and bumps caused by bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, and pointed, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn; they are made of ram's horn, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made from ram's horn.
And the experienced ones make them of black feathers, which they use to open up fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, by their levity reflecting on those reflections.
And they come in three varieties: some are long, others medium, and others short, depending on the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
Form of the large experienced one of lead:
Form of the medium experienced one of lead:
Form of the small experienced one of lead:
The forms of the probe are of several types: some are simple, with only one curve, and they come in three varieties: large, small, and medium.
And they have hooked bodies, and they come in three varieties.
And some of them are hooked with two curves, and they come in three varieties.
And some of them have three curves, and they come in three varieties.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of simple hooked small:
Form of large hooked with two curves: Form of medium hooked with two curves: Form of small hooked with two curves:
Form of large hooked with three curves:
Form of medium hooked with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and scrape the nodules and abscesses; and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
Form of large scalpel:
Form of medium scalpel:
Form of small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the incision is made are sharp, and the others are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way that it would be made in the incision of a vein or nerve, and by these, the patient and at rest are tranquil, a little by the burning which, in turn, causes the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of plasters, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small, like glasses.
They are made of horn and are similar to a comb with which it is made alcafol.
And it is in the side of the punctured tip with a hidden spatula and on that of the parts inside and outside, when you want, like combs.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers due to the puncturing of abscesses and do not bother the patients; and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small. And these are their forms:
The forms of syringes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; their forms:
They are made of citron wood, round with no length, and are thin.
And if these species of syringes are great, medium, and small, then they stop the flow of blood with speed in necessity, and when not at first medicine.
However, do not use them to stop the flow of blood in any part of the body; but only in fleshy parts, like those in the limbs, and in the armpits, and in the groin, and in the breasts, and in the belly and in the groins, and like those similar to the fleshy parts.
And some of these instruments are made small like the tips of knives according to this shape; through which blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or due to incision of a vein or artery.
And some are made round according to this shape:
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cure of women's breasts, which are like those of females.
Some men's breasts are swollen due to the complement of sleep when they begin to be hairy; and then their breasts are swollen, and their breasts are like those of women, and are Roman-like, lean.
And when you pierce those according to this, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then cut out the whole pouch, and fill the wound with medicine, and then close the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal it.
But if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its weight like that of women, then it is split into two sides, with two cuts resembling a lunar figure, of which each contains the other according to the shape from line B. to line G. And then cut out the pouch, and close up the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal it.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which you intend to pierce due to the restlessness of the patient, and due to the flow of blood, then fill the wound with a cut submerged in corrosive ointment and let it rot away, and heal that which corroded is like that of the ulcer.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of piercing abscesses that come from below the tip of the needle.
Abscesses that come from below the tip of the needle are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a membrane that is thin.
And some contain moisture; and some that are punctured according to this lunar section: from line G. to line B. And when the pus is completely evacuated from the abscess of the gland, then you fill it with a cut short and let it rot away into the other day.
And then the cut is closed and healed with convenient ointment into that, when it is healed.
And if the abscess of the species of the joints is, and of scrofula, then you split it on that like that we have said in the section above scrofula with a split.
And if the plague has spread so that it causes necrosis, then administer cauterization to him as we have already said before.
Chapter 49.
Of incisions on ulcers that occur through an artery or a vein.
And if an artery is broken and the vein above it is hardened, then pustules occur; and by these signs you know that inflammation and pustule are caused by an artery or a vein: for when the pustule is caused by an artery, it is found in the lower part of the body; and when you press the pustule with your fingers, you feel that there is a pulsing in it.
And that which is caused by a vein is roundish and raised on the surface of the body.
And an incision on this pustule is harmful, and especially in that which is below the elbow, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, so one should avoid its cure by cautery, and that which is in the extremities, or the head, should be avoided.
But in that which is above caused by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, make an incision in the vein in the long direction; and then open the incision with nails, and discover the artery and the veins underneath it.
And then put an awl over it and make it penetrate to the other side, and ligature the artery with a double thread in two places — which causes that you are in great pain in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then stab the place between the two bones with a spatular instrument until the blood flows out of it, and dissolve the pustule.
And then administer a cure in which pus is engendered, until the bones fall away from each other; and then cure that with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if it is a pustule caused by an incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what you can of the pustule over the vein, and then thrust in the awl below the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a thread doubled in two places so that you extract that from the other side, and then ligature the pustule with a good ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligament of the grape in two parts with two extremities.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then thrust in the needle below all the pustule after the incision of the first needle, and ligature your threads in four places.
Then dry up the pustule in its middle place so that when it is dried up what is in it will come out; and then you cut off the superfluity of the vein, and leave what is attached to it.
And then put dust over it which you have dipped in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with hot water and ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 50 of the pustule which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Just as pustules occur in arteries and veins, so pustules similarly occur in nerves when they occur from a blow or occur from excess work, and likewise.
And it is done in the places of the assistants or of the foot, or in any place in which the joints are bruised.
And it is a serious pustule, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and in its major parts it has no pulse, and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels a stupor.
And it is not a pustule aggregated in the lower part of the body, and because of that it is below the vein, and it is bruised all over, and it does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be cauterized with iron, for it would certainly produce contraction.
But that which is on the head or forehead, open the vein with a spatular instrument. But if it is a small pustule, then grab it with forceps and cut it out by its roots.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and cut it out; and then stab that, and close up the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 51.
Of incisions on pustules which occur on the jaw, and also occur in the belly.
It happens to some men that they have many pustules on their bellies and other parts of their bodies which are called ulcers because they resemble fungi; the roots of these are fine but the heads are large; and already their lips are wasted away, and they are found in small and also large people.
And I myself have seen one, and on his belly were two pustules which were like fungi, and there was no difference between them but that they were white and fine-rooted.
And already the lips of these were turned inside out and were split, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Therefore, I opened those and found in one 18 inches of pus. And the other six inches.
And the operation at its incision is that you consider whether the patient is cold and his color white, cold, of fine roots; then you open it with a spatular instrument on the side, and let there be cauterization in the fire, for much blood is expelled through the incision; and if wind comes out of the wound, cauterize it.
And if the patient is frightened and fearful, beware of cauterization with iron; but take a recently-made thread of lead, and ligature that pustule, the manner of which we have said before; and let it be for two days.
And then tighten the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large thread on the pustule until it is cut off and falls away because of its work.
But if the pustule is of coarse roots, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and horror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you open the matrix of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to open a pustule which is of dusky color, with little feeling, of light touch, for such a one is full of cancer.
And you will know by memory of scrofula.
Chapter 52.
Of cure of the eminence of the navel.
Eminence of the navel is caused by many causes: or by fissures of the hip which is on the belly, and its membrane or intestine according to that it goes into other ruptures; or from blood which flows out of a vein or artery as has been said before, or from constriction constricted in it.
But if it is from fissure of the hip and constriction of the membrane, then the color of the pustule is like the color of the body; and there is little pain in it, and likewise appears in various situations. And if it is from egress of the intestine, then its situation according to that we have recounted, of more violent diversity, and when you press it with your fingers it is concealed, and then returns; and it is very strong in it, and it is magnified a lot because of the taking of a bath and vehement work.
But if it is due to humidity, then it is a lion and will not be hidden when you touch it with your hand, nor constrained, nor crushed.
And if it is due to blood, then these signs will appear as an ulceration turning black in color.
But if it is due to a wound, then it is a heavy, thick and hard ulceration, and its size depends on the amount of damage.
But if it is due to windiness, then its touch is sharp like a lion's.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness; then you must abstain from treating it, for in that place there is fear and danger as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke of ulcers from arteries and veins.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing extended; then you touch all around the circumference of the navel, and you command him to breathe in while you press your hands against his chest, and then you encircle with a wide sponge the circumference of the navel over the area which you have marked with your touch; then extend half of the ulcer up towards its roots with a large swab; and bind it around with strong linen or ceda and the manner of binding decently.
And then open the middle of the extended ulcer towards the navel and put your finger in that opening and feel for the intestine; and if you have caught it or held it with the ligature, then you extract gently and push the intestine back into the interior of the abdomen.
And if you have caught the hernia, then take it with a swab; and cut off the excesses of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that part, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads, and insert the two needles in the circumference which you have made around the ulcer in the shape of a cross, letting them penetrate; then tighten the ulcer in four places on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the extended flesh fall back into place and heal by itself; or cut off what is superfluous and let it drop, then treat that with a poultice so that it may heal.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to a wound in it or due to humidity, then you must hollow out the ulcer as we have said and draw out the blood or humidity which you find in it, then treat that with water so that it may be healed and consolidated.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of hernia.
We have already said, in the division, of the species of hernia and in what manner there is a way to its cure with medicines, and that it is distinguished in it the cure with iron so that it not be ulcerated; and we have said that hernia is engendered in the mother and cautery of its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes hernia is in a place where its eradication is possible, as of the kind which is in the breasts or in the groin and to their like parts assigned to be extracted entirely, and especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and large, you must not expect from it any better, for I have not seen any of those heal nor come to that.
And the operation on it is, when it is assigned as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge him of black bile sometimes, then you bleed him, if there is found a manifest fullness.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he may be placed for operation, and then pierce through the tract claws which are suited to it; then hollow out all around with a good sharp saw without breaking any of its roots. And let the blood flow, and do not extract it too gently, then squeeze out the places, and wipe away the clotted blood all over with your hand or an instrument with which it is possible to you of instruments.
But if it opposes you with clotted blood from an artery or vein, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood may cease, and then treat that with another cure so that it may be healed.
Chapter 54.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, of its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of tympany or to the species of iposarca, for that is deadly.
And when you have treated that species of dropsy timpany with medicines and it does not confer your medicine, then consider, for if the patient already has acquired debility, or is to another malady another dropsy, as it is in him hoarseness or abdominal pain and like to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear is over that.
But if you see the patient in robust health, and in him is no other malady but dropsy alone, neither infant nor old, then the manner of its operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and then press his abdomen with your hand, filling the water to the lower part of the perineum, and then take a spiny swab according to this form:
It is of two pointed parts long, of acute extremity just as the swab; but indeed it be in him some brevity little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead that.
And then consider if the engendering of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, for then you must with section lengthen the navel by the quantity of three digits to the lower parts, in the right of it over the perineum.
But if the engendering of dropsy is from malady of the liver, then your section be left of the navel by three digits.
And if its engendering is from the spleen, then your section be in the right.
And beware that your section be over the side upon which the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not run to that place.
And then pierce with the instrument all around, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the swab between the navel and the pubis, and you squeeze that; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or inch.
And then pierce the pubis so that the swab may reach the place desired, and it is a place of water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is like a cannula of subtle silver; it is made of silver or of brass or of lead lion, to which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and in the sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its extremity is split according to the manner of a feather, as you see:
And in the extremity of it above is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately goes up on the instrument, therefore evacuates from the water in the moment quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than you should not in the moment, the patient dies by resolution of his animal spirit, or attacks him fainting which is drawing near death.
May you evacuate that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what are to you the dispositions of the patient of the strength of his pulse and of his goodness.
Then extract the instrument and retain the water which causes it as soon as it is retained by the cord which retains the trauma that is on the head of which and it is recommended to you that you pierce it according to that manner.
And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water and do that for a few days out of caution, and beware of making a mistake until the water does not break but a little.
But if you fear for the patient and release a great quantity of water, then cure that with an incision in the sand, move it in a bath, and wait in the sun for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the gallbladder after the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in that which is preceded.
Chapter 55:
Of the cure of children who are born with their genitals not perforated.
Sometimes a child is born from the belly of its mother and the head of his mixture is not perforated (or it is tightly drawn or not in its place)
Therefore, treat him with a puncture of him as soon as he is born with a very subtle spatula according to this form:
Then insert into the trauma a subtle lead pin and ligature that, and hold it for three days or for four three.
And when he wants to urinate, he is retained and urinates; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the location does not harm that closure.
But he of whom the trauma is tight must be medicated with a pin of lead as we have said for many days until it is amplified.
But those in whom the trauma is not in its place, are swollen, which cause is because of those, he who is born and the trauma is at the end of the head of the penis so that it cannot urinate to the parts within, while elevating the penis with his hand to the parts above; and there is no generation to him, because the sperm cannot arrive to the mother according to rectitude, and there is a great illness.
And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vehement extraction, and insert the head of the head of the penis of the location of the foreskin with a sharp spatula as if it were an incision of a feather, or you do not cut any part so that the glans of him come to resemble the head of the penis and that the trauma falls in the middle place according to what you desire.
And beware in your operation of bleeding, for many times that happens to you; and treat him with what you stop the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56:
Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin of the head of the penis and of callus and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin of the head of the penis.
Many times that whitlow happens in the penis and is an eminence of meat there.
And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant: suspend that with a subtle hook and cut off all of it until that one is entirely removed; then place on that site immersed in Egyptian ointment; and then that, cure it with fine ointment day by day until it is healed.
And if the whitlow is malignant of a dark colour, then you must administer cauterization after the incision of it and its reason.
But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must draw out that whitlow which is within at its beginning until it is consolidated; then you cure that defect, because when you cure both the foreskin, there is not assurance that it will not be drawn.
And it has already happened in the genitals and in the foreskin blackness and callus, then you must excavate all that which is already blackened and which wants to become rotten or which is rotten; then you line over that with wax, which is ground with bran of pomegranate peel and of nuts pounded and sifted.
Then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
But if bleeding ensues, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
because lunar cautery is at two dispositions together, it is with bleeding and the wound when it is rotten.
And if the head of the penis is eaten away and is destroyed all at once, then you must insert into the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen but in him from whom the foreskin is uncircumcised; and when it happens by plague or by blister) you must excise it with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate them thoroughly, then you must excise with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and that is because the foreskin when it is subtle is easily pierced through its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a very thin ligature, which is already moistened in water rubbed so that they do not adhere to another part.
Then let it be cured with white vitriol until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57:
Of the purification of children and of the cure of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure of continence but like the other plagues; however, when it is of our operation and our will, and when its cause is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that a better operation and a way that loses more life than the others.
Therefore we say that the ancients did not use circumcision on some of their free ones, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is not except that we have acquired by experience, which cause is that I have overcome the greatest part of the artisans and the midwives to use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use for ligature wax and for incision the nail.
And I have already proved all these manners and not overcome a better mondification with tweezers, with wax ligature that in mondification with the nail, because many times the string escapes above it, because the string of the foreskin is at two tunics, and the tunica pulls from below, and it is very easy to another incision and secure pain. And in mondification which is done by aphetaty and it is digital, of which the scissors are used, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secure, because very easily it goes into the trauma of it.
But in operation with a nail, very often you break iron and corrupt your operation. And the string of the child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there has not been necessity for mondification, and I have seen that.
From the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with gall, the goodness, experiment discovered to me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the acuity that is above is like the acuity that is below; and then as you press your hand so proportioned two acuities, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the gall is made with a figure containing the chain of the whip of all cut, with which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you cause the infant to be mostly if it is of those who understand a little, that you do not make but that you tie the gall in its whip only so much, and that you leave it within another day.
And then cause him to be cheerful in all that manner that is possible for you of that which receives his intelligence. And then cause him to be between your hands established in preparation, and let there be no noise; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, that the infant does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
And then introduce your hand to the whip of it and breathe into the chain, and draw that within that is exited the head of the whip, and then purify that of what is aggregated in it of dirtiness.
The form of the forceps to purification, this is their form:
Let the one ends be blunt and the others be sharp, so that the nail of the claw is not exited, and let the length of the two acuities be like the length of two handles equally.
But the error in purification is that the intrinsic chain exited out completely or was parted from it at the incision.
Therefore, whenever you extend that of your finger before the apposition of the place and incise that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull out that with tweezers and incise that.
But if they have passed three days, and the thing that is inflated below the whip remains, then you leave that within until the aposteme is cauterized, and cut that with ease, and incise that according to what is prepared for you.
And guard yourself from the head of the whip, for it will not hurt him.
And then cure that with what the plague is consolidated by the powders which we have recounted in the treatise of powders.
And if it is incised above measure, and the parts above, that does not matter to him.
And cure that with what we have said within until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is made by oppression made by stone or by blood clot, or by hernia or by tumor, and resembles those of whom we have said of the manners of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is made vehement upon him, then let the instrument called syringe be administered, of which this is the form: Let it be of silver and let the tube be slender, also with reed of bird's feather with slender tip in similitude of a long needle in similarity of one palm and a half, to which let the tube be slender in the head of it.
And the manner of the issue of urine by that is that you take the gall doubled and tie in the extremity of it wool or linen with good ligature; and introduce the extremities of the gall into the part below the syringe, and incise with forceps if any superfluous cause of the wool, but insert it into the tube with vehemence. And then fill the syringe with oil of rose.
And cause him to sweat over the fire, and moisten the bladder of him with warm oils, and olive oil and rosewater.
And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the whip; and then fold the whip above at the part of the embelic; and then press the syringe into that; and then press that within until it reaches the bladder, and let him be bent in the position he was before, and there is not made pain according to this order, but the passing into the bend.
And then extend the gall with the wool little by little, for the urine will suck the wool.
And then pull out that and do by cure urine, and use syringe, not cease doing that until the bladder is evacuated and the patient has ease.
Chapter 59.
Of quality of catheterization of the bladder with pepper and with similar instruments which are in agreement to that.
When there happens in the bladder ulceration or aposteme, or blood clot in it, or is constricted herniated, and you want in that to distill waters and medicines, then let it be made with instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
Unless that in the extremity of him is deafened, it is closed. And in that so are three holes: two of one part, thus with respect.
In the commencement is a hollow place, in which is that which is inpillied, and let it be according to quantity that oppilies him, its addition, within that when some cause is by him pulled of the humidities, is pulled, and when it is expelled, with that is pulled, and when it is expelled long, according as does clampcedra with which naphtha is in the battles of sea.
Therefore, when you want to push humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of clampcedra in the humidity and pull with that which pushes on the parts above, for the humidity is pulled in the hollows of clampcedra.
Then insert the extremity of clampcedra in the whip according to what we have recounted in the syringe; and then press the humidity with that which presses, for that humidity goes immediately to the bladder, and let the patient be bent over that.
Form of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and it is this form:
And let it be made of silver or brass, of which the head also is like small feather, and below it tube within ligament.
And take a bladder of the animal you want to use, and place inside it the moisture you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie that between two strong pieces of string with a double knot, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the bladder.
Then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the moisture, until it is completely within the patient's body, and you feel that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder available, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its rim; and insert a strong needle into those holes, so that it rotates freely; and attach the circle as you would attach a tourniquet, pushing in whatever moisture, oils and waters you want.
And then tie that in the instrument, and do with it as you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the removal of stones.
We have already described the different kinds of stones, their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, as well as their signs.
We have also described the kind of stone that requires an operation with the hand, and cutting.
Stones formed in the bladder itself are those which are lodged in the bladder.
And these we will now describe briefly and openly.
Therefore I say that stones formed in the bladder most often affect children; and their signs are that the urine which exits the bladder is like water in thinness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and goes many times to urinate, and then is relieved; and through this they form a hole in those.
And it is easier to cure in children who have reached the age of 12; and it is difficult to cure in the old. But in the young it is easier because of what is among them.
And if the stone is larger and its cure is more difficult, then the contrary is true.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, first of all let us cleanse the patient with a crystallizer which extracts everything from the slit which is in his intestines; for that slit sometimes blocks the expulsion of the stone after its examination.
And then let the patient be held by his feet and shaken and beaten on his back so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or it jumps out in some way.
And then let him lie between your hands with his legs hanging down and his chest raised up, so that the bladder is completely turned upside-down.
And then push it out completely.
Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then cut him immediately.
And if you cannot get it out with your fingers at all, then anoint your left index finger with oil, and insert that into the patient's anus if he is a child, or the little finger if he is a fully grown young man, and push it in. And push out the stone as it lies below your finger. And gradually pull it into the neck of the bladder.
And press on that with your finger, and expel it out through the hole where you cut him.
And order the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and order another assistant that with his right hand extend the testicles up above, and with his other hand push down the scrotum, in the area where you are cutting.
And then insert a pointed piece of steel which is shaped like this: [illegible] and split what is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle place, towards the left side of the scrotum; and let the cut be made on the stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the cut be made crosswise so that the opening out is wide and the inside narrow according to how much room there is for the insertion of the stone, and not larger, for if you strongly press your finger which is in the anus towards the stone after the cut has been made, it will be driven out from its place.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, making their emission difficult because of this.
And some are like a lion's tooth, and are round, and their insertion is easier.
Therefore if it is one with angles and edges, push it into the fissure.
And if it is not driven out, then let you push on that, or press on it decently with instruments, the end of which is curved and thin, so that you push on the stone, and it does not escape from him; or insert below it a thin instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot push on it, then let you enlarge the cut a little, and if you see any flow of blood, bind up that firmly with a thread soaked in vinegar.
But if the stone is larger, then at the beginning push your hand towards the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it in there; and then push in a little bit more there; and do likewise if they are more than two.
But if the stone is very large, then it is ignorantly done that you insert it with a great cut, for two reasons occur to the patient: either he lingers or he receives continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely consolidated.
But the assistant must expel it as soon as it has been driven out, or push on it in the fracture with forceps so that he pulls it out in pieces.
Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in aloe and dragon' blood, and bind that firmly. And place over it a cloth steeped in oil and wine, or in rose-oil and water, so that the wound may heal quickly.
And then support the patient on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when that has been loosened, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure it with a ointment of diaphenicon and an ointment of diabazilicon until it is healed.
But if in the wound occurs an ulcerated boil and corrosion, and from that it seems as though the blood is frozen in the bladder and because of that the urine is prohibited (and that is called for the flow of blood with urine), then insert your finger in the wound and push out that blood, for if it provokes a convulsion of the bladder and putrefaction, and rot in there.
And then wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and with everything that suits it for its cure until it is healed.
And then in the hours of all the cure, let you apply both the thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed over the wound.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the meat of the penis, and emission of urine is prohibited, then cure it with what you see before making the cut, for forces are applied to it through this cure; and it has already been tried and proven, and that you take a punch of iron-ore, of which this is its shape:  [illegible figure]
from triangular end, sharp, placed in wood.
Then take gall, and apply it to the stone below the bladder so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the stone, piercing it with ease until the piercing tool reaches the stone. And rotate the piercing tool with your hand in the stone little by little, and you will pierce it from both sides; for the urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand over that part of the stone which is broken and split by the urine; for it is bound up and is opened up by the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if for some reason this cure is not prepared for you, then apply gall below the stone and gall above it. Then press upon the stone in that opening between two ligatures. Then extract it. And then untie the ligature and cleanse the clotted blood which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a ligature of gall below the stone except that it should not return to the bladder; and the other ligature above except that when the gall is untied the stone returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for that reason when you tie the gall above it is necessary for you to lift the scrotum upwards to the upper parts or that it return backwards and heals the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of extraction of a stone from women.
A stone in women is seldom generated.
But if one sees a stone in any of them then the cure for it is difficult and prohibited by many things.
One of them is that the woman is very thin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who will undress to show her genitals if she is chaste or if she is a married woman.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision on a stone in women is distant from the location of the stone so it requires a long incision and in that there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to do so then know that you must take a female doctor who is well-skilled and few are found.
But if you are deprived of that then seek a doctor who is curious and subtle or present a midwife well-versed in the diseases of women or a woman who has experience in this art.
So do that and command her to do everything you order her to do from the examination of the stone at the beginning; for it is necessary that she check whether the woman is a virgin then know that she inserts her finger into the anus of her and feels the stone.
So if she finds it then prevent it from going below her finger and then command it to be inserted into that.
But if she is not a virgin then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel around for the stone while placing her left hand over the bladder and compressing it with good pressure.
So if she finds it then know that she gradually pushes that down from the opening of the bladder to the parts below with the palm of her hand facing upwards so that it comes to the root of the scrotum.
Then insert into that the tip of the thumb of the hand facing upwards over the root of the scrotum from whatever part it is stopped at and hold the stone in that part; and the finger must not be pushed back by the stone but must restrain it.
And the incision should be small at first; then insert the nail over that incision and if she feels the stone then increase the incision according to the amount which she knows the stone is pushed down from there.
And know that the forms of stones are many; for they are small and large and round and long and they have bumps.
So you know how many species there are from what you wish to indicate about what you want.
And if you see blood flowing then apply vinegar to the wound and keep it there for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And prepare from yourself the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
And if you see blood flowing and know that the discharge of blood is from the artery which is cut then you place powder over the wound and tighten it with threads and do not interfere with that; let the stone go and do not extract it for the woman will surely die. Then heal the wound.
So when the keenness of the blood has ceased then after a few days when the wound is healed you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62.
Of incision on a hernia that is acrid.
An acrid hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white veil which is below the scrotum and is named veil.
And in some cases it is in the upper layer of the veil which nature prepares in the part of the scrotum so that it is split that there is another veil; and it is the veil of the testis between the white veil which we have said and it is not anything but fat.
And the generation of this hernia is by weakness which occurs in the testes for the matter is poured into them and in some cases it occurs by a blow made on the testes.
And this moisture has many colours for the colour of it inclines to yellow or is blood-red or red or is black and fetid and it is what is most common.
And the signs by which this accumulation of moisture is known are these: for if it is in the white veil which we have said then the lump is round declining a little to length as the shape of the testis and appears through the testis for the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the upper veil then the lump is round at the part of the scrotum and for that reason one estimates that there is another testis.
And if the moisture is between the veil of the testes and the white veil then it falls below the sensation.
And if you wish to know the colour of the moisture then you test the colour of the moisture in the lump by testing the tip of the probe whose shape is preceded; and according to what it comes out in the trace of the probe judge what is contained within it.
So when we come to the cure of it with iron then know that we command the patient to be bath-soaked if that is possible for you and see the body of him stretched out.
Then let it be re-dampened over the back for some cause a little more and place below it some soft cloths.
Then stand over the left side of him and command the minister to follow on the right of him so that he extends his scrotum to one side of two leagues at the root of the testes and to the opening of the navel.
Then take a flat lance and cut the veil of the testes from the middle part for the length within prop to the testis.
And the incision should be made according to the rules, evenly spaced from the line that separates the hair of the pubic region, so as to reach the white flesh underneath.
Examine the wound and be careful not to cut yourself; then, with the tool you are using to examine the wound, gently scrape away at it so that you can see into its depth.
Then pierce through the flesh full of pus with a broad incision and draw out all the pus.
And then separate the two lips of the wound with your fingers and stretch out the flesh above them; do not touch the cord that connects the testicles, and cut through the flesh in whatever way you can manage to do so. And cut through it in its entirety or in sections, and especially the lower part, for if you do not examine the wound carefully, there is no guarantee that the pus will not return.
But if the cord from which the pus issued is still outside its cavity at the time of your operation, then when you have finished cutting through the flesh, return it inside and sew up the two lips of the wound around the testicles, and treat it as you would any other wound, until it heals.
And if you find that the cord is corrupted by some other disease, then cut away the vessels which are causing it to be sore, and extract the cord, and treat it as we have said.
But if the pus is concentrated in two places at once, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut through that part according to how you cut through the other one; and if you see that it is a single operation, then perform it as such.
And then you should wipe away the blood and apply wool which has been soaked in oil or rosewater into the wounds; and place another piece of wool, which has been soaked in wine and oil, over the testicles and the navel; and put on top of that folded cloths and powdered herbs, and tie it all up using a bandage formed like this:
and there should be two pieces of cloth, which are stuffed with wool dyed red according to this shape; and the ends should be pressed together with a thread or with wet wool, and attached tightly around the waist of the undergarments, and one end should go between the buttocks from behind, and the second end should go towards the front part of the scrotum, and two ends over the patient's thighs, and the other two ends over the armpits; and all the attachments should be tightened around the waist of the undergarments.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cauterisation instead of an incision with a knife; and you should take a thin cutting cautery and cut through the cord around the testicles, and ignite it according to our instructions so that the white flesh containing the pus is revealed, and then you should apply the cautery in the following way: and it should resemble the Greek letter alpha.
And then pierce through that flesh and ignite it until all the moisture has been driven out.
And then stretch out the flesh with your fingers and scrape it with a thin cautery that is being ignited; and cut through it in whatever way you can manage to do so, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the cord.
And know that this operation is more safe and distant from the flow of blood than an operation with an incision.
But if, in the hour of the incision or in the hour of the cautery, an abscess forms, or there is a flow of blood, then treat whatever contradiction occurs to you with that cure which is fitting for it according to what has been said.
But if the patient is afraid and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer an incision according as you have been instructed by what we have said about the signs; and it is when you are certain through these that the hernia is aqueous.
Then have the patient lie on his back on any raised surface; and pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a spatula that is as long as the body.
And the aperture should be wide enough for all the pus to come out.
And then put a bandage on it and leave it there so that the rest of the pus can run out. And then treat it until the wound is healed.
But if a contradiction occurs in the flow of the pus at that moment when you pierce it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes a contradiction and prevents the flow of the pus, then put into the wound a needle or instrument by which means the pus can be extracted from the water-pockets; or place on top of the pressure of the wound a small.
And know that the pus will return, and it will be so for several months or around a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced according to the method described above, for the patient will suffer in this way for days.
CHAPTER 63.
OF AN OPERATION ON A CARNIOUS HERNIA AND ITS TREATMENT.
Know that in the operation on this hernia there is usually great fear due to its terrible appearance; and therefore I have seen its dismissal and its being saved by this better method.
And you should remember the operation in that and the properties of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses are born in the parts where the testicles are joined and they are caused by several reasons: or due to acute acute superfluity which is poured into the testicles, or due to a blow.
And it is according to the colour of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious abscess.
And if it is very old, its colour will be dark, and there is no heat in it.
And sometimes it is caused by a knotting of the vessels, and due to inflammation of those parts from which the testicles have already been affected, or due to inflammation of the veins.
But what is caused by inflammation of the vessels is understood by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But what is caused by inflammation of a vein will not be dispersed for any reason due to compression with the fingers.
And it is also possible that on this type an incision can be made and on the other meats; and you should cut through the cord around the testicles, and then stretch out the water-pockets above them, and extract the pus from the white flesh, and tie up the vessels, and cut through the suspension of the water-pockets in all their parts.
Therefore if the water has already become solid, then have it extracted and cut through that.
And if there is adhesion for some reason in the flesh, or between what is between the vessels, then have all that adhesion removed and cut through it with a circular incision.
But if there is flesh growing in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then cut through all that is there and extract the water as we have said above.
Therefore when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rosewater and wine; and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that are internal.
A hernia is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a blister with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and ambulation for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, fear is appropriate for what precedes it.
However, let us focus on the first one they mention.
And I say that you should lift the patient onto a raised platform; and then tighten the suspensory of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie the cords of the scrotum with your fingers around the veins that are proven to be in the scrotum; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend those with violent extension.
And then insert an acute, broad lance through a transverse incision in the right side of the vessels where they are discovered.
And then excise any part as we have said in the extraction of archery, which is in the temples.
And then insert a needle into those in which there is internal hernia, and tie one end at the beginning of the places where there is internal hernia, and tie the other end further back in them. And then insert them in the middle place through a transverse incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then cure the ulcer with treatment of the other ulcers in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels fall away from one of the testicles, for this is not bad.
But if internal hernia occurs in all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles by themselves are tied to the vessels so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they wither away, or that they die by themselves.
Chapter LXV.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is through an incision that extends inward on the abdomen from the armpits of the navel, so that loosening the intestines from that rupture enters one of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or from an incision in it, and these two types occur for various reasons: from a blow, or from falling, or from crying, or from lifting something heavy, or from similar causes.
And the sign of this, when it is from an extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess swollen inside the vein because the abdomen compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is from an incision in the abdomen, because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and there is visible inflammation below the navel, and this is due to the hernia of the intestine, and the body of it at the edges outside of the abdomen.
And sometimes the intestine slips out with the membrane, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia of the scrotum.
And sometimes it is made with swelling, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these species of this illness, there is fear, because one must avoid the occurrence of that.
And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at the parts within his cavity if he obeys his returnment, and then he should be placed on his back between your hands, and lift his legs.
And then squeeze the vein that connects the vein of the testicles at the parts above, and insert the vein of the testicles all the way through the incision; and then pierce two lips of the incision with hooks according to how you demand them to open the incision with those.
And if the incision according to the amount that is possible for you, then let the hernia be slipped out from that.
Then cut away the skin around the scrotum, so that the tough white membrane of each part is exposed.
Then you insert your finger into the opening around the testicle, where there is a tough white membrane between the scrotum and the testicle, and you cut away the membrane that attaches the second part to the back of the testicle.
Then pull the skin of the scrotum away from the testicles and towards the parts in front, and hold the tough white membrane up with your left hand, and lift the testicle up by the membrane to the part where it is cut; and tell your assistant to hold the testicle up, while you cut away the membrane behind it with a complete solution.
And make sure that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped around the tough white membrane. But if you find any cause in him, then you return it to his belly below.
And then pierce the part below the scrotum where blood and pus will run out, just as we have described in what we have said before.
And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the sutures we have recommended (and sometimes the tough white membrane is cauterized where we have said to cut it, for fear of a flow of blood, which happens several times), and let the sutures fall so that they can heal by themselves.
But if its healing is delayed, then let it be soaked in hot water and place it so that it falls down according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with the other treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxxvi.
Of a swollen hernia.
In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been cured by the treatment with iron.
And the first say that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia that is caused by wine; which is that you sew up the vessels around the cut with ease, and then dry up the abscess in the middle of it by opening it up so that the vessels are closed off.
And heal the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxxvii.
Of the rupture that occurs in the intestines.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the intestines as we have said, and the location protrudes.
And do not give the patient any cause for the intestines to become wrapped around each other; and if they do, it is very little; and return them to their original position within a few hours.
But if time passes by with this, there is a tear in the membrane where the intestine descends into the membrane; and it happens because of the extension of the membrane which is in the intestines as we have said, which causes it to be stretched and softened, and then the location becomes abscessed and protrudes.
And its cure is by cauterization just as we have described in the narrative of it.
And sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then you dry up the location of the rupture of the abscesses that protrude with a cut according to its width, about three fingers wide.
And then strengthen the tough white membrane below the scrotum so that it is exposed.
And then take a stick and place it on the protruding location of the membrane, and press it against the bone of the belly.
And then cut the two protruding locations on the end of the membrane with a stick, and adjust them by sewing up one of those to the other.
And then pull out the end of the stick, and do not cut into the membrane at all, nor extend the swelling, nor any other cause that you may know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then heal it with the cure of wounds, and when you have sewn up the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the membrane is contracted and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this location, for it is closer to health.
Chapter .lxxviii.
Of the softening of the scrotum.
Many times the scrotum in some men becomes softened because of the softness of the flesh that is between it, and they fail to guard against it.
Therefore it is necessary that he who is treated in this way makes the patient lie on his back and raises his scrotum up according to its shape, and then cut off all of the softened skin on top of the natural membrane; and then sew together the two lips.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened membrane at the beginning with three or four incisions and with a firm suturing.
And then sew up between the sutures; and then heal by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Chapter .lxxxix.
Of emasculation.
Know that emasculation in our law is prohibited, but I have been asked to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary for me to remember it except in two ways, of which one is so that it may be in the knowledge of the doctor when he is questioned about it, who knows its cure when it occurs; and the other way is that we sometimes have a need for emasculation of other animals for our own sake, as with horses, and cows, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
And therefore I say that emasculation is done in two ways: either by piercing, or by cutting at the incision.
But in that which is done by piercing, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie in water so that its testicles are softened and hang down, and that they are pierced. And then take them with your hand so that they are resolute and do not protrude below the touch.
But in emasculation done by cutting and incision, see that you have the beast and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie up the suspensory ligament, and cut over each orifice so that two orifices are cut through.
And then sew up those which you have just now cut. And do not let any cause fall upon those of the membrane, except the thin membrane which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by constriction, for strong constriction will leave no cause in the testicles that the animal should desire to copulate.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70:
Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is when a growth appears in the space between the testicles, a kind of female glandular tissue.
And sometimes urine flows from it, from the area between the testicles.
But in women, there is only one type: the clitoris on the vagina is like two testicles of a man, a little smaller at the entrance, and like the foreskin of a man, and two testicles.
And the cure is in three ways: two from men and one from women. And it is necessary to cut out the tight flesh so that the moisture of that flows out, and then cure that with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second type of men from which urine flows and is located in the space between the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter 71:
Of an abnormal growth and突出flesh from causes in women.
A mole is a growth on natural causes that is tightly bound and is caused by constriction, and in some women it spreads like it does in men and affects coitus.
Therefore, if you have an excess of moles, cut them with your hand or with a pair of scissors.
And do not cut all the way through, especially at the root of the hair, lest it cause bleeding.
Then cure that with the cure for wounds until it is healed.
But a growth is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother and fills it up, and often appears at the entrance like a tail; therefore, if we cut it as we would a mole, then we should cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
Of the cure for hernia.
A hernia is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated or has a small hole in it. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to an injury that preceded it, and it is caused by tightly bound flesh or a thin membrane or membrane.
And it occurs in the area of the womb or on the ribs or the upper abdomen or lower abdomen, and it is prohibited from coitus and pregnancy and menstruation, and often prohibits urination.
And the diagnosis of it is made by examination of the midwife if the swelling is obvious, or if not obvious then you should touch it with your fingers or the palm of your hand.
But if the swelling is due to a thin membrane and is close to both labia, then you should cut and tear it apart.
And you shall pause over both labia with your fingers, and then pause the tips of your fingers against the flesh on both sides.
And let the woman be on her back with her legs extended and spread the two labia with force so that the thin membrane is torn and the swelling is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the wound, and bind it with a bandage every day so that the wound does not close up again.
But if the membrane is thick and strong, then you should cut it with a sharp knife or with the blade of a myrtle twig.
But if the swelling is due to flesh, then suspend it with a pair of scissors and cut it.
And you shall have the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, like astringents and dragon's blood and honey, bound with egg white.
And then administer a wide leaden bandage so that the wound does not heal quickly.
And let her keep it for several days and administer warm water.
Then it will be healed with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes they occur in the womb due to the birth of other flesh, and then you should cut it according to this manner. But if it is due to scrofula and the scrofula is not caused by any contrary condition, then do not use iron in any way.
Chapter 73:
Of the cure for hemorrhoids and of a tail and of red bouton that occur in the clitoris of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appearance of the openings of many veins from which they flow continuously, and with age hemorrhoids grow larger.
And I have already written in the division of those and their signs, and said thus those that received cure and those who did not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the area of the womb and do not appear to be caused by feeling, then in those there should not be cure with iron.
But those which are in the openings of the womb over which there is sensation, they are to be cured.
And let the woman be in a sitting position and then extend it with the fingers or with rough cloth, and cut it at the roots.
And then sprinkle over it some of the powdered iron without biting, like cassia and similar to those.
And then let her walk for an hour, and then place that in tepid water.
And if the bleeding continues, then let her drink a decoction of sumac and myrobalan and pomegranate rinds and similar things.
And then take wheat flour and cook that with honey and bitter wine and make a plaster of it and place it over her abdomen.
And if the bleeding is scanty, let it be; but if not, let two leeches adhere to her breasts and to the nipples their incision.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of henbane or in the juice of henna or in the juice of walnut and in bitter wine, and let the wound be bound with it until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 74:
Of accidental piercing of the clitoris.
Many types of scrofula occur in the womb, like a hard scrofula and scrofula with teeth and an ulcerous one and suppurating and with scabs and abscesses and hemorrhoids and others. And I have already written about these illnesses and their signs and their cures in the division.
And let you listen in this treatise of scrofula caut which appears in the womb when the scrofula is caused by cold humors, and if you want to know in what manner its operation is done with iron.
Therefore consider whether the pain of the scrofula in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it has a burning sensation and if you feel that over it, then do not pierce it, and cure it with what helps in preventing the acuteness of the accidents.
And then you must make the woman lie down on a bed that has two pillows; recline on her back and straighten her feet to the lower part of her belly, let her thighs be spread apart, place her arms below her ears, and tie each limb to what is convenient.
Then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the uterus is dilated, the shape of which will depend on the individual case.
And when you want to administer this instrument, place your thumb on the uterus of the woman, and what enters the uterus from the instrument should not be larger than the uterus itself and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the uterus, then you should apply powder to the tissue of the opening of the uterus so that the insertion of any instrument into the uterus is prohibited.
And you should apply the grease that runs along the instrument from above, and the person administering the instrument should turn the grease within as the opening of the uterus is dilated.
And when the fetus appears, and is touched by hand and becomes soft, then you should dry its head with a sponge on one side.
And when the placenta is delivered, then you should place a sponge soaked in rose oil or oil with some styptic in the wound and place the calcium in the incision in the uterus.
And after delivering the placenta, place clean wool soaked in water over the uterus, and in which are crushed mallows.
Then it should be healed after two days with ointment that is suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
And sometimes the uterus and wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which is crushed rhubarb or long pepper, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the uterus, then you should be prohibited from curing it with iron, but treat that as we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach midwives how to treat unborn babies when they are born according to an unnatural shape.
It is necessary that the midwife know at the beginning the shape of natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman express herself from the lower parts and desire to breathe the air, and over that is what is above her, and hastens the ejection of the baby, then you know that this birth is according to a natural shape, and the ejection of it is over his head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore when you see these signs, then the belly of her should be compressed so that the embryo descends gently, when it descends over his head, then the second one comes after him, and is cleaned from those superfluities with good cleaning.
But that which is different from this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the baby exits over its feet and the body of her exits before her head and her feet, and her hand, or at her leg. or the head of her exits and her hand, or at her belly, and strongly it is turned on his neck, and similar to the shapes of her blameworthy.
It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And you should show all the figures of these, and what skill is in these so that it be signified by that and be established on that.
When the baby exits over his head by natural effort, and he is violent on the woman and the delivery for her is difficult, then you should make him cease, or that the women hold him, and evaporate the heat from him with fenugreek powder and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert her finger with a small sponge and split it with that the second one, or dry her with her fingernail within so that it removes what is in her of moisture. And compress the belly of the woman so that the fetus exits.
But if it does not exit, then you should smear the woman with a poultice of pith and a poultice of fenugreek with chamelee.
And then command him, the one who is compressing, that she be pressed and make her sneeze with some medicine; and take his mouth and nose for an hour, for the fetus will exit immediately.
And if both hands of the fetus are exited at the beginning, then you should reduce those with little ease little by little. But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and then shake the bed gently so that she doesn't fall because of the shaking.
And if the hands are not bent back and the fetus is dead, then insert those and pull the limbs of the fetus or tie the body to his hand with a cloth and pull that equally, for he will exit immediately.
When the fetus exits over his feet, then you should push those up on him, and then turn the fetus gently, and then grab one of his feet and pull those gently little by little.
But when he exits into the thighs, then you command him to expel, and make her sneeze with medicine, for he will exit if God wills it.
And if it is not exited with what we have recommended, then you should return the fetus little by little to how you place that according to a natural shape, for he will exit immediately with gentle ejection.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of mallows and dissolved gum, and beat them all in the mortar with good beating, and apply it to what the heat of the woman is, at the bottom of her belly. Then make her sweat in warm water so that she attains the hippocratic crisis.
And when you see that his lower parts are loosened, then you should give him a fumigation of myrrh and place that below him. And when she has been given the fumigation for an hour, then make her cease on a bed, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift that, and compress the lower part of her belly gently, for the fetus will exit immediately.
The feet hang down latitude-wise from one of his hands. Let him try to pull it back with his hand; but if he cannot, then let the woman stand up and walk around.
And if she cannot walk then let her lie down on the bed and hit her thighs with a violent blow, and administer poultices which have been moistened with mucilage.
And if the child has been delivered then let her sit up and work on pulling back the hand; and straighten out the feet according to their natural shape; make the woman sneeze and order him to press himself in until he is completely expelled.
The child is hanging over her mother's shoulder, with his hands and the surface of his body spread out. That the midwife should have the hand of the child and gradually turn him over little by little; and that this is made easier.
And when it is and how much it is wrapped up, then place over the navel of the child that which we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
And then command him to suckle little by little and when you have done that let her lie down on one side and command him to be pressed in; and make the woman sneeze with some medicine. The preparation of the exit of the fetus is over the side.
When they are going to be horrified by the mother according to this method, consider and then insert your finger inside so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the child is suspended over the face and neck, then insert your finger into the navel so that he is not retained and delayed.
And then press the child towards the parts inside as you pause that according to what the midwife wants; and order the woman to press herself in several times and he will be expelled easily with the exit hanging down, God willing.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four, but that is strange and difficult; but they are caused by nature and do not live.
And count those, now that they are multiplied, one second, and they are separated by the placenta; distinguish between them in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled thus with an easy natural exit, and sometimes with an exit not to be laughed at as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver and arrive at that to which we have said about the non-natural figures, then you cure them thus as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and with tardiness, and it is worked on according to all the figure as it is prepared for him by bringing about health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have indeed seen that a woman who aborts may have six, and another ten of them, the cause of which was discovered by the glorious wise ones through measurement.
And all that being said that it should be in the science of the midwife how strong they are at that small thing and then pause at that with which she does that.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On the extraction of the child when it is dead.
When you treat the dead child with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled out, and you must use incision with the hand; then consider if the woman is of healthy nature and has none of the accidents by which she is thought to be in danger of loss.
Then let the woman lie on her back on her side with her head inclined down and her thighs raised up.
And the minister should hold that in two parts or be tied in the bed so that the body of the child does not extend due to the extraction of the child.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oiled and moistened mucilage of altaea, and of fenugreek, and of linseed.
And then the midwife applies her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand with facility in the mother, and then encloses her hand around the place where the nails are in the child.
And convenient places for that: then consider if the child is prepared to descend over his head; and then you place the nails in his hollows or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or under the beard, or in the furcula, or in places near the ribs, or under the armpits.
But if the descent is over his feet then in the sole of the foot, or in the middle of the back.
And have the nail with the right hand and pause the curve of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with facility and place the nail in some of those places which we have said, so that he comes to the desired cause.
And then pause and place in the opposition of him another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that there is an attraction alike, and not an extension according to its uprightness only.
And the hand is stretched out to all parts so that the exit of him is drawn away just as it is done in teeth extraction.
And let the extension be made smooth in that which is between them so that what is retained is released; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife moisten his fingers with oil and insert that medicine and turn him around so that he who is retained is released.
Then if the exit of the child is drawn out, then the nails are transferred to another place where there is an opening; and do that so that all the child is expelled.
But if the hand is drawn out in front of the other and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then let the cloth be wrapped around that; and then extract that so that all is expelled, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
And thus you do in the other hand and in both feet.
But if the head of the child is large, or there happens to him contraction in the exit, or it is in his head tightly bound, then let the midwife insert between his fingers aspidium spinosum and split the head and extract the water, or gouge that with an instrument which is named “alundat”, the form of which will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is next.
And do likewise if the child is of a large head by nature: and then let that be inserted with an instrument, or that be taken up with an alundum just as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is drawn out and is bound because of the furcula, then it is split so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
But if he is not complicated nor obstinate against exit, then you insert the head just as you can.
And if the insides of the abdomen are pustular or are edematous, then you must pierce that which allows the moisture inside to flow out.
But if the pain is in their feet, then the attraction is slight and the direction towards the mouth of the mother is also slight.
But if it is constricted from the abdomen to the feet, then you must extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and split the abdomen and the feet so that what is inside flows out.
But if the other members are cut off and the head is turned, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then she should insert her hand into the anus, surround that with her hand, and draw that towards the mouth of the mother, and then insert a finger or two inside it and draw it out with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by pustular heat which comes from within, then you must not put anything in there; instead, administer infusions of moist, fatty causes. And give ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if it is in their side, then if possible, it should be sutured; and what we said about the living fetus should also be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a sharp object and extracted.
And make sure to leave no cause inside the womb.
And once you have completed all of your operations, then administer what we said about the treatment in the pustular heat which comes from within the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then use astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I once saw a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and inside that was another fetus alive, and the other was a dead fire. A long time afterwards, an abscess appeared in her womb; and something inside became swollen so that the heat opened up and began to vomit fire.
And I was called to heal it, and I treated her for a long time, yet the wound did not heal.
Then I applied to it some strong-attracting ointments, and extracted an os from it, and then after a few days, another; and I was very astonished, for there are no bones in the belly.
And so I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Then I opened the wound and extracted from her many bones; the woman remained in the same disposition, and she lived like this for a long time, vomiting fire occasionally.
And I did not consider this strange, for there is knowledge and aid in this so that the doctor with his hands can administer a cure.
Of the forms of instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the incision by which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the string which holds the lips together, to this joining there are two virtues at both ends of two strings. But this virtue must be more subtle than the string, and it should be made either from gut or from wood-pulp.
And each wood should be as thick as two fingers and the width of both ends of the strings is one finger; and the length of each is half a palm, and in the middle of the strings there are two joints of that wood, which are already tied together, the length of each is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is about two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she is opened by them when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Other similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of gut or wood-pulp according to the appearance of forceps. But at the end of it there should be two additions like pliers, and the length of each addition is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with them, then you should make her lie on her back, opening what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument like you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother' mouth so that the midwife can do what she wants.
The form of the incision which the ancients described:
Form of the impulsion by which the fetus is pushed:
Form of the incision by which the large head is cut
And it is like forceps whose teeth are in the end, like this, and sometimes an incision is made long like this with forceps, like this, whose teeth are like the teeth of a saw with which it is cut and incised. Form of the small incision:
Form of a nail having one spike:
Form of a nail having two spikes:
Form of a spatula having two ends by which the head is cut:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more numerous and prepared by the artisans, it is easier for them to operate and better for men because of their quantity.
And you must have those instruments, for the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Of extraction of the placenta:
When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then you must command the midwife to hold her heel, and then make her sneeze with a handkerchief, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out through that, good.
And if not, then take a jar and pierce a hole in its lid, and place herbs which burn the mouth of the mother, like calamus and rue and anise and camomile and aromatic myrrh and cassia wood and santal wood. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the jar, and place that over the fire.
And then place a tube of reed in the mother's mouth, and hold it there so that the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
And then make her sneeze as we said before, and let the placenta come out with velocity.
But if this treatment is applied and it has not worked, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in myrrh milk, and then insert that into the vagina and press with it the placenta, and when she has found the placenta, extract it little by little according to how the mother does not suffer a violent attraction. After that let it be turned to the right and left side with facility.
And if the mother' mouth is constricted, we have recommended the cure with snuffing and with medicine from the jar with herbs.
But if it is not eliminated with all the causes we have mentioned, then beware of over-exerting yourself in an attempt to draw it out, but rather ensure that what comes out of the mouth and into the mother's breast goes to the woman's thigh; then anoint the area with ointment and tetrachemical remedy. For this will cause it to rot in a few days, become dissolved, and be eliminated.
But when it rots, a bad odor rises to the head and stomach, and that hurts the patient; so make sure to administer sub-fomentation and suitable remedies for this.
But some of the Ancients have already experimented with sub-fomentation using nasea and dry figs.
Here is a way to use the instrument by which the woman is sub-fomentated because of the retention of menses and the secondina:
It should be made of glass or copper.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire; then the sub-fomentation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And let that which is within be consumed by the sub-fomentation and repeat another [dosage].
For the treatment of the anus of a non-perforated infant:
Most newborn infants and their anuses are not perforated; they have thin and elastic skin. Therefore, the midwife should use her finger to perforate that thin skin; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware of touching the clitoris.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if you are afraid it is closed, then insert a cannula for a few days and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
And sometimes the anus is closed by a coagulation of plasma or of pus; therefore that coagulation should be incised and then cured with what we have said about the cure and the plug.
For the cure of the fistulas which go inside:
The fistulas that go inside at the beginning of the anus discharge pus; they have a node and are thick, and they can be found near the anus or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that node becomes old and discharges thin white or rotten fluid, then some of these fistulas penetrate in some places.
And those which penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the orifices and through windiness; and sometimes the patient vomits it, and often it comes out of them with worms.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the vagina; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the hip socket.
And that in which the penetrating fistula is known to have entered the anus but not exited is when you insert your finger into the anus and press a thin rod of copper or iron into the fistula when it is swollen.
But if it is swollen, then insert a thin rod of lead or horse hair into it until you feel the rod or the hair in your finger.
And if you don't feel it at all or if there is no sign of excretion or worms or windiness, then know that it is not penetrating; then return to the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the vagina, then its sign is the excretion of urine from it and the prohibition of that by applying medicine to it until the place is healed.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the hip socket and there is pain in the circle around it, then its sign is that the rod goes inside there if there is no swelling in the bone, and pain in the circle around the affected area; and when there is pus, heat, and when medicine does not help it or heal it.
And in all penetrating fistulas there is no cure for sure; and the cure of those is work and skill of doctors over which we have written.
But in that which is not penetrating and does not become old, healing is expected with iron according to what you have written and that which has already been tried.
And let the patient lie on his side over your knee and raise his legs up onto you, with his thighs slanted towards his belly; then insert a rod of lead or iron into the fistula until you know where the rod goes in.
And if he feels pain around his neck, then let you insert your finger into his neck.
And if you feel the rod already inserted discovered to penetrate, or if you feel the node or flesh between your finger and it, then know certainly that it is penetrating; therefore do not worry about it, for there is no cure for it as we have said.
But some say it heals in some people with a fever.
And the medicine by which it is hoped to heal quickly in him is that you burn a pointed cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been said; then insert that burnt cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those flesh-like joints which are like a feather are closed.
Then cure that with poultices wrapped in wool until all those joints are closed; then cure that with remedies which generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed in any time by any other cure.
And if the rod enters but does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the rod there is a node or swelling, then cut the skin of the fistula where it touches the surface of the anus; then cut it with the rod until the section reaches the place where the rod goes in, and when the node is freed by the rod, pull out the rod.
Then cleanse those flesh-like joints which are like a quill of goose feather and from which nothing comes out.
But if blood flows from it when you press those joints, then the milk that comes out is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for the cautery with fire tightens those joints, and the drying of moisture; the cautery with fire also cuts off the flow of moisture.
Then cure that with poultices wrapped in wool or in boiled flax until the place is dry; then afterwards cure the wound with hard ointment which generates and consolidates flesh.
And these are medicines in which there is constriction and drying; when that is restored, it is already healed and you should not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum of the anus and is long in the superficial part of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and feel it.
And if you feel the rod and between you and it there is node or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on him but according to way of hope and expectation.
This cause is to treat it in three ways: to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry that up so that you can find the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert the poultices and the cure near it; and not to process anything because the opening of it does not close, and the fistula opens wide in the anus, and goes out with a bad odor through the patient. And sometimes the fistula is ended according to this manner: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and around the buttocks on the surface of the body with the cord, and at the margin of the anus, then take hold of the punctured end of the tent, which is like a needle used to pierce hearts in this way
and enter that vein wrapped in a piece of wool, or around those; and then insert the tent with a piece of wool into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates at the margin of the anus inside, then you take out the piece of wool as you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the piece of wool and join together its two ends, and tie it, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have inserted the piece of wool into the flesh far enough that these flesh pieces are joined between the two ends of the piece of wool, tie it tightly.
Then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you are prepared for, unless it moves in the wound, because it is not up to you to do this so as not to insert the needle; and then do it when it has healed.
The shape of the spatulate needle with which the fistula is split: its curvature is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that it does not pierce what is not necessary, as with a needle.
On stitching up hemorrhoids in which blood flows in their incision.
Hemorrhoids come in two ways, because they are either between the anus looking like warts, or they are like the grease of hair. And they are small and large, and the blood flows from them constantly, and they are located, and on the edges of the anus.
But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which flows a yellow water or a little blood with continuous flesh, and they are according to the color of the flesh.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you order the patient to sit and squeeze so that the anus dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut and grab with your nails or whatever you have those with your fingernail, and then you pierce them at their roots.
But if the nails are not in them due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or with a stick or with a piece of wool, and pull them out with your teeth, and then insert them and spread over them some powders mixed together at the incision, so that they are as cautery; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. And then heal them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the exit, then you crucify the patient with a small cross made of wood, and wash him with the water that is in his anus and which causes the exit more quickly when he squeezes himself.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is leanness, and it is that you grab them with your fingernail, or grab them with your nail, and insert them, and then heal them with what we have said until they are healed.
And the one who has an incision, be careful to administer a stitch of them in this manner: take a piece of wool wrapped around and insert it into a needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their upper parts, and make the needle penetrate with the other part of the piece of wool into the root of the opposite side, and wrap both ends of the piece of wool in the part lowest down from the needle, and tie it tightly; and then squeeze the hemorrhoid with a strong grip, and pull out the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one not sewn up, so that the excess blood flows out from it.
And then place over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or in cerot; and place it on the anus and order the patient to rest. And then leave it until it heals; and when it is healed, heal them with ointments or with other treatment so that they are healed.
And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then you cut them with the point of a spatulate needle or with your fingernail until they are moist and host an abscess above them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Then you obstinate them with a more violent scraping than the first one so that they move blood and are excoriated; and then heal them until they are healed.
Know that ulceration, so is a key, and it is not unless there are red dots according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it is made in all parts of the body and especially in the lower parts of the feet and the toes, and from there you have pain.
And then let it be incised what is in the circuit of the key, and let it be held with tweezers or with nails, and let it be pulled out from its root; and then heal that.
And if you want, cauterize the second one as it is preceded in its own chapter.
But a wart is a small rough round fistula on the surface of the body, and many times it comes in the hands of children.
And its treatment is that you stretch and insert it, or squeeze it with a needle or thread until it comes out. And if you want, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
But a mole is a small hairy or hairy fistula on the surface of the body that appears in the armpits, and when it is rubbed it is similar to an insect bite, and it is made around the body.
And its treatment is that you take a hollow reed of goose feather or hawk feather, and let it be strong, and place it over the mole so that it contains the circle of the reed from the edges of it; and then rotate your hand with the reed so that you insert what is in the circuit of the mole, and leave it at the bottom of the flesh, and pull out the mole from its root.
And if you want, do it with a reed of ram or of iron according to this shape:
Let the part above the reed be drawn to a thinness, dull (so it is not pierced), wrapped so that over the finger the sensation of it be wiped and the revolution of it.
And if you want to cauterize the mole as it is said before in the cauterization of warts in the chapter on cauterization.
On the shape of the instruments that are administered to give crucifixes.
Sometimes it is made of silver or brass or melted brass or malachite; and sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those which are administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose anuses are dry or painful, the crucifixes of these are small.
The form of great and small stones
The top of the catheter in which is attached the bag should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at where the bag is attached, thus with times.
And the end of it further below, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (so that it is not open) most fiercely, excepting with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two slits, and in the other side a slit, and let the width of the slits be according to the thicknesses of the rays and larger one small.
And let the bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or wool be tied, and its length be one palm.
And let it be perforated with many slits thus as it is rolled; and if the space between the slits, the thickness of a finger.
And let it be inserted into these slits strong vinegar of strong bile which is of ten bilis, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in him the bag, let it be tight at the head of the stone between two distinctions with strong constriction, and let it gout with that each slit: But the quality of gouting with that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is warmed according to the amount of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And let the patient be reclined on his back, and elevate his legs upward and place beneath him a board on which there are men or a bed; and let the end of the cautery be anointed with oil or with white of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or the like; and let it be inserted into the anus with ease, and let the minister hold the bag and express that with two hands and press with mightiness while it is evacuated into the bowel all that which is in the stone; and let the stone and the patient be lifted up the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to go out, let him have as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for all a night, it is more useful in healing.
But if you gout that in illnesses of relaxation of belly and its going out is cut, then do the cautery again until he is healed.
And if in the anus are hemorrhoids or painful tumors, let the stone be very small and fierce, of the stones with which children are stoned.
Of care of the sores:
You have already said in the division of the care of sores what was proper for the book, and I say thus is the care of those with hand and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that sores are various according to what is caused by the sores and according to the place on which occurred the sores.
And the causes why many times sores are caused are thus as hitting of stone, or piercing with spear or with knife, or hitting with lance or with club, or with arrow, or the like to those causes.
But the sores which are in the parts of the body are thus as sore that fell upon the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or thigh, and the like to those of the members.
And I am recounting the care of some sores so that you understand that reasoning and rule about the other sores.
And I will begin of the sores of head simple, for the memory of the compounded will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when it happens in the head simple sore and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is by hitting of stone or the like, and the tendon has been broken only and there is great sore and you fear about that patient a tumor, then you cool it and take phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at once, and do not delay that; and draw off blood from that according to the amount of its strength if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, mostly if the blood which has come out of the sore is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the contrary side from the sore party; and beware of the patient's replection and of wine and heavy food.
But if because of the minor any cause prohibits that, then it is diminished from food and do not approach meat or wine.
And place upon the sore, if there happens to it tumor cautery, cut cotton steeped in rose oil or wine in which is steeped;
But if it is secure from tumor cautery, then place upon the sore, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recounted earlier, then apply it small;
And if the air has already changed that, then place upon some ointment until it is healed.
But if the sore is large or it is by piercing with knife and the like, and its lips are not sewed together by threads, then sew those together according to how I recounted of their sewing.
But if the sore is uncovered of bone and nerve, and there is not retention of it except a small suspension, then insert that and let the sore be cared by medicines and restore the meat after in place of tendon, and command the patient that he abstains from food in which is coarseness: heads and forms of meat and the like to them, until it is composite.
And if you find in the tendon putrefaction and it does not adhere to bone, then insert all that putrid and throw that, and let it be cared.
But if in these sores is artery or vein from which flows blood and it has not been cut off by medicines, then you press upon the artery, and if you find that uncut, then you insert that with spatula, or ligature that; and if necessity prompts you to do that which I have recounted, then cauterize until the blood is abscised.
And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is dryness; thus that you powder upon those this powder, for when the air changes that before which.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of eggs yolk one, of blood of dragon two parts, of milk not-extinguished three parts; let it be all dry and sifted, and of that be the sore filled, and let it be bound by good constriction until it lies over that healing, and let the blood coagulate.
And let it be tightened above that with powders and let her lie thus until it is healed, for there is not inherited of it the medicine until it is healed.
And at times do that alone cautery when you have not at hand eggs and blood of dragon;
And do this meteyssa operation in great sores when it seems that it should be placed upon them and be tight, and so sores recent with its blood, which the air has not altered;
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intent to the position of this powder, but afterwards cure those with that which I have recounted, thus that you place upon those some ointments digested, or that you place upon those poultices of flour of barley with water and honey until they are cooked; and let them be cared by the other care until they are healed.
But if it happens with the sore fracture of bone, and is small, then you draw that out with tweezers.
I will describe the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
Of wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no harm done to it except to apply something that causes strong contraction, as well as cinchona and zeki which are like vitriol and similar to them because they do harm to nerves and contract that. And don't place on the wound any cause of all heat, because the substance of nerves is heat and the continuation of it goes to the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
And if it is healed with medicine that are light, such as washing with warm water, or by using a poultice of rosewater or not-rosewater, and then when the wound is washed with warm water and the other stones according to this way, and then anointed with oil.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or sew up the lips of it and then cure that with powder inside until it is healed.
But if the wound has depth or an infection in it to the lower part of pus-filled swelling, then pierce that in the lowest place.
But if in the wound an artery is cut and there is flow of blood, then separate or stop that, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity requires you to do so.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of them are broken and the veins of the neck are preserved, then sew up the lips of the wound over the cane of the neck and don't touch it; elevate that and reduce it to its natural shape and then strengthen it with decent tightness, and let it heal for several days; and then cure that with ointments in which there is contraction and excitation until it is healed.
But if the wound has been made on the bone with force, then probe it and if there are pieces of bones in it, extract all that you can; and that which to you does not appear clear, let that be inside until the wound becomes pus-filled and separate and the discharge of it be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent then powder on it the powder by which you are advised. But if a fistula is made in the wound then cure that with something of which the remembrance will come later in its chapter.
If it is a strike by a lance or a spear and you see the depth of it then consider more if from the wound there is bloating when the patient stops breathing; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is not depth to it and the wound is recent with its blood, then you place on it powder from the first hour and don't tighten that so that the blood isn't retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and weaken the patient, but anoint that with attractive ointment, and loose it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then place on the orifice of the wound a woolen cloth so that it sucks up what there is in humidity; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs what is retained inside it.
But if from the wound three days or more have passed and there does not come to the patient spasms or trembling of the heart or tightness of the chest, and you see the other good dispositions of it, then know that the wound is healed; and then cure that with cauterization and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if its healing is prevented and it is already open for a long time then know that a fistula has already been made; cure therefore that according to its chapter.
And if the wound is by a strike of a spear or a lance and it is simple in its surface on the foot or the head then cure that with what precedes suturing if it is large or powder if it is small.
But if force has already been made on the bone and only pieces of it are broken then you twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated then let them be until the wound becomes pus-filled because the extraction of them is alleviated.
And for other wounds that are accidental in other members the increase in cure is the increase of what we have already said.
Of wounds of the belly.
The disposition by which a wound occurs in the belly is either large or small or medium-sized.
And a small disruption is made difficult in another way and it is seen that its reduction is more difficult if you don't cut off the infiltration of them to their own place at once, because it opens and becomes swollen so that its insertion is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized because in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult as in the two mentioned before.
And know that there are four types of suturing of the belly, but two sutures are common and convient in suturing of the other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures are proper to each other in the suturing of the belly, but they are also proper to the suturing of the other wounds.
I will now describe to you each one with its explanation.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine has exited through it, and its reduction is difficult in one of two ways: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the intestine is given inflammation by chill of the air.
And therefore when that is so then you must scorch it with a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone or by gathering in tepid water and cyperus, and spikenard, and myrrh, and embrocation over the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this with that in which there is contraction and it is better than lukewarm water in resolution of the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved then you moisten the intestine with water in which is steeped alder and mallows because through that the insertion of it is alleviated by a little cause.
But if the intestine is not relieved by this cure then split the disruption a little with an instrument with which its membranes are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is proper that there is no incision and no occupation to dry up afterwards and deficiency of food.
Of the instrument its form is:
One end of it is bent acute and the other end not acute, and its extremity is subtle but not with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
And therefore when the wound is enlarged and you see it exiting the intestine then know that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place if possible because that is better.
But when the rupture is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place his head and the feet highest of all.
And likewise if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then direct your intention and attention to this, so that the part which has the wound is higher than the other.
And you should administer this for large wounds and small wounds alike.
And for small wounds, apply what you have prepared, and let the minister hold it between his fingers, who should have the rupture in his hand and close its lips, and he should discover to one or another whether there is any cause for sewing.
And this is the common method of sewing: take a needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the amplitude of the wound; and leave off at the extremity of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, then that you do not put thread in both extremes of the gut, with two extremes of the needle which is below the gut of the parts within, while you make it penetrate from this part; and you have already joined two extremes of the gut and two extremes of the needle, and so are made four turns.
And you tighten with double thread around the needle, and some times from two parts together, and you join two lips and the wound by decent gathering; and leave off at the thickness of the little finger and put another needle in that, and tie that with thread thus as is done with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the sewing of the wound.
And let the needles be smaller between coarseness and thinness, for thin needles penetrate quickly into the flesh; and coarse ones are difficult to enter into the gut, and therefore let them be smaller in coarseness and thickness.
And let the needle not be pushed into two extremes of the gut next to each other, so that the flesh is not quickly pierced and that the wound opens before its consolidation.
And let the sewing not be prolonged so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
And you should insert the extremes of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during his sleep; and you will place over the sewing powdered herbs from every part, which have the extremes of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is consolidated.
And these species of sewing with needles in what manner is most convenient in small wounds, for it suffices in their sewing one needle or two or around them.
But the second sewing is communal: and it is that you administer with sewing the four extremes, of the gut and two extremes of the needle, in one go, with a needle in which is thread wrapped equal in coarseness and thickness.
And when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremes, return the needle from that part from which you began, so that the thread drawn pulls the uppermost part to the wound, so that the sewing is like sewing of cloth in which the cloth is tightened.
And place between each sewing the amount of the thickness of the little finger.
And this sewing know men.
And with such sewing I closed the wound which was done to a man in his belly, which had been pierced by a knife, and was the rupture of the wound major of a palm, and had come out of the intestines around two palms from the intestine of the middle place and was the rupture in the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had exited the wound for xxiiii hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of xv days or around, and he healed that and is well; and appropriately this lived for many years, and is conversant in his dispositions.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not applied nor any medicine, but I placed over the wound cotton wool two times a day and frequent ablution with water of honey until he was healed.
But I will tell two species of sewing proper according to narration of Word.
And it is that you begin with sewing of the gut and insert needle from the part outside to the part within.
And so when the needle penetrates into the gut and in that you twist according to rectitude and in length of all the body, and leave off at the extreme of the needle in which you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate in the other extreme the needle from the part within to the part outside in the other extreme of the member.
And when you have done that penetrate, then you make that penetrate another go in that meteyssa extreme of the member from the part outside to the part within; and leave off at the extreme of the needle which is in this side, and make penetrate the needle in the other extreme of the part within to the part outside.
And make penetrate with that your penetration which you do that penetrate in the needle in the extreme of the member in the extreme of the eye which is in the part of him within that all that penetrates.
And you begin of this member side and sew that with the extreme which is of the needle in the other side, and pull out that from the gut which penetrates, and return that in that gut and sew the extreme of the member which is in the other side with this extreme of the eye; and pull out that from the gut which is of part of him.
And do that one go and another, and do that one go then another go while you sew all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this way of sewing is that you sew with sewing of skin am which I sew the skin, in that you sew the intestine one go from the extreme of the gut, and leave off then while you have completed it.
But the second proper species which I tell is teaching of Gualia, and that is of word of him and by him composed, is that you sew that according to semilitude am which medicine sewed that, in that they join all part to its compared part to him conveniently by nature; and apply the extreme of another of him and the extreme of the eye to the other extreme of him, and that is done according as I have composed.
Let you put the needle in the extreme of the eye to you next to the part outside, and make that penetrate to the part within in that sole, and leave off two extremes of the intestine; and return the needle and make that penetrate from outside to inside in two extremes of the intestine.
And you return those, and make penetrate some of the part within into the part outside in two extremes of the eye others than are in the contrary side.
And this way of sewing is better than the common sewing, and is sewing of which precedes memory.
This is the word of Gualia
And you put in these some thread, and begin with insertion of needle from that which is of you, and make that penetrate according to sewing of those whom I sewed the bodies equally.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle part of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the belly.
But the treatment of medicine for plague is different from the treatments for other illnesses.
The cause of this is that when you encounter a fresh plague wound with its blood visible and the air alters it, and you reduce the hernia and dress it decently, then apply an incorruptive powder to it.
And if the air has already altered the plague wound, then apply on it some alum in unguent form which is at your presence so that it forms a hard stone and catches the pus, and is consolidated and dried; and thus you treat this as you do with other plague wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at your presence, then apply it immediately as soon as you notice the wound, for as long as it starts to weep, cut short hair, and change its dressing twice a day, as well as wash it with warm water, until it is healed; for in many dispositions when the plague wounds are simple, you do not need another medicine.
But if you fear that the plague will spread to the principal members, then cover wool in lion fat of good quality, or in rose oil, and apply it on the parts between the joints and below the armpits.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in his bowels, for many times this happens, then cauterize it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the putrefaction has occurred in the intestine and there is a penetrating wound within its cavity.
And know that which is of the large intestine is of a harder cure than that which is in the small intestines.
And it is of difficult cure because the intestine called "gut" does not receive cure from the plague that occurs in it at all; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its size which is in those, and because of the subtlety of that body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to get it while it's fresh, then reduce it according to your skill by which you reduce intestines equally.
But if it has passed into it space and has already turned green or black, then that you apply bile on the place that is blackened from it, so that blood flow comes out, for in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
And then insert what is another part of that dressing, and hang the two extremities of the bile from the edge below the plague wound, so that on you is alleviated the attraction of it because of the fastening of the tissue and emission of the pus of the plague.
Remembering of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it might be restored in some men, thus because he drank vinegar and it was a plague wound in his belly with piercing of spear, and the plague was of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and made into a fistula, and there came out of it pus and wind.
Then he followed the cure for him which was that it was not confided in his healing, but he continued to sublimate it until it was healed and the place became consolidated.
And he put that he saw the place already consolidated, he would direct upon the patient that he should not have any accident of evil in his belly; and he did not experience anything from that evil accident, and he stayed in his own habits eating and drinking, and he went into bath and was exercised in his wits.
And some experienced men have already said that when plague occurs in the intestine and it is small, then one should tie it according to this way: and it is that you take gum from big nuts; and then you adjust the two lips of the plague wound and place one of those gums which has an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when he takes on them and tightens his mouth, cut off the gum's stalk, for it will adhere and not dissolve.
And then place another gum near the first one, and do not cease this until you have done with gums one after another according to the quantity of the whole plague wound.
And then reduce it and close the plague wound; and let those nut stalks remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not let any harm occur to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with fine thread which is made from animal intestines attached to it, since it is more in needle; and it is that you take the extremities of those intestines' threads, and let it be somewhat fleshless, and then tie the extremity of it with thread, wrapped around, and then insert that thread in needles and close with that the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this way of suture with gums is nothing but according to the way of confidence and hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then there is only sublimation, and not a complete cure for it.
Of cure for ulcer and fistula.
Know that all plague and ulcer when they are closed up and become old, and there is made an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and continues to weep pus at all times and is not cut off, then in whatever member it is, universally it is called a fistula and we call it azucem.
And fistula according to truth is a knotted ulcer, hard, white with which there is no pain and to which there is no cavity as it is a cavity of bone; and therefore that is named some rizatz, that is pain.
And it is in some men moist, which lets out pus; and very much of the moisture is discharged in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have already shown all those causes, and their signs in the division, as well as the cure for them with medicines.
And thus I will make you know the cure for fistula which is made by way of operation with hand.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for from those there are fistulas which come to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the head, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or to one of the joints, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to a similar joint; and of those there is that gives proximity to the principal member and to its likes.
And thus of these fistulas which follow this manner are of difficult healing and do not receive cure, and with them is trouble and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places which I have described, and you hope for and believe in its cure, and wish to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight ahead, probe with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for lead, because of its light weight, will be drawn and curved toward the twist.
And if the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify anything about it with a probe.
Then christen the orifice with holy water, for the moisture by which you cleanse it will go through the other orifices and flow from them.
And then inquire carefully, according to what manner you are able to know whether there is bone or nerve here, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula whose orifices are all on that spot, and according to the nature of the pain which comes with your compression of the area with your hand, and according to the significance of the causes and the swelling.
And when you have considered all these causes with true knowledge, then proceed to the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula appears nearby or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of those places which I have mentioned to you.
Then you shall dry the fistula according to what has been said before about its description, and prevent what is in that filtration and of putrefied flesh, and what is born from the orifice of flesh, or of thorns and their likes, and heal within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth and goes straight ahead, then see that you insert it into the fistula as much as you can safely do so, and then cleanse it of all its putrefied flesh; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotted in the cavity of the fistula's corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh within until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you shall cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you have certified this, then you shall inquire and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or major member as I have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you shall cut away that corruption until it is all gone; and then heal it with what makes flesh within until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and the ulcer comes back as before, then know that you have not attained the complete eradication of the corruption; and then discover it again and carefully find out the reason for it and cleanse it with your strongest medicine, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not attained, and then you must only leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small or you can pull it out, then you shall pull it out with subtle forceps which are suited to that purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all those, and leave behind none of their causes with your knowledge.
But if you encounter any cause of moisture and in their incision there is no fear or error, then insert those limbs or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to pull the bones from your patient at this time, then pause over the wound whatever will cause it to fester, and leave it so that what is around those bones of flesh and limbs, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated but constrained, the section which you have cut in your operation.
Have you fear, pause over it a cloth dipped in oil, or a cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when those limbs fester and the bones are separated from their socket, and their attraction is driven away.
But if it is a great bone like the bone of the leg or thigh, or similar, and what is corrupted is only its membrane, then cut away that membrane behind so that the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted is a great portion and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that up and to cut all around where the corruption has come, and then heal that within until it is consolidated.
And I remind you to fasten one end of your patient's thigh to your bed so that he may assist you in your operation.
A young man about 30 years old had pain in his thigh, and from the parts within the jaw was matter upon the matter within the body which came to the jaw, and it is matter of ulcer with great ulcer, and there is not to him an extrinsic cause.
And then the time was prolonged by the error of the doctors until the ulcer had opened up, and matter had collected from it, and its cure was then paused until the thigh was fistulated, and there are in him many orifices through which all oozed pus and the body's moisture.
And then he was treated by many doctors for about two years, and there was not in them any relief except in the bone, where he was called.
And I saw his thigh and the matter that flowed from him through those orifices, indeed his whole body was wasted away and his color was yellow.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And then I probed all the orifices and found them coming from all parts of the thigh.
And then I cut and probed one of those orifices where I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it rotted, indeed blackened and rotted; and a portion of the thigh was already rotted where it had penetrated into the membrane.
And then I seared that which had been discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I found that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which I had cut off and seared, and I had already removed it.
And then I paused over the wound' restoration with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
And then I probed and discovered the bone again a second time over the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I seared what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I found it necessary to perform the cure of it and its restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I uncovered him again and did not cease from cutting into the small bones little by little particularly and piercing through to the bone, and it was not closed up until I had cut around a palm's width of him, and that [bone] I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that one with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to cut into him again except by the disposition of his sickness and because of his lack of tolerance for it and fear of death, since at all times he fainted from the excess of evacuation.
And so he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition has become good in his body and his strength has returned; and he is restored to his usual dispositions, and he has no difficulty walking or harm in any way.
But if there is bone protruding from the body, then you should proceed in this manner: Take some ligature and tie it tightly around the end of the protruding bone; have someone else pull on it upwards while you hold it down with a piece of woolen cloth which is thicker than the first one; and then tie that over the meat below the bone and stretch out the end of it so as to draw the flesh away from the part below, and uncover the flesh at the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
And put a board or pillow under the bone properly so that when you do this it is not forbidden for the saw to cut into the rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw be used on the rotten place little by little, because if the corruption is in the hollow of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to sensation, then it will force another cut elsewhere.
And if the bone is rotten and not protruding, then it is one part continued from the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it; then uncover all parts completely; and put a board under it, and cut there in the first part where the corruption is until the cutting continues to the other part.
And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption a little bit at a time as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint and saw through the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not a reason for that except foolishness.
And if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or foot it is very difficult; however, see what the corruption appears to you like and open it up, and treat it according to whatever way that seems possible to you, and with every foolishness be corrected by you when there is no contrariness caused by a vein or nerve.
And you should know that there are many ways of cutting and the saws for cutting these bones depend on the situation of the bones and their preparation, and thickness, thinness, magnitude, smallness, hardness, rarity, and so forth; therefore, when you prepare any kind of instrument for an operation, be careful to fit it to that operation.
And you should know that this operation tells you about the kind of instrument of which you are in need; when you have great study and long experience of the ways of this art, and knowledge of the ways of diseases, for then you already have through your own experience what is convenient to instruments for all illnesses.
And I leave it to you at the end of this chapter to count up the number of instruments with which you will be equipped, by which you will proceed in your prohibition, which you will learn about from the others. The shape of the saw:
The shape of another saw:
The shape of another large saw:
The shape of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be shaped like a star-shaped key, and its points be shaped like the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient for it to have smooth heads except when it is used on the heads of joints which are corrupted, or on a large mouth.
The shape of a smaller razor:
The shape of a broad razor:
The shape of another saw properly made: let its bow be made of the most superior iron and the blade of it of decently made boy's dagger. Its shape:
The shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
The shape of another subtle razor:
The shape of another razor with a curved end:
The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
The shape of another smaller chisel:
The shape of another chisel; this one resembling a rasp, and its end is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones:
The shape of a rasp which is convenient for piercing of bones:
And its end is triangular and acutely pointed.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes which we have mentioned about rasps and chisels and saws.
Of cutting edges and piercing through bones.
The edges may become blunt either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the healing does not correspond, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the part of the body in which it is not caused by any cut, then you should cut that part of the body where the corruption is located, so that the patient may escape death or a greater harm to that member.
And the sign of him to whom it happens is that the member turns black while it is being healed as if fire had burned it, or it becomes black afterwards when that burning has gone into that member which feels it and which affects the whole body; therefore, be careful about cutting that.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is the percussion of some poisonous things such as scorpion venom, or snake venom, or adder's venom, or the like.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in the end of the finger, then cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
And similarly if it comes to the hand, then cut that from the knuckle of the fire-bow, and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the bow of the arm.
And if instead of that you cut the arm at the elbow in the joint.
And if the corruption passes over and turns around the knuckle then in that is the death of the patient; and the cause of another one besides this in healing is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly cut the foot when corruption comes to the toe of the foot, then cut that from one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then cut all the foot. But if it goes into the paw, then cut the leg at the joint of the paw.
And if the corruption has already come upon the paw then there is no remedy except release, and let the patient go to death.
And the way of cutting the member or of sawing it is that you tighten the ligature in the part which you want to cut, and tighten another ligature over the place; and extend the minister one ligature to the lower parts, and extend the other minister ligature above; and separate the flesh which is between two ligatures then split it lengthwise so that all the flesh be uncovered; and then let it be cut or sawn.
And have cloth placed over him from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and let the patient be given a poultice of heated lead and a cautery.
If there is bleeding, then cauterize the wound or apply some powders that restrict the blood flow; then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the affected limb with a bandage in a comfortable manner and treat it until it is healed.
I have seen a man whose foot was affected in this way, as described by you; the cause was blackness in his foot from burning, resembling fire burns.
And that corruption began first in his toe, then spread throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself remedies so that the treatment would go to the affected limb with his great desire and effort; he applied them until the joint was healed and the pain and burning ceased.
For a long time, that man had suffered from that corruption in the toe of his right hand.
And then he came to me, and I removed that excess with the medicines I applied to his body; thus, the purification of his body was accomplished, and the excess did not spread to the other toe but began in the hand where it had started.
He begged me to cut off his hand, but I refused, fearing the spread of that excess and more so because of the risk of the hand becoming gangrenous due to the seriousness of the condition.
And when he despaired of me, he returned to his homeland and found that man who prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it healed.
And I have not added this narrative except that it may be an aid to those who suffer from this disease and as a sign by which it is recognized and treated accordingly.
On the treatment of wounds and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy part and the space of the abscess is prolonged so that it forms a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged, and the wound remains hollow as if it were a vessel, and the cord-like tissue above it is removed with a thin cloth, and there is no further corruption, nor does it affect the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinuous wound and not a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged so that corruption spreads to some part, then it is called a fistula and not a sinuous wound.
And its treatment is that the cord-like tissue is entirely removed as it is rolled up, especially when it is thinned down and treated with a cloth, and you must be careful not to cause adhesion to the affected area due to the corruption.
But if you expect the cord-like tissue to adhere and the corruption has not yet caused any damage, and it has extended forward, then you should treat it with enemas.
And you should consider the sinuous wound; if it is large and the flesh gives off a fetid odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, wine vinegar, and honey, mixed together in equal parts and placed in a vessel over fire until it becomes thick like honey.
Then take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; treat the wound with this, close its opening, and leave the medicine in for two hours.
Then remove it with care; do this for several days until the wound is purified and healed.
And sometimes it is enema with water of ashes when you do not have the medicine available; take ash from a vitis vine and put water on it, then stir it up and treat the wound with this until you are sure that the wound is healed.
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then treat it with water and honey in which is mixed ground zingiber, and also with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to purify and cleanse, and wine adheres to the wound, especially when there is an excess of dryness and astringency in the wine.
And when you do this several times and you are sure that the wound is healed, then treat it with something that makes flesh grow in it.
And take some thin myrrh and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or treat the wound with other medicines and ointments that I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow and the enema cannot be inserted, then widen it gradually with a small iron rod and place a poultice wrapped in an Egyptian ointment or a basilicon ointment over it until it is widened.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should bring the edges together with stitches and leave a small amount inside so that the enema can be inserted into it.
And if the opening through which the arm extends upward is elevated above the surrounding parts, then dry that part in the pus which is below it so that the arm can extend downward; for when the arm is contract in a sinuous wound, flesh is generated in it.
And if you cannot dry the wound in the bone, then you must have the limb prepared so that the arm extends outward freely according to your estimation, and there must be no cause for the arm to be retained in it.
But that which is over the opening of the wound, let it be kept in place for as long as it takes to heal what is bound in the arm. And so that you may know whether what runs out of it is blood or pus, or undigested food, or digested:
And according to this you consider the location of that wound, whether it causes pain in the patient or not, and if there is an abscess in it:
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been applied to the opening of the wound already adhere, or it has acquired adhesion, then you should loosen it on the third day, and when you remove the dressing, then change the ointment.
But if from the wound a subtle pus extends downward to a great distance, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is proper; for there are some men in whom the generation of flesh occurs slowly in the wounds, and others in whom it occurs quickly.
And if from the wound an indigestible arm extends for several days, then know that the wound has not adhered; and if the adhesion of the wound is delayed and its cause prolonged, then adjust your medicines in desiccation, and if your medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, then dry them with myrrh ointment, when there is an excess of astringency in it.
And the most effective medicine for this condition is to take a thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the affected area, and use it often.
And if there are no bandages available, take thin ointment, honey when it is cut and thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them all into powder over the fire, and spread this powder on a cloth and place it over the wound; and spread the ointment that you have cut and thickened over the honey, and spread it on a cloth.
And sometimes you should administer to it long-stemmed aristology and roots of celestial lily (and celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaurea, and use these simples or prepare them, grind them up and sieve them into powder over the honey that I have mentioned; and use this.
And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then understand that the corruption is in the flesh of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or to the tendons; then treat it with a fistula treatment, as has been said above.
On the treatment of nail fungus and nail scraping and addition of digit incision and section.
Panarici is an apostema which arises below the nail of the toe or finger, and very rarely in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is apoplectic of apostema cauterized, or it is corrupted, and causes a pus under that corrodes the root of the nail, and very often corrupts all of it, and very often its corruption pervades to the bone within which has an offensive odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes lame, and its color becomes dark.
And therefore when you have this with what we have said in the division and do not bring about your cure, then understand that you should pour out all the superfluity that is rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound properly, because cautery is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the edges of the nail start to press into the flesh between the fingers, and begin to sting and irritate it, then understand that you should place a fine needle under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive it upwards and cut that flesh with ease, and place over it something that produces burning corrosion while it is still moist; and then cure this with an ointment until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already penetrated to the bone, then understand that you should cut out the bone and extract it, because the bone which is corrupted will never be healed.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then cut it at one of the joints according to where the memory is, and then cure this until it is healed.
But if the nail has a concussion or abrasion, and subsequently it causes great pain in that place, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh which is below the nail, because you will cause great pain to the patient, and this would result in the birth of superficial flesh in that location; and then cure that place until the pain subsides.
But a finger which is attached to the hand of some men, is very rarely all flesh, or it has no bones in it, or it is only a nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some of the fingers. But he who is born on some fingers does not suffer harm, and he who is born at the joints suffers much harm.
And for those which are born fleshy, the cut is easier, and you should cut it below its root with a broad spatula.
But for he who is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the falling off of it.
But for he who is born on the finger between the joints, understand that you should at the beginning cut into the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those convenient saws for this, and then cure this until it is healed.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers between them very often or due to the nature of man who is born that way, or due to consolidation of pus or by fire, or similarly, therefore understand that you should dry up that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then place between them lint soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate these from one another, or place between them a thin sheet of lead according to where it is consolidated.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
Of cuts from time to time, these are varicose veins.
Varicose veins and varicose veins, are large twisted veins full of melancholy humors which appear in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore understand that you should administer a purgative to the body of black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But their cure by cupping is according to two manners: the one is that it is cut and that black blood is drawn, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
Its cut is according to this manner: at the beginning soak the leg with warm water until the gross blood which is foul from the leg is resolved, and then bind up the leg of the patient at the place above the pus which is near to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two places, or three places with a broad cut, and then elevate the black blood by the sole of the foot upwards to within it, and let the amount of blood which you desire and can endure be expelled, and the strength of the patient bear it.
And then ligature that, and command him that he abstain from foods generating black cholera.
And repeat the cure by cupping when the veins are full and this afflicts the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient if it pains him, and then place him in a bath and soak the leg with warm water until he becomes warm and the veins are swollen; or that he is exercised by strong exercise, if bathing is not at hand, until the member is warmed.
And then dry up the vein on the outside of the leg by a cut in the thigh or at the back of it below the knee, or in the sole of the foot below the toe.
And then open up the vein with tweezers and scrape the vein in every part where it appears to the sense, and it is due to the appearance that it inclines towards blackness.
And therefore when you see this and the vein, you will see it white and like corded.
And then you should place below that the rayon so that it is elevated and gitted from the vein, and support that with a lion's tooth.
And then cut another incision near that incision to a depth of three fingers, and then excise the vein that appears above it.
And then elevate that and incise it behind the second incision down to the bone, and then extract that and elevate what is within from the second incision, and then extract that from above the incision.
And then do what is necessary to extract it from the incision that is highest or uppermost of all the incisions, so that everything is exposed; and then incise it.
And if it does not yield to you when you try to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong needle with a thread through it and ligature it, or insert it below the bone and move your hand over all parts where it is lodged. And be careful not to incise it; for if it is broken, it is difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
And when all of that has been completely expelled, then place over the site of the ulcer wool saturated in wine and rose oil, and cure that which is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted with an enlargement at its parts, and it does not follow rectitude according as we have said, then you should split that throughout all of its twists and the locations of its enlargement, and then suspend that with hooks so that you elevate it all.
And be careful not to incise the vein and not to harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your discretion in that.
Form of the incision with which the vein is dried:
It is not accuteed with the hooks or acute at its end so that it does not harm the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would incise the vein because of its subtlety; there is superfluous thickness in it as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is engendered in the legs in lower lands like Al-Ategi in the arid and barren lands of Arabia and in the lands of India that are lower and arid with little tenderness, and in which there is not grass nor herbage.
And very rarely is it engendered in other locations of the body other than the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that comes beneath the membrane like venom within the body of serpents and worms and snails and worms engendered between the membrane and the flesh.
And a sign of the occurrence of it is that this vein happens in inflammation and swelling in the leg, and then the location becomes vesicated; and then the vein begins to emerge from the location of that vesication looking like a root of a plant.
And then when you see the end of it, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma and a half, and keep it in place and let the lead hang from the leg.
And as many times as it causes some pain at its parts going outward, wrap that with lead and hold it. And if the pain is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not incise that which is rooted so that it be exposed, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an apostema and swelling at the location and a bad ulcer.
For it should be treated gradually and extracted little by little so that it is expelled from its end and does not cause any harm in the body.
And from this vein some people are affected who are in their length of five or six palms and I have seen one who was twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then insert the bone into its hollow and perforate it with a long hole through to the body so that everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and then administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and then cure that with the cure of apostemas.
And this vein sometimes has ram-like pains, and mostly when it appears at the joint of the leg or in the leg, and it comes to it pains from horrible places, and is engendered from every orifice of a ram.
And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above.
Of the section of worms engendered under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some land because of its boun illness due to worms which are engendered between the membrane and the flesh, and go throughout the body pushing and descending, and are revealed to the sense by the movement of a member from member so that they rupture the membrane and emerge out.
And its generation is from putrefaction of certain humors like the engendering of worms and serpents and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the throat, then very rarely does it open in it and enter and destroy the throat, and that happens sometimes.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless through the movement of it and its appearance to the sense, and then you should tighten what is over it and what is under it with a ligature and compression very strongly, and then cut over it and extract that.
And if it is deep in the flesh and not approaching, then you place cautery with fire over the location where it resides, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the location as we have said.
And if you want it to be brought to the head near the throat, then tighten the neck strongly with a tight ligature, and then cut over it, and extract that; and let the patient use purification of his body with evacuant medicines, and guard against food engendering putrefaction.
Of the section on infant illness.
This illness is named in our land infant, and it is a pain which comes in some members, and then it is transferred from member to member.
And I will tell you about that according as he recounted to me. He was called to a sick woman in a village, and he saw her arm and noticed a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it was swollen for an hour, he saw that inflammation go up as though it were a living worm, but more quickly than if it were silver when it goes from place to place.
And then it went to the pain of that location and settled in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
And then it went through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then he recounted to me that it moved around through the body, second as he saw it; and it was too marvelous about its transformation and the speed of member to member. And he had seen before that in the same way, but he had seen pains which are transferred from member to member. But I have not seen that with the arms as with the woman.
And I did not think that was because the woman was old, being of sixty years and with veins exposed, and in her appeared to the sense that twitching transformed.
And it is necessary that this retro-cure not appear in those who are delicate, with humid bodies and veins hidden.
And when you want to cure him and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear like that as we have said, then you stretch him out and reduce him lightly and dry him on the spot from which that windiness has come out, and cauterize the site.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you should treat him with a purging of the body and with that which expels windiness, and those carmine pills with foul-smelling pills and serapium pills and similar ones.
On the extraction of arrows:
Arrows are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt ones, and some are solid; and among them are those that have three angles, and others that have tongues.
And the signs of the soul are when an arrow strikes it, and penetrates the bone, and exits through the foramen which is above the brain, for then occur violent soda, and scotomata, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile, and the voice is greatly impaired and destroyed, and moisture exits from the site of the wound white like flour, and his eyes resemble water.
And so if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from cure and extraction of the arrow unless it is stuck outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels like it has been stuck in a hard substance, and is not a hollow cause; and quickly the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and flows from the wound black blood, and descend all ten parts.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are effusion of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes in a great spirit, and demands frequent breathing.
And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain is near the little ribs, and a great wound is made with violent pain and a sigh, and all the limbs of the muscles are not weakened.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then quickly see the wound with some digested food.
And if the arrow strikes the belly and is lodged in it, see any slit of the wound, or the fabric, or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for cure by extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and exits urine, and processes some cause to the parts outside, and is great pain on the patient, then know that it is deadly.
But the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and their like of the limbs, are saved according to the most prominent dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your cure.
The cause is, because in one man an arrow struck the lacrimal bone of his eye on the root of his nose, and he extracted it from the other side, leaving the bones of his eyebrow, and he was healed, and did not occur in his eye any harm.
And extracted another arrow from a Jew which he struck in him on the bones of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and he did not obtain it except for a little end with which it adhered to his staff, and it was a great arrow of the pointed arrows of the Turks, with lion ferrule, in which there were no eyebrows.
And the Jew was healed, and no harm occurred to his eye badly.
And extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had struck him in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that to which the eyebrows belong; and then I inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his throat, and I made it thin with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And extracted another arrow from a man which had struck him in the belly, and I considered that he would die from it; and therefore, after they had passed thirty days and no change occurred to him of his dispositions, I inserted into the arrow and probed it, and he was healed, and no bad accident occurred to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and after fire close to seven years, the arrow exited through the root of the thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow struck her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and she did not change in her dispositions for ten days, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his face and the wound was consolidated, and the arrow was broken, not causing here any pain, and similar movements.
And extracted the arrow of the king's prince who was struck in the middle of his nose, and he had already declined to the right party a little, and the arrow was all hidden.
And I was called to his cure close to the extraction of the arrow after three days.
And then I probed the wound of the arrow with a slender probe, and he did not feel it; but he felt a puncture below the eyebrow on the right, and then I perceived that this puncture was from the end of the arrow.
And I applied the place with ointment in which is verity atractive and digestive, believing from me that the place would be exposed so that it appears to me the location of the arrow, drying on it.
And no significant accident occurred that the arrow had achieved that location; and I continued with the ointment on it for several days, and no accident occurred; and the wound between time was consolidated, and he healed the exit of his nose by space of several days after which one day he felt the arrow in his nose and recognized it to me.
And then I paused on the wound acute corrosive medicine for several days until fire exited, and with the probe I probed that one, and I found the end of the arrow which adhered to the staff.
And then I saw the plague disappear with that sharp medicine, and after some time, about four months, it completely went away.
And when the plague became inflamed, and I was able to insert forceps into it without causing any discomfort, then I stopped trying to remove it with my hands using various techniques, and instead began using forceps to extract it gently, as you will see from the description of these techniques in the following chapter. And so I removed this plague.
And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it, and the plague was healed, and the patient recovered completely and experienced no relapses.
And I will now describe to you the process of extracting certain arrows, so that you may understand the rules and significance of what I have not described, for the parts of this craft and their definitions are not fully explained in this book.
And wise artisans compare a few things to many, and what is present to what is absent, and they discover new operations and new instruments as a result of the occurrence of foreign causes in their craft.
And so I say that arrows are not removed from the parts in which they are lodged, but according to two methods: either by extracting the part in which they are stuck, or by using the opposite method of the other part.
And an arrow that is stuck in a fleshy part is extracted by being pulled out from where it entered, or it is removed and extracted.
And if it does not come out immediately, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it has healed and the inflammation and pain have subsided.
Similarly, if it is stuck in a bone and does not come out immediately, then leave it for a few days and repeat the extraction and movement every day until it comes out.
And if it does not come out after a few days, then you should drill a hole through the shaft of the arrow in that bone, from every angle, until the hole is enlarged and then extract the arrow.
But if the arrow is deeply lodged in the body and hidden from sight, then you should probe it with your fingers and, if you feel it, pull it out using some tools that are suitable for extracting it.
And if you cannot reach it because of the tightness of the plague and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut through the plague until it is enlarged enough for you to extract the arrow.
And if there are nails involved and they are stuck, then you should loosen the flesh all around where the arrow is lodged using every technique you can think of; and devise a way to do this, if you cannot remove the arrow through the opening in the flesh created by the fracture of the nails or by twisting them.
And when you are extracting the arrow from any part, use your fingers with forceps in every way possible to make it yield; and use a very gentle touch so that the arrow is not broken and its extraction is not made difficult for you.
And if you cannot extract it immediately, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it have healed, and then try again as it will then be easier to remove. But if you are faced with a flow of blood, then follow the instructions for treatment that we have given in that chapter.
And be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, or pierce the bowels, and proceed with every possible precaution to extract the arrow; do this slowly and carefully, just as we have recommended to you.
And therefore, you should contract the arrow so that the patient is in the same position as when the arrow struck him, for this is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then do what you can according to the figures.
But the arrows that are stuck in the opposite part, or that have already entered some part on the outside, or cause a pulsing sensation in the part above the cordian vein, then tighten the tip of the arrow by feeling the affected part with your fingers; then cut it off at the place where the forceps are holding it; and then pull it out, for it is easier to extract in this way.
But if it is stuck in the bone, then twist the arrow according to its opposite angle until the arrow cuts into the bone and widens the opening; then extract it.
But if not, leave it for a few days and then try again until you succeed in extracting it.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that part, then push it through with your fingers.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer pressure, then insert your finger into the hole of the arrow so that it fits into the hollow of the shaft and then push it with your finger.
But if the arrow is hollow, then push it with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow will be pushed out by this.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then hollow out all the flesh around where it is lodged, if you can do so, and then heal that wound with whatever you think is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is near enough for you to feel with your fingers, then probe it and be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, extract it and then heal the wound if there is bleeding.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows:
Have their ends shaped like the beak of an owl, which grip the arrow so that it does not slip out.
And they are made in various shapes, large, small, medium or thin, according to the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the wound and its tightness.
is like a rake so that it pushes away the arrow's shaft in the concavity and is pushed by that.
Of punctures of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy from which blood usually flows are .xxx. of which are in the head .xvi., are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that appear in the temples; and two veins in the lacrimal of the eyes, which are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two guidelike veins that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins below the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are 5; Among these are one cephalic vein, and is called the wild side; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is deaf, and it is a middle vein, and it is composed of a ramus of the basilica, and of another ramus of the cephalic; and they name that one among the people “the vein of all the body”, and the basilica is the vein which is paused on the domestic side, and is named “citillar”, and the commoners call it “the vein of the belly”; and the funis of the arm, and it is paused over the wrist, and it is that one in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is that one that appears above the wrist by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the great auricle and the lesser one, and there are two ramps on it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the leg of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the leg of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
The juice of the veins which are near the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigrant and phlegmatic ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: it is that he should cut the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occipital at the location of both veins with a broad cloth with good friction; then tightly hold the patient's neck with a bandage where the two appear and their locations are near the ears at two places depressed from the head; and you seek that one with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is a sign with a test.
Then you take the scalpel, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert that below the vein in the codicil where the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then elevate your hand with the vein and the codicil to the parts above, and pierce the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let blood flow as much as you want.
And then tightly hold that with powder and lye until it is healed.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cautery.
But from the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the phlebotomy juice is for ancient emigrant and bad sore and constant ophthalmia and sharp body of excesses poured into the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you count for yourself: constrict the patient' neck in motion until the two veins appear by manifest appearance and be demonstrated their pulse below your finger, and then you seek that with a test.
And then you elevate the codicil above the vein to the parts above with your index finger, and insert phlebotomy incident below it, and elevate the vein above; and pierce that thus as you have done in the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then loosen the constriction of the patient, and pause your finger on the vein for one hour, and then pause a poultice and powder and tightly hold that above with strong constriction until it is healed.
And now has been preceded the reminder of them, and of those the incision and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And therefore, the phlebotomy juice of the vein of the forehead is for phlebotomy of the cephalic to ancient illnesses of the face and to emigrant and heat and putrid ulcerous.
And the quality of phlebotomy for him is according to what you count for yourself; it is that the patient tightly holds his neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is its form:
Pause the eminent point which is at the end of the fossor on that vein and stab it with a needle or with another cause in his hand, in the manner of him, and let blood flow according to the quantity which you want; and then loosen the perforation of the patient and tightly hold that until it is healed.
And some times it is opened with phlebotomy lateral, however not because the phlebotomy is of acute extremity like the others, but rather it is of lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the cross, because the bone is near it and strongly break it in it when it is phlebotomized if it is thin.
But the phlebotomy juice of the two veins that are in the lacrimal of the eyes for scabies of the eye for heat and weeping in the eye, and for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightly holds his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those while you are standing over his head.
And let the phlebotomy be made according to the cross at length a little with phlebotomies few, because in the place there is no meat; and if the phlebotomy is thin, strongly its end is broken.
And then let blood flow as much as it is necessary for you, and pause a poultice on those, and tightly hold those for one night, and then loosen those.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is for acute fever and for violent heat and illnesses of the face and emigrant and heat that occur in the face, and especially when it is ancient.
And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient tightly holds his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy thin long and insert that in the middle place of the end of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear by feeling here, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
Because you finish your hand with phlebotomy little by little and let blood flow according to your necessity; and then ligate that for one night, because that is restored speedily.
But the phlebotomy juice of the two guide-like veins for constriction of ale and for commencement of leprosy and for many illnesses and anger and evil putrid corrosive ulcers like that with heropotomenon.
And the quality of phlebotomy for them is that the patient constricts each one under his neck with ligature; and let the artifexes stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein lengthwise with broad phlebotomy little by little, and then withdraw blood according to tempered quantity or according to that which you see of necessity that is at that one; and then do likewise to the other vein.
Then untie the ligament and tighten the two veins with a ligature so that the patient is not suffocated and let him breathe so that the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the veins in the legs, leads to small swellings and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that you make the patient bend forward towards you and tighten his neck with a band, and then open his lips and look for two veins whose one is on the right side of the lip and the second from the left; and the demonstration of each is due to the darkness of each of them, and this more because in their surroundings are small black veins; and then cut each of them by cutting.
But if you have doubt below you and do not know which is the one, then understand the incision of the most obvious of them, and of the most evident of them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
But the benefit of the two veins that are below the tongue is the phlebotomy of the cephalic to prevent suffocation that occurs in the throat, to the evil of the uvula and to the evils of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing these is that you follow the patient's head in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side of it there is a vein and on the other side there is also a vein, and the color of each of them is inclined to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each of them; and be careful that you do not end your hand in phlebotomizing these, because below these there are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those which usually flow in all men, and their phlebotomy is made according to two methods, either they put on them mirtilat or olive oil with subtlety declining; or cut them with a scalpel, and call it if anessil, and this is its form:
Be the side of him like this with vees, and it is necessary to open concave veins full of apparent large gross blood; and to those who contain thick twisted blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser latitude and more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to phlebotomize the subtle veins that contain thin citrus blood.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: because it draws blood from the evils that are below the throat and neck, and from what affects the feet and belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomizer, when phlebotomizing that, to be very careful about that and to be above-fear in that, because below him there is an artery, and if he err and adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and he will stop the flow of blood, therefore he must not phlebotomize that with sharp phlebotomy, but cut it with alnessil.
And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then you must leave it and change to the other, or seek one of its branches; or phlebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and cut it with alnessil phlebotomy as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of the antecubital, then you must touch the place between the wrist and the elbow in front of the tightness of the arm, and then press on it with a bandage; and then raise the arm and cut the vein with a concave section with alnessil phlebotomy as we have said; and be careful that the percussion box does not reach any space within the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, swelling in the place that you have pressed with a bandage, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flowing in the phlebotomy like water of a child, and the blood is thin red, then you know that it is artery blood; and therefore you stop and put your finger over that for a long time; and then pinch the arm and if the blood stops, because it has stopped flowing, then you release that.
And watch over the patient during his healing, and be very careful about him and do not anger him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not stopped, and you see that it is due to you that there is no medicine at all, then you cut the artery, if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or take a piece of fist, and open it, and hold one end and tighten it over the place of the vein with a descent incision with a ligament and with powder in between the other day.
And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then heal that with what precedes it at the recollection of the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
And the incision of the blood is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But the phlebotomy of the dark vein is beneficial that draws blood from the superior part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomizer to be very careful about that in the phlebotomy of it, because below it there is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and its healing is difficult, and it is not healed at all, and this nerve many times appears in the feeling; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not demonstrated, then you must stop the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open the vein in length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and refers to the evils of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this properly, if you want to phlebotomize with olive oil or mirtil phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, because there is no artery or nerve below it.
But however, it is apostemat in some men when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice that apostemat.
The first of them is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and for the hope and precaution of the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy be performed in one of the veins which are in the head, that is: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after eating when signs of repletion appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or the first after three hours have passed in the morning.
But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it is caused by convenience and necessity for it, at night or day, in any hour and at any time.
And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized unless from the fourth month to the seventh, and the old should not be phlebotomized who have already passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some reason, one should cleanse the bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's clyster if there is retained flatulence in them, so that the veins do not throw off the superfluities during phlebotomy of the bowels which are cleansed and that they do not harm the main members.
And those who are phlebotomized should not be sick with a sacred disease or drunkenness, or suffering from a disease or intoxication, nor those who have recently recovered from their sickness, nor those who are sick of dropsy, but phlebotomy should be feared when there is colic pain and vomiting, and when there is pain in the abdomen, and when there is multiplication of cough and of labor, and because of eating or waking through the night, or because of any cause that dissolves the strength, or those who are sick with a bodily or animal disease.
And consider in the subsidence of humors before it if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible for it.
And enter a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subsided.
And stop the phlebotomy of him in the feet of the day, that is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And for that the feet of him should be guarded on that day from all accidental diseases, animal, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily diseases, such as labor and excessive pain and cough and their likes.
And at his bath make the causes present in the use of which the blood usually flows from men with aromaticity and odorant and with balms and their likes according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomizer on a cushion that is put higher than the cushion of him who should be phlebotomized.
And then stretch out his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomizer two or three times; and then tighten the bandage with a belt and wrap that two times.
And let the tightness be moderate, for when the tightness is equal or the tightness is with superfluity, then the flow of blood is prohibited; or it is with mollification, and then the flowing out of blood from the body is prohibited.
And then the tightness, let him who should be phlebotomized rub his hands together between them until the veins are dilated and declared to the sensation.
And then the phlebotomizer anoints his phlebotomy with a little of the ancient oil properly; and then pause his hand over that vein, below the place from which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the compression is lessened because from those veins from which the compression is made the blood flows out, and when the phlebotomy is paused over that it is contracted, and is extracted the phlebotomizer; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that vein is contracted.
And so, for this let the phlebotomizer be firm and be solicit in all these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, well and good; and if not, you iterate that again another go below that place a little, or over it with a compression, if the place is not pustule.
And if the place is pustule or the patient becomes scared, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, for strongly he will draw out the pustule, nor enter a bath.
And then iterate the phlebotomy if she desires it.
And if the wound is small and the blood flows subtlety, and you fear that the blood does not flow the quantity that you desire, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust in the wound a little, and do that with compression before that place is pustule, for the place is pustule in most men because of little wounds.
But if he has already pustule, then do not iterate over him, for it does not excuse you any cause; and pause over that some part of the wound of oil, for it arouses the blood of the body. And it is better in this place of oil than the other oils.
And similarly administer oil in every phlebotomy in which the phlebotomies of veins are with the prohibition of the flow of blood, and do that theriaca alfolic and sagzenea when it is paused from one of those over the place, for the blood is subsided and is disturbed when it is thick.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a large pustule is generated, because many goings occur, and majorly to him who has not stood blooded except that going, or in the wound of the vein is little, then you cut it, and pause over the place sponge infused in water and salt, a little scorched, and tighten that for one hour, for it is dissolved.
And let him who does that then cause the subsidence of blood from that vein with completion of him or another vein.
And if it turns in the place for several days some blackness or viridity, do not note that; and if you desire, pause over that some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallows or of calamine or their likes.
And many goings occur so pustules and eminences because of phlebotomy of the basilic.
And so pause your hand over that, and if you then tighten softness because of your compression over that, then that eminence is wicked and bad; and then beware that you pause over that some cause of what we have said, for strongly the blood will flow from the artery.
And make ointment with that in which is stiffness, so that the place is hardened, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
And let him who extracts blood from every man according to the quantity of his strength and according to the color winning over the blood according to what appears.
For if the blood is black, then you let it escape until it is red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it escape until it is subsided; and similarly if it is acute, until the keenness of it is gone.
And to him who is full and strong and has need of extraction of blood in one go, let the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the phlebotomies be long.
And in those who are fucked, the opposite of that should be done, and whatever extracts it should be extracted in many layers, and the traction should be tight.
And the best way to administer phlebotomy of a vein is that there be a transverse section, not puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is saved from bleeding and cutting of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to whom it is customary to happen a syncope after phlebotomy, and whoever you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel heated; and extract all of the blood in three or four layers.
And if it is a paleness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in scented syrup and very fragrant.
And if syncope happens after phlebotomy, and the cause of it is a loss of much blood, then let him take to drink water of meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use aromatics with aloes, and let him anoint his feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
And who wants to open his arm and dissolve his blood second layer, whoever from whom the phlebotomy is for much evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, that evacuates the blood little by little, it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the days that follow.
But who wants to open his arm and drain his blood second time, and his body is strong, then do that around seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But who wants to throw the blood of his body contrary to the part to which it declines, let him be opened on the second day or the third.
But the body in which much blood is already drained and it becomes acute and fever occurs, let him be drained of blood in one layer and let a great quantity be drained from him and let the aperture be enlarged so that syncope may occur, since you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and let you place your hand over the pulse of him due to the flow of blood, so that death does not occur instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you want to open the arm and evacuate blood second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it has become difficult to draw blood, do not press upon it with force and have it extended slightly bent, for this is very bad.
Have the vein within which it was phlebotomized a second time; or remain that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy when the blood coagulates in the orifice of the vein; or place over it tyrian purple, or of sandaraca, and press that with slight compression while the blood is drawn out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation is settled.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood second time, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed him on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "veins of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the basilic or the cephalic, when they are not found or are concealed, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein dilates and appears obviously.
And then it should be constricted over that with a ligature with slight tightness; and phlebotomy according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to length.
And let the aperture be wide and let your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that upon the joint of the hand be a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you perceive your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing the hand in warm water, and the body is bathed in warm water in the time of winter.
And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all the other veins, for there is no pulsating vein nor nerve beneath it.
And phlebotomy of the outer part of the right hand is confounded with maladies of the liver.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you constrict the hand with a ligature or with your hand, since you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein is dilated and is fully demonstrated; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if you pierce it from all sides, it will not harm that.
And beware of not piercing your hand with the phlebotomy, for beneath it are the nerves of the fingers bare of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in that, for if you do not immerse that in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then you place over the vein oil and salt, so that it may not be consolidated firmly; and similarly do you do in all veins tightly.
But the youth of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is confounded with maladies of the brain.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him likewise as you have done in the other.
And the youth of the basilic vein from phlebotomy is to maladies that are below the body, likewise as maladies of the mother, and to retention of menstrua, and to maladies of the knees and ulcers of thighs and legs, and to their like of maladies.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his leg in warm water and does over that friction so that the veins appear obviously; and he lies upon the joint of the leg with a bandage; and the place of the vein let the finger point out, and from that ramify into the fascia of the leg many branches.
And then phlebotomy the most ample branch or beneath the leg from where the ankle bone appears, for it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that in the fascia of the leg, then beware of the nerves that are beneath that upon the fascia of the leg, and phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize it according to the transverse, as if you wanted to pierce it.
And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse his leg in warm water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist erred in the first layer, then repeat with the phlebotomy on him a little, for the place is safe; and do not fear him malicious, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do the other basilic likewise.
And of the sciatic vein, the place likewise as we have said is beneath the ankle bone of the part wild.
And the cause of the patient's bleeding is hip pain when it comes from bloodletting.
And the quality of the patient's bleeding is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly ties the bandage on his hip on the side of the wide space above the talon, in four places with one long slender bandage, for it does not appear except through this.
And therefore when it appears, then you should bleed that according to each skill that is within your ability and according to the cross, and it is better; or pierce that by incision or cut that by cutting, for the place of that is salt.
And it is in most men very hidden; and if you pierce that, and it does not appear at all to the sense of touch, then bleed one vein of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the ear and ring fingers.
And beware of the nerves, and make the quantity of blood flow that you want.
Then untie the bandage and place a poultice over the site of the bleeding and bind the area tightly, for quickly it is healed.
Of phlegm and of the qualities of using those.
Phlegms are of horns, or of warts, or of verrucae.
And phlegm is made according to two manners: one of them is with incision and extraction of blood, and the other is phlegm without incision.
And this phlegm which is without incision is according to two manners, for it is with fire or without fire.
And the phlegms that are administered with incision and extraction of blood are fourteen places of the body, of which one place in which phlegm is paused is alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of it from two parts of the neck; and phlegm of the chin below the jawbone and below the mouth; and phlegm of two spatulas; and phlegm of the armpit, and it is on the end of the breast; and phlegm of two little holes, and they are of two arms; and phlegm of two joints; and phlegm of two thighs.
And phlegm does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this it does not have the virtue through those, just as it is cauterization by bleeding; nor is it believed that phlegm be made with fire or without fire in any illness made by repletion when the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts phlegm for illness or for continuous, we administer that in all hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle place of it, and whenever it is appropriate.
And therefore when you see any cause of those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command phlegm to be made after two or three hours have passed of the day.
And the cause of phlegm of the nape is that when it confer to heaviness in the head and to this that it is bent towards the eyes; but it should be believed that this is appropriate evacuation of the whole body.
And this phlegm is in the place of bleeding of the cephalic vein.
And it is not believed that one should use that which is of complex friction, or in which is catarrh, for it gives great harm to that person.
And for this it is not believed that use of that by the old, and on the heads of which are cold illnesses.
But to that person on whom that is continually done, then it is believed that you command the phlegm-taker to pause his hand a little with the ventose at the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But phlegm of the ear is in the place of bleeding of the dark vein and of the basilic; and for this it confer to asthma, and to constriction of throat and to splitting of instrument of throat, and to coughing, and to repletion.
And it is believed that the phlegm of the ear be bound a little, for if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And phlegm of the forehead confer to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and to migraine, and to heat, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bleeding of the basilic.
And it is believed that you command the phlegm-taker not to press his hand with incision so that he does not pierce the artery and cause an excess of blood flow.
And phlegm below the chin confer to cold in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to appearances to them of illnesses that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of bleeding of the alar that is in the two lips.
But phlegm that is made over the two spatulas confer to headache, which is made by repletion of heat.
And phlegm of the two parts within the little holes confer to benefit of bleeding from three veins, that is, of the basilic, dark and cephalic; for it attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins through which the attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the phlegm-taker that he does not push too much in incision, for the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is phlegm with which one phlegms over the buttocks and confer to the haemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers further below.
And it is believed that you command the phlegm-taker that it be a strong phlegm, and that it be of warts, for the place indigests from strong incision; and strongly let him phlegm with strong phlegms that are subtle incisions, and let it be scarred with incision.
But phlegms of the legs minor for minor evidence, for they draw blood from all the body, and confer to old pains of the hips and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to cough and addam; and they stand in the place of bleeding of two sopines, and armpit, and of two joints.
However, they weaken all the body and make syncopes occur in many people.
And from phlegms of the armpit the benefit is close to the benefit of phlegms of two legs.
And the quality of the position of phlegms is that you pause the phlegm at the beginning seen and sweat through coolness, and do not prolong the position of phlegms, but pause them briefly, and let the humors come to the place by descending evenly. And do not cease this and continue while he sees the place already red and swollen, and that the heat of blood appears.
Then you gently scrape and suction the wound a little at a time, and be mindful of the patient's vital signs.
For those with tender skin, you should only scrape once and not too deeply, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the suction device operator to increase the intensity of the scraping and take a little more, tempering the suction as appropriate.
And if the vein is thick, then you should scrape twice, because in the first scraping, the channel for blood and moisture is opened. In the second scraping, pursue the inquiry into the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very filthy, then a third scraping should be done to achieve the goal.
Finally, when we want to extract a little blood or a small amount, one scraping is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scrape with a deep scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scrape with a wide scraping.
And the term for the scraping in which there is only the depth of the blade.
And if that from which the blade is thick, tough, brown, and its pores are tight, then let the suction cups be applied gently, open and resolute; if in the summer season, also like oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if in winter, then oil of neroli, or oil of lilies, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
And if the superficiality is thick, raw, then let the oil be of marigold, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of aniseed, and to those similar.
But if the patient has ample pores of tender skin, then let oil be prohibited, and let those places on which the suction cups are to be placed be washed with vinegar or warm water of solanum, or water of cedar wood, or water of borage, and similar to those.
And that from which the blood is of great moisture, wash its suction cups with sour wine, or water of myrrh and sumac, and similar to those.
And that from which the superficialities are thick, wash its suction cups with old wine, or water of sage, which is marjoram, or of aniseed tea, or of camomile, and similar to those.
And that the suction should be guarded against bathing; have that it be administered close to bathing for an hour or two, and that he sleep with the suction applied.
What must one do who is to be bled by cupping before cupping.
Consider this at the beginning: if the patient or he who is to be bled is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation, then let him take cooling remedies, like bitter apples with vinegar, and endive in sour wine and leeks, and secanin, and julep, and similar to those.
And give him foodstuffs like pullets, and meat of young birds that are roasted, and foodstuffs seasoned with vinegar, and to him similar.
And that from which the complexion is raw, let him take in drinking honey and alum water, or honey of sesamum seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between July and August; and that he be admonished to drink little and eat little, and give his foodstuffs pullets and carnbibi and pigeons and small birds and doves.
And that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, let his drinking be greater than his eating.
And that he be given in drinking at certain times to certain people a dose of theriac, or medicine of musk, as it is musked, or alcelita before cupping or phlebotomy, or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and let them not take those which scald.
But the suction cups that are after scraping be over the heart, and on the liver and spleen, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the armpit of the broad, because those members do not undergo scraping upon themselves.
And it is not used for those except for bloodletting from a member, as they use the cupping over the breast in the disease of flow of blood of the blood of the veins; and they use that to dissolve thick rawness invaded by the member, as they apply it over the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scrapes it and removes the pain from which it resolves the cupping.
And it is also applied to the knees when they become swollen in their joint or burst, because by strength of attraction strong its joint opilacion and eradicates the pain from its place.
And similarly it does when it is applied to the heart and liver after cupping in those who are enclosed.
And these suctions are administered dry with suction only; and some times they are administered with fire.
And some times they are administered full of water in the diseases of the liver.
And that is why the cupping should be filled and be large, it is water alone or water in which are cut herbs to that appropriate.
Form of cupping administered with fire: it is the width of the orifice of two fingers, according as we have formed it; and the quantity of the fire be the length of a palm; and be in its breadth, in the place that is in the circuit, the length of him, the fire be small according to the quantity that enters it an awl.
It is made of oak wood or citronwood, of thick edges, lions, dogs and horses in such a way that it does not lead the member by its position on him.
And be at its middle a transverse branch of oak or of iron, on which is applied candle with the fire.
And let this cupping be large greater than that which we have recommended; and the small less according to the diseases and the condition of him who uses it.
And the cuppings of children and weakened ones be smaller than those of young people and large bodied.
And the quality of applying this cupping with fire over the member is that it extends the fire with decent fire before a few candles of wax, and apply that over the middle of the transverse branch in the middle place of the cupping, so that the fire be set around with straws so that the patient's body is not burned.
And then it be applied to the member of the patient, and his finger be over the hole that we have said, between while we hold the cupping and do not feel the finger and that the vapor rises over that hole, the cupping is dissolved as soon as possible.
And prop the fire the heat according to his manner, and repeat that if he feels it of that.
But in cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse branch nor hole, and it is not administered except that it be filled with water, and it is applied to the member only by itself.
And that is its form: And this cupping when it is larger, it is better, so that it can receive great quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Leeches are not applied to small parts of the body, but to those where it is not possible to place cupping glasses due to their size, such as the lip and gum and similar areas; or on a part of the body that has been stripped of flesh, like the finger and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters of pure spring water.
And let them be left in the water for one day and night, so that they become hungry, and let no cause remain in their bellies; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and cupping; and let the patient's limbs be rubbed until they turn red; and let them be placed upon him.
And when they are full, then.
And if it is possible to suck the wound with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial in healing.
And if not, then wash the wound with sweet wine and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and expressed.
And if the flow of blood continues due to the application of the leeches and it is oozing, then you dip a cloth in warm water and place it over the area so that the oozing stops.
And if the blood is profuse, then you powder the wound with powdered vitriol, or guaiacum and similar substances from astringent causes, until the blood stops; or place on the wound the pods of beans that have been roasted and let them adhere to the wound, and let the blood stop.
And, if necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then let the wound be rubbed with fresh blood or leave a needle in the wounds until blood comes out; and then let them be placed, for when they feel some blood they will immediately adhere.
And when you want them to fall off, powder them with a little ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will soon do so.
Thus begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is a restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation of bones.
Oh son, learn that the foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who have never read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter of them boast about this chapter.
And for this reason this manner of the wise men in our land is hidden; and I have not been obliged to do so at any time until now; and I have not used what I have learned, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and contemplation upon their wisdom, so that I might extract knowledge from them.
And also by adding my own experience and study over the course of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge and experience encompass; for I have condensed it for you and relieved you of the burden of reading lengthy explanations; and I have condensed it to the end of the explanation; and demonstrated it at the end of the demonstration; and formed many forms of the instruments administered in it, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractured bones, from which their premise is necessary before we begin to remind the members of the fracturing and various of each. And therefore, we will give in the beginning of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters at the understanding of which at the beginning are perhaps the artificers and to station upon the truth of those; so are you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore I say that when it happens to someone fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, then you should first apply phlebotomy or bleeding of that, or any embrocation, if no counterindication, such as debility of strength, or the person is an infant, or elderly in decrepitude, or it is a time of violent heat, or violent friction.
And let him be fed on a diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and abstain from fattening foods and from all foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you ensure the formation of a firm scab, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the limb.
And then return the patient to his usual diet with which he is accustomed.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed on nutritious foods of light and heavy foods in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked in water, rice, capers, fish, cow's belly, eggs, fresh peas, wine, and heavy foods similar to these; and with this diet coagulation of the fracture is made more quickly and gently.
And know that the bones are broken when they are in the first youth and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the withering of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of every part any cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens together, so that it comes to an end of strength and firmness, as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's foods, foods in which there is weight and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the kinds of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the toe; and likewise all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I have experienced the reminder of every kind of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the others.
Great diversity of fracture within itself. And the kinds of fracture of the bone in their metapyses are diverse; for there is made arcuate fracture some that occur in them stellate; and some fractures according to the length of the bone: and so are the fractures of the satagia and astragalus and accessory and non-accessory bones, as occurs in the pen when it is prepared for writing, and there is made fracture with crack and disruption in the head, and fissure fracture is made small.
And every kind has its own pain or torment peculiar in its restoration according to what comes to mind distinctly in its locations.
Great sign of fracture of the bone. And by that is known fracture of the bone: its crookedness and its protuberance and appearance to the touch, and also when you press it with your hand.
And therefore when there is not in the location apparent crookedness nor is it made due to your touch when you press the bone with agitation and the patient does not complain of great pain, then it is not here fracture.
There may be tortuosity or a small fissure, so do not be afraid to massage it with your hand and with compression all over; pause on it some medicines of which you will find reminder in the appropriate moment for that place; and let it be tight by subtle constriction.
And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it, when it is all swollen to its counterpart, then you should start by rectifying it by cauterization so that it happens to it an abscess.
And if an abscess happens to it, then leave it for a few days until the abscess goes down; and then heal it in whatever way you can, with elevation and ingeniosity.
And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is worse than the pain from the bone in which it happens.
And then strengthen it according to what you will be reminded of.
But if in the bone there is swelling, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And let your position be such that you hold the member in its natural place while the parts are extended from the broken member; then you must force these joints to return ingeniously and in any way you can in their places.
And watch yourself according to your strength that no pain or injury happens to the patient by your operation; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to another's companion according to their best forms.
And if you opportunely touch it with your hand and see any diverse cause, rectify it and heal it by the quantity of your skill.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do many times make an abscess happen by their operation, or cause contraction in the member as we have seen happen many times by the operation of them many times.
And the quality of the constriction of the broken member is that you recognize it; because you should know that broken members are differentiated in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those which are small like the arm and the finger and the elbow and similar to them, then let the wrapping be of very thin cloth.
But those which are large like the thigh or the leg, let there be wrapping of tough cloth, for the tough binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all parts by equal constriction, so that no stain enters it.
And then begin, and your evacuation of equalization, pause the convenient ligament over that fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
And then go to it at the most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen so that your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture is not relaxed. And then lengthen yourself by wrapping the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little as you take from it a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken place, and then go to the wrappings at the most inferior part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the constriction of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we have said above about the first wrapping.
And then pause between the wrappings of cotton or cloth with which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized if there is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it for any cause.
And then pause another bandage over it, and then heal it over these decently made strips just as much, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the place, and then pause on it what seats the abscess and which eases the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen the strips over it.
And let the strips be of the thickness of a thin rod, and be cleverly formed; or be of wood of pine; or of reeds of palm ; and let the width of each strip be according to this form and figure:
However, let the strip that is paused over that fracture be thicker and tougher a little than the other strips; and the length of the strip according to how it lies on the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the strips with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then tie above it with a decent thread according to what we have said about constriction, and let your constriction be less as the member is more lengthened from the fracture.
And let the threads be thin in thickness and subtle, and let them be of tough thread; and if the threads are thick like how I have seen through the operation of some foolish doctors with their threads of rope twine, it is a great error when constriction is unequal.
And thin threads are not convenient, because you will not accomplish by constriction with them what you want, and there will not be room between strip and strip for a finger.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the strips when you tighten the constriction in its places, then pause under them cotton or wool so that it does not hurt him.
Sometimes the fracture is in a vein, and disruption happens in the tendon, and I come to remembrance in that in the head according to uniqueness.
And know that every broken member is not tightened with strips on the first day; the cause of which is that the member, when it is large, let no strips be paused over it except after a few days or seven or more, according to your security from happening of an abscess.
And this is the manner of the splints with which the Ancients restored, which were paused over fracture and dislocation and twist.
Manner of splint as a dressing for restoration of fracture, convenient to many complications and especially to women and children, because it is that about which there goes no heat nor friction: and let be taken from flour dust, and the bran is the meal that comes from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And dry it as it is, except that you moisten it with egg white, and do not pause the application of it thick nor subtle; and then use it.
Another method of an ointment for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, frankincense, acacia, enula, and mastic which is ground from wild myrrh, all in equal amounts of one drachma each; add myrrh and aloe at half a drachma each, and mix them with oil of helichrysum or with egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly; and then use this ointment, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health to many people.
Another method of an ointment that confers health to fractures and twists: take mastic and white mustard in equal amounts of one drachma each; add myrrh and aloe at half a drachma each, acacia at six drachmas, and bol armenic at twenty drachmas.
Let all be sifted in a mortar and pounded together, and let them be mixed with honey or the white of an egg and applied.
Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and also for wounds and fractures: take soft wool which has been dipped in warm wine and oil and place it over the affected area.
Let this plaster be used not only for healing, but also for preventing suppuration and drawing out pains justly.
Another way of making a plaster which heals broken bones: take the leaves of the wild fig tree and the leaves of the wild poppy; pound them all together to make a plaster from them.
Method of plaster which heals broken bones and also resolves suppuration from a wound: take the roots of horehound, camomile flowers, violet flowers, and bran, each one part; let all be pounded together and mixed with wine, if the patient's skin is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then use this with water of coriander or with water and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster for resolving suppuration which is more effective than the previous one, when suppuration happens because of a broken bone: take the roots of horehound and of larkspur, and of mallows, and of marjoram, and violet flowers, camomile flowers, all in equal parts; pound them together and mix with water of vinegar or warm water, or wine, depending on the quality of the affected member and its color.
But Hypocras does not dry on its own, so it should be placed over the broken member for its healing, unless a poultice is made of wax and oil for some other cause; and let it remain between the thickness and the thinness.
But it is seen that plasters are placed over the broken member for its healing and the causes in which there is dryness with a little warmth are also like those that we have counted.
Method of plaster which works for wounds and pain: take powdered myrrh, cedar wood, human hair or owl feathers, horehound, and salt, all in equal parts; pound them together, sift and mix to make a plaster.
But the quantity depends on how large the wound is and how it has healed: consider that if there is no pain or swelling, and the bone has not been broken and has not come out of its socket, then you do not have to wait for many days. And if violent pain or swelling or inflammation happens in the affected area, then you should stop it there and then, and remove the plaster from it.
And take a linen cloth and sea sponge which is damp with lukewarm water, and dip the affected area in the lukewarm water and wash the wound until the swelling and pain cease; then let the member rest for an hour, and place soft wool which has been dipped in wine and oil or rose oil over it for one night so that suppuration is secure from cauterization, and so that the inflammation of the member is reduced.
And then repeat this gentle compression and small plaster, and not tighten it with your first compression, and gently with that until it is healed.
And if the suppuration and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are already reduced by now, and you have removed the plaster and compression as we have said before, then you should repeat that just as we have said before.
And if none of the causes that we have mentioned happen to the member, then do not remove it but rather leave it for three or four or five or seven days; and some times it is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you from the appearance of the affected member, as we have said, until the fracture is healed and the meat closes over that.
And then adjust the compression according to how it was before in your first compression, and adjust the thickness of the bandage on the patient's body, according to how his memory precedes it.
But if you see the fracture already dried and exhausted but not closed, then know that food is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore moisten it with lukewarm water for three days totally, and loosen the compression a little, and through this operation draw the member's food, and it will heal quickly.
But what the foolish healers of a broken member do when it is not healed at first, as it appears, and is healed according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and great fear; and if they were right-handed those who increased the Ancients in their sockets and fought against them.
And I have not seen any of them do that, for it is more reasonable that they do not do so.
Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct; for some fractures are caused by blow of a staff, and the blow pushes all the bone inside the head, which is below the skull, just as it pushes in the trunk, and because of that this species of fracture is called compression; or the staff penetrates one part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh around it, and the penetration does not go through the end of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the wound of these two fractures is large or small, and the fracture which is compression or crushing; and the cause of it is blow with fists or clubs on stone, and to them similar.
And this fracture is penetrating so that it approaches the membrane which is below the bone; or it is in the bone's face, and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
And of fracture which is dulled in the bone, in the thickness of the hair, and because of that this species of fracture is called capillary fracture.
And of fracture which is caused by blow or penetration of stone to them similar, and makes some lamina of the bone enter into the gaps between the teeth, and is caused in the concave place just as it happens to the fingers when a blow is struck and is split into the gaps between the fingers.
And this happens mostly in bodies of fat people, as well as children's heads.
And there are all these species of fractures, they are like broken stars. And then you will have the memory of everything in its place.
And know all these species of fractures by examination on these and by inquiry with their fingers and appearance of the corrupted flesh that is on them.
And hairline fracture is known by what is uncovered over the bone, and it is wiped away, and liniment is applied over it, because the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see through the accidents that indicate by obvious indication fear, such as vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and sweating of those, and appearance to them of the accidents in the greater dispositions, six days are not healed.
And if you see no-running accidents, then you expect health, then you begin the cure of it.
The reason for this is that if the victim has come to you in the beginning as he was victim and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the appearance of the bone before day fourteen according to all disposition.
And if in the days of summer, then you should cut the bone before the seventh day, having that what is under the skin be corrupted from the padding, and that the accidents we have counted happen.
And if the fracture has already reached the padding covering the brain, and it is in minute pieces and crushed, then you should insert the crushed and ground up piece according to what I will recount to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the victim who has been victimized, and uncover over the bone according to habit and manner possible to you according to the figure of the plague, and that be lighter on the victim.
And if you have to do the detection of the bone, blood flow or pus cauterize, then you should oppose it with what covers, and it is that you dress the place of drapes infused in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest while the pustule is settled, and be certain of the blood flow; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its removal.
And that be according to one of two manners of operation.
And the one manner is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision knife, and this is its form: And then administer another incision knife this, a little wider than that; and this is its form:
And then administer the incision knife wider than the second.
And it should be that you have many incision knives, of which some are wider than others; and some are shorter than the others and are in the thickness of their sharpness, and are of iron sharpened or filed.
And use them with facility in percussion over the incision knife so that it does not rattle the head and lead that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should bore in the circuit of it before you administer the incision knives with the drills, which are named non-deep drills.
And they are not named so but because those do not stop the end of the bone to it that is aprop it, so that to the drill is round extremities or margin over that which is under the head of it sharp resembling a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these drills great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, while being present in all bones of the brain the extremities of which are acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill over the bone and rotate it with your fingers while you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause what is between all the way the amount of thickness of the ray or environment that.
And then you insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone, and make that more subtle than you can over that at end of elevation, as we have said, within erradiques the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause by some tools which you will have equipped as pins and forceps subtle.
And it should be that you keep with great care that the incision knife does not touch any cause of the brain.
And then when you have bored the bone perforated, and separated from the brain if it is continued with it, and have that extracted, then shave and bite that in the roughness of it from what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision knife, but however let it be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
And if any part of the small and broken bones, then take that with facility with what it is due to you of the instruments; and then that cure the plague with poultices and ointments which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is gentle, distant from fear; and it is called Gualia and is called by great laziness; and that is the name of it: it is necessary for you in the beginning to begin to uncover the part of the bone of the place where is the fracture most violent and most manifest, and then when you have uncovered that part and have paused below it the end of this incision knife long and gentle of which this is its form:
And the lenticular part is round and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides in length, as you see; that the lenticular part be fitted to the brain with the facet of it inscribing acute in the bone.
And then you pierce on the incision knife of one part with a small needle within that you insert all the bone with facility as it is rotated, and be certain of the padding that no accident happen to you in any manner which you fear in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Then if it penetrates any cause attached to the bone of the padding in some locations of bone, pierce that from it with the end of the incision knife lenticular, and loosen that from it with facility, because it is loosened from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the padding, and what is severed or is left of the bone is the facet of it, and you have in it roughness and minute cracks, then shave that roughness and loosen those cracks with subtle rasors by which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that be to you possible to administer them in all locations the most convenient of them and the most direct of those according to what in which you are involved your operation that broken bone and the form of it.
And it should be that you administer in your reason by which you shave the bone at the beginning the wider of those rasors, and then use after it the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing that according to continuity until you arrive to administer the most thick and the most subtle of all those.
But in each of the other small and fine fractures and subtle fracture, let you administer cure according to what you have arrived at rectification of it.
And it is caused by not being removed from all those who have studied in that art. And as for this, what we write about, we have shown in great fractures.
And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the amount of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place that on top of the opening of the wound; and then take another piece of folded or doubled cloth, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of cloth, and do this lightly with pus on that, so that you don't press hard on the head. And then apply salt water to it, and do not tighten it except for the amount that the wound is, only.
And let him remain with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization; and then loosen that, and administer medicines that get rid of superfluous moisture, like flax and linseed flour, and powder of fennel and of aristology, and of similar things to those.
And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer in that all medicine of the property of which is that cleanses and does not bite.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there not be in it any filth of ointment or other; nor let you allow virulence to accumulate on it; for when it is applied to the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and destroys it, and malicious evil occurs over the patient accordingly.
And accidents occur in the head, as the bone is removed from it and especially when the treatment of it is diminished, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider if the accidents that we have said occur to the patient, know that they are fatal without a doubt.
And if blackness does not occur but from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is due to that medicine that causes that blackness, then take honey in one part and rose oil in three parts. And soak a piece of cloth with those, and then place that on the head; and then cure that with the spices of treatment that are convenient until it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts, both above, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, and the lower part is cartilage, and is not broken, and nothing occurs to it except curvature and twisting and sinusitis.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must put your thumb in his nose and close that fracture with your index finger and your thumb, so that the nose returns according to its natural shape. And let it be done by you with facility, and be careful that it does not hurt the patient through that operation.
And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then let it be split with a sharp edge at its tip to make it a little thicker.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same thing.
And try to restore it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you must allow the cautery wound to heal for two or three days.
And then insert at the end of the nose a plug of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or insert two plugs, if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be in the plug thickness of such quantity that it fills the crack in the nose.
And some of the ancient restorators say that the plugs are wrapped in fat, and are changed every day; but I have not seen it; I had rather that the plug be wrapped in yolk of egg with powdered sugar, and let the bone be bound and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes let a plug be inserted in the nose instead of a plug, which is a goose feather wrapped in linen cloth; and let the fracture of the nose be very strong, and let the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, then do it, and if you want to do plugs.
And if another cautery wound occurs, plaster the nose with a poultice or with cotton soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if a cautery wound does not occur, then plaster that outward with sesame flour and fennel powder mixed with yolk of egg; and then place on it a plug of linen cloth, and do not tie the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then split them and extract them with instruments that are appropriate for those; and then sew the wound, and cure it with something that causes flesh to grow and harden, and with plasters that are convenient for that.
And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then cure that with plugs and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Chapter .iiii.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and its fracture is not with pus, then be careful if the fracture is outward only and is not split in two and curved inwards, then its cognition is obscure.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left side, then insert your right index finger; and push with that the crookedness of the fracture inward with facility from the outward sides, with your other hand from the inward side of the bone; with that decently split that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated in two, then let the extension of its two parts be according to rightness so that the equality of it is possible.
And if tooth concussion to disruption occurs, then strengthen those of which you expect they will break with thread of gold or silver or gut; and then place on the broken jaw a poultice, and then place on that doubled cloth, and place on the cloth great star-shaped holes decently made, or a sole ingot at its length; and then ligate that above according to how you are equipped for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to have rest and tranquillity, and give him wine to drink.
And if you think that the figure is already altered in some way, then cover and loosen it on the third day; and then rectify what is already altered of it and plaster that with sesame flour, with yolk of egg, or with farina of sesame, after you have removed its poultice, and place on the plaster wool of linen.
And then when that plaster and bandage are on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave that, so that it is not loosened until it is healed and the fracture strengthened; for many times this fracture is tightened in three weeks.
And if another cautery wound occurs, then administer what we have said many times in its swelling so that it is healed, and let the cautery wound be cleaned.
If the fracture is compound, then consider whether the bone is separated or shattered. Then you must skillfully move those shards with what is convenient in the removal of those [shards] with instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it with phlebotomy according to the amount of your need.
Then, when you have moved those shards, and none of them remain exposed, then close the opening of the wound if it is wide; but if not, place one of the appropriate ointments over it, which will help it to heal.
Chapter 5:
Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Many times the furcola of the front part is broken due to a blow from a muscle, and that fracture happens in one of three ways:
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without shattering; and its restoration is easier; or it happens that shards occur in it, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is compound.
And the operation on it, when the fracture is compound, is that you have two assistants, so that one holds the joint and follows the broken collarbone, and the other pulls the neck towards that side.
Then, attach the fracture with threads so that it is made according to its shape, and there is not a little prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then place a cord made of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, and let its size be according to the amount of your need; and extend and raise the collarbone, and hold the cord with your hand so that it ties the fracture according to its shape.
And if you cannot bring the end of the collarbone to the sides outside, because it has been reached by the shoulder, then let the patient be supine on his neck, and place a cushion under his armpit, half in size.
And the assistants press his armpit down to the sides below so that the collarbone bone is elevated higher than the shoulder above, and then you straighten the fracture and attach it with threads.
But if you feel shards of the collarbone and they are exposed, then cut there and extract those shards with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you invent an incision on it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for that, after having placed under the collarbone the instrument which serves the ciphac; and the instrument is of wood or iron, of which this is the shape of it:
And it is like a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its breadth should be according to your need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; and let it have two ends thus divided, and one end be broad and the other narrow.
And if the opening of the wound which you have cut when you extracted the shard is broad, and it is sure that there will be an abscess, then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the opening is small, or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the split in the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in hot vinegar and oil, and place it over that.
And altogether, that the stake is not exposed over the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament softens or you see the stake already exposed, then you straighten that and strengthen the binding.
And if the patient is broken in two or three parts, then make a stopa over which you have spread powders doubled with rose vinegar, and place that over the collarbone, and then attach it with threads.
And do not loose the ligament unless an abscess occurs in the place or pus, until 12 days have passed.
And renew the ointment if you have seen its need for that, and tighten in the binding and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone has clotted.
And it is tightened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and in some people it is done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
The spatula is broken in its middle and not at its edges.
And when the bone is broken — and it is broken in its middle —  and it is not known except by touch, then according to how the fracture appears, you shall prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
Then place on the site powdered white alum and a stopper made of lion's tooth; then place on it powdered linen folded twice; then place over it a thin piece of slate according to the quantity of the spatula, or a little more.
But if the slate is hollow in one of the places of the spatula, then fill that hollowness with lion's tooth and then raise the slate evenly.
Then tightly bind it above with a long bandage with appropriate pressure, and firm the slate so that it does not slip from its place.
And consider the healing every day; and when it is soft in any place, bind it again and tighten it and equalize the slate if it has slipped from its place.
And keep the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25. [The number here varies depending on the manuscript].
And therefore when this number is complete, then you shall dissolve the bandage and know for sure that this is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you see that the place of the bone is swollen and you put under it a cord, then you shall split it over it and push it and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone with pus cauterization if it occurs here.
Chapter 7. [The following chapter begins a new subject].
Of the restoration of a broken foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in its middle and this is evident there, but its ends are most often crushed and comminuted.
And of its accidents when the middle of it is broken there is a decline to the ends within and pain occurs in it, and difficulty in walking and coughing and great vomiting blood, and it is evident in it hollowness in the broken bone and is not concealed by sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient be laid on his back and a cushion placed between his shoulders, and pressure applied to the muscles of him, and the ribs adjusted with the hands of two people, and subtle in the operation of it and in the equalization according to every way that is possible for this and what is convenient for this, so that the figure of the bone returns according to how it was.
Then place on it plaster and wool and place on that subtle slate of willow or of holly, or something like them in levitation, after you have wrapped that in linen, and subtle the binding over the broken bone so that it does not slip; and go around that with bandage according to roundness to the back sometimes, and tighten that with appropriate pressure; and consider the bandage at every hour and when it is soft, tighten that.
And if necessity demands the removal of that you must cut away the callus or growth, or pain, or pus that occurs in the site, then you should cut and dissolve that and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred by way of healing of it; and reduce the plaster, if you see this is necessary for the face; and tighten on him the binding so that it may be healed.
Chapter 8. [The following chapter begins a new subject].
Of the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in large places that go along the back; and from their ends at the front, pain does not occur to them unless they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not concealed by sensation because of the inquiry of it with fingers.
And its restoration is to be done by gripping the fracture with fingers according to the possible way, so that it may be swallowed according to how it was, and then plaster and tighten on him the broken bone if it demands this.
And if the fracture of ribs inclines to the ends within, then there occurs to the patient vehement pain and stabbing, such as that which occurs to him who has wept, and because of that the bone puts the veilment; and occurs in it difficulty of breathing and coughing and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the ants are made in it with moving things.
And from them there is this advice: that you place foods for the patient that generate inflammation and fullness so that the belly may be swollen and extended, and the fracture be driven to the outward ends.
But we abstain from it so that it not be cause to generate pus cauterization, unless it occurs; and if it does occur, then it already helps.
And some of them say that the wind should be applied over it and that it suck with strength; and is like a ratiocination, but nevertheless is feared that the wind sends the superfluities to the site by weakness.
And some of them say: that the site be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and that powdered linseed be placed between the ribs so that it may be filled, so that the binding be wrapped around it according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured with a poultice of food and medicine.
And if it causes violent constriction of the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts the veil over him with piercing pain, we should fear for the patient; then let us split open the site, uncover from the cracked rib, and then place on it instrument that conserves the cephalic, the memory of which is preceded, and that we pierce the bone with facility, and extract that.
And then let us adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large with cauterization and cure that with plasters so that it may be healed.
And if pus occurs within, then you should cut and pour powdered linseed in warm oil over the site, and that the patient be cured of that by what it does to the pustule within.
And let him be laid on his side on which he slept so that he may be healed.
Chapter 9. [The following chapter begins a new subject].
Of the restoration of fracture of the spine of the back and of the neck.
Sometimes the bones of the neck are fractured, and they are evident in their compression, and likewise the vertebrae of the back. And when this occurs in any of them and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see the fingers are already soft and dead and do not move those nor extend them and when they constrict them with your fingers or prick them with an awl and do not feel pain in them, then know that it is not healed, and in the midst of their dispositions is deadly.
And if you constrict them and they feel pain in their piercing, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will heal by its cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the feet of him.
Then if you see that they are already soft and pain occurs in them as it did in the fingers, and then when he lies on his back, feels hollowness and egestion according to his will, and sometimes is resupinated over his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is deadly, and therefore do not trouble yourself with its cure.
But if these causes do not arise, the cause is better and closer by.
And the cure for it is that you pierce into the swelling of the boil with a cautery needle that you heat over a warm charcoal fire, or with a needle heated in oil; place this on the swelling several times a day until the boil is healed.
And then apply one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and apply a bandage over it; and order the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that causes pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the bone is separated from the socket or any other cause, then you must cut on the tendon and tie up the bone; and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large; and then treat the wound with a poultice of garlic, until it is healed.
But if the back of the elbow is broken, and it is the end of the bone that is broken, then you must insert the tip of your left hand into the hole, and bite the broken bone with your other hand as hard as you can by closing your fist; and then apply a plaster and bandage on it, if necessary, and then bind it.
And if you feel broken bones in it, then you must cut on it and tie up the bone, and treat the wound with the cure that has been described until it is healed.
Chapter 10:
On the restoration of width.
The bones of the pelvis are often broken, and if they are broken, their fracture is nothing but a separation at their ends, and they are ingrown in length and decline towards the inner parts; and the patient feels pain in the place and piercing, and the leg is numbed when it is fractured.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, in whatever way that is; and then place your other hand under the fractured bone, and press hard on it towards the first hand.
And if the fracture is only at its end, then you bite it according to how it appears to you by closing your fist until it is reassembled into its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in its length or inclines towards the inner parts, then you make the patient lie on his stomach so that you can restore the fracture. And when you have reassembled it, apply a plaster on it; and then place a bandage made of wood or rope over it, and tie it tightly so that you don't fear the puncturing of the fracture or the removal of the bandage.
And fill the cavity with something that fills it so that it takes on the tightness according to its equality; and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if there is a boil, then cease from extending it and restoring it until the boil is healed; and then return to its restoration, and bind it thus.
And if they are broken or crushed, then you treat them.
Chapter 11:
On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh.
The adductor is what is between the hip and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a wooden board of moderate thickness according to this shape:
And let there be two ties at both ends, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And let the patient walk on crutches; and then let him push out his broken arm over the board so that it reaches the tip of the board in the place to which the curve of the board is attached.
And then let something heavy be suspended over it, or the servant extend it towards the inner parts; and then the doctor press the fracture with his hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient lies on his neck and suspends his arm from the collar of his neck with a rope; and then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds the lower part of it; and each of them extends it towards its side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you press on the fracture with your hands and also with another hand, and each of the two servants extends it towards its side.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then you must place half of the bandage on the tip and the other half below the fracture above the hip.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then you must place the bandage on that place and over the hip.
Bite it with ease and without pain, and then when it is reassembled according to how it should be, bind it if there is no boil.
But if there is a boil, then loosen the bandage on the seventh day, and apply wool soaked in wine vinegar and oil over the boil until it rests, and then bind it.
And the way to bind it is that you apply a plaster on the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then lift up his arm over the adductor, and let him hold his hand open over his muscle.
And place the cloth and bind it over the adductor so that the arm is in its place, unless something prohibits it from the broken bone.
And then use bandages.
And it is that you place over the fracture the bandage that is wider and stronger than the other bandages; and place between each bandage the width of a finger, and let the length of the bandages be according to the fracture with an addition of three digits of the whole hand.
And then bind over the bandages with the tightness that was said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding over the place of the fracture be very tight. And when the fracture is longer, then let the binding be lesser.
And thus if you see the placement of the bandages and the binding as we have said in the time in which you restore the member to its position, then you do it.
And if you fear a boil, then you loosen the bandages and the binding on the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not come to the place of pressure or swelling; or food is prohibited from coming to the member due to disposition of excess of binding; and then rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are sure that nothing happens, then do not loosen the ligature except after three days or more.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
And place over the adductor a poultice of wool wrapped in, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not loosen or dissolved, or that the figure of the broken member is softened, then rectify all with your skill.
And let the patient eat according to the order that we have previously mentioned, so that the food is subtle in the beginning so that it is started binding; and then let it become coarse for him.
The custom of the adductor and of his bed is that they are bound for 40 days, and then let them be loosen and let him take a bath and be anointed with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is fresh, then you must not remove that ligament and the splinters within one or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is made up of two bones which are called two beams; one of which is small and is that which lies under the elbow-joint, and the other is large and is that which lies under the small one from the part further down.
And often only the larger beam is broken, or the smaller one, and often they are both splintered.
And when the smaller beam is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when the beam is broken below its fracture is bad and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are splintered at the same time.
Therefore, when the broken bone is the smaller beam above, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in performing its restoration, to apply slight extension with ease so that it may be enswathed.
But if the larger beam is what is splintered, then one must ensure that there is more violent extension.
And if both beams are splintered at the same time, then you must apply motion with the greatest strength.
And you must apply the hand-position during its restoration and extension over a cushion, with the palm of the hand towards the upper parts, further out than all the others, and with the auricular finger further down than all the others, and with the patient reclining on his back over a raised pillow.
And if the fracture is of the shoulder-joint, then you must bring it to rest and apply great extension over a raised pillow.
Then one minister should extend the arm from below with his hand or with a ligament, and another minister should similarly extend it above.
And the doctor should enswathe the bone in such a way that he reduces it according to the best possible figure.
And if there are gaps in the bone, then you must reduce all of the pieces into their location with your skill.
And if it appears to you that there is a gap which puts the tendon in danger and it does not seem to you hopeful regarding its restoration, then you should stop at that place and treat it according to the manner we have described above.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already written about that topic in a previous chapter, and so you should take its cure from there.
And if pustules appear at the beginning of your restoration, then you should take a cloth with ointment made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be softer between being thin and firm, and tightly place the cloth over that pustule with gentle pressure so that the pustule yields; and then remove the cerot and apply plaster prepared from ground mullet with egg yolk, and then apply splinters; and let the splinter which is placed over that fracture be the firmer and thicker.
And know that the number of splinters of the arm is seen in the greater dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one beam or in both beams at once.
And then apply your extension over the location of the fracture more strongly and violently, and when you extend it to the upper parts of the fracture or to its lower parts, apply the extension a little softer according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft moist cloths and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightly bound should be of the appropriate thickness between being thin and thick as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the ligament after several days. And if some cause occurs by which correction is necessary, as when it happens to the member, then you should bathe the member in warm water so that that pain ceases.
And let the member not be constricted while resting, and then return the extension.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bones are already relaxed and resembling those [bones], then rectify all of that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nutrition is prohibited from coming to the member by superfluity of stricture, then you must soften that a little and leave it for several days so that the nutrition can run to it, and then strengthen it.
But if no cause happens to the patient from those we have mentioned, then you must not dissolve it within about 20 days or so.
And let the hand of the patient be suspended by your virtue of movement, and make that one sleep on their own back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or quickly it is restored in 28 days, and all of that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of virtue.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that in the palm of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there is a great tendency to fracture, and not much happens to them except for a few times.
And when fracture or sprain happens to the hand, then you must make the patient lean forward and lie down according to equality, and then place his hand over that extended.
And let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor heal those until they are united with good conjunction.
And then you must place plaster and bandages if pustule does not happen cauterize; and then place a splint over it according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts within the belly of the palm, then make a bandage of linen cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with his own palm fractured; then it must be strengthened with long cloth.
And let the splint of flesh with cloth be in which it is raised, so that the flesh is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to how it should.
But if the fracture is at the parts outside, then you must place over it splint and another splint of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then pause the stricture, as how the hand is rolled to the ratchet between the fingers with ligaments.
And if fracture happens to one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it must be healed as how it should and then strengthened with the palm; and if you want, pause to him small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not mauled.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as well as in that of the middle finger, or the index, or the auricular, or the ring, then it must be healed and bound with the finger to which it belongs; or all are bound according to continuity, and that's better; or pause over it small splint, as we said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration and then that, the disposition of pustule cauterize and oppose — with your operation — with what happens when any cause from those, according to how it is iterated his account.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh many times is broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the party in front and to the upper pustule.
And its restoration is done so that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and face down.
And let the minister extend all the ligament to its party according to quality when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
But if it is near to the root of the thigh, then let the ligament be near to the armpit at the party of the little finger, so that the extension box in itself, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is near to the armpit, then let the ligament be made near to the armpit, and let the extension be at the parties below.
And let the doctor heal the bone with both hands until it reduces that according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then you must place plaster and bandages if pustule does not happen to the member. But if pustule happens to it, then you must leave that for several days until the pustule cauterizes, and then return to your cure.
The bandage of it must be done so: cover over the fracture a hard bandage, and fold that two or three times, and absorb from it superfluity; and then wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And interject long thread between the thigh and the leg near to the armpit at the parties below, and let the ends of the thread come from the party above the two parts, and then roll over the leg and the thigh that which absorbs from the bandage.
And then pause over the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and pause from those a splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is coagulated.
And then begin with strong bandage of the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you are more away from ligament of the place of the fracture, your bandage is less and looser and moister.
And then extend two ends of the thread at the parties below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not relaxed from its place.
And then leave the bandage over that, where it is so that no pustule happens to the member or cauterize or inflammation and resembling those; and if any cause from those happens, then you know of its dissolution, and rectify all that happens to it totally, according to how we said many times.
But if in the bone is bone of the bone which you put, then you heal that according to what it is possible for you; and if not, leave it and heal that, and cure with that from which the account precedes so that it heals.
And some times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened another with which they are tightened to it, as we said in the helper and in the arms.
But however in the restoration of it is made not happen to the patient claudication; and if it is restored alone, then it must be applied to him the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps from which he limped.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few months, and all of that is according to the diversity of the complications and of the other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the ankle of the armpit.
Know that a fracture of the ankle of the armpit happens many times, but attains to it much sprain.
But if fracture happens to it, then it is not but fissure or crack in its parties, and that is with spot or with spots, and over all it is state by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that which is broken in the parts of it with the said things between which it is united and joined, as much as possible, according to equation and facility and fabrication.
Then apply plaster and place it over the round wound, if you need to; and tighten it above with a bandage as is convenient.
Then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, as well as an ulcer cauterized and similar to those by which it opposes all incidents with what is convenient to it until it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg: and when there is a fracture of the bone great or small, with whatever you like, place the patient upon the manes of a horse or ox or camel or donkey, and let the head be in the middle between two manes, and thus he shall be borne towards the rim of the sun until he is healed.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named by the name of the leg; and the other is thin and is named the shank.
And it happens to both kinds of fractures what happens to the two bones of the arm, and by that is made the restoration of it just as the restoration of the arm similarly, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is turned into all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, then the leg is turned to the rear.
And if the thicker bone is broken, it turns that way below, and it is of those causes which are not to you unknown.
Then administer extension and equation and ligament of the stars according to that similarly.
But indeed, if the fracture of the leg is loose having many splinters, then let the extension be less and more distant, and draw it with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the stars and that you complete all your operation, then you shall take weights of wood of pine which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and are made splinters of white of palm; you shall attach those to which is a small thickness, and it shall not be of the fingerless, and the length of those according to the length of the leg, and of the rear within to the most distant.
Then wrap around each one in two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one over the fracture of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they shall be within the most distant location of the foot.
Then tie the two stars in three locations of two extremes and in the middle location, for with this string the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right side and left side, and it stands in good position.
And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and it is placed upon it so that it conserves that from movement.
And indeed, it is better that you do that in fracture, and when with that is plague properly.
And indeed, consider the leg in each day and study it with that for the last study, and keep it from ulcer and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happen, then treat it with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the fracture of the leg and of the shank and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
To the talo no happens fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot happen fracture some times; and to the toes of the foot rarely happens fracture, and it does not happen to them except in the months of disposition.
And if to the bones of the foot happens fracture and those bones are made to be elevated upon each other, then let the patient put his foot upon the earth prepared thus:
Then place one foot over what is elevated of those bones, and indeed press and equalize those within that they turn in the locations.
Then apply plaster and stop it above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two pegs planted.
Then tighten that with the foot with a descending string, more than you have wrapped it with cloths and with other causes of which you need.
And when to it have passed three days or four, then you unbind the string, for you shall find the bones equalized or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus with what is known.
But if any toes are broken, then restore those and equalize them just as you and instructed in the restoration of the toes of the hand. Then place to the toe that is broken a star according to the length of the toe, and let it be more bent from it a little; then below the foot this table which is to you instructed, and tighten that with descending string.
But if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place upon each toe a star of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the pegs of the table piercing the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which are to you told in the other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and treat every accident with what is appropriate.
Chapter .xviii.
Of the fracture of the heel and of the bone of the instep and of the staff of man.
When the heel is broken, then let it be made to bend in a shoe, and indeed let it be tilted to the side of two little, and let it be held behind.
And indeed the midwife fills the heel with cotton, and it is made in the heel thus as sperry; and indeed let the instep be bound, and elevate both little by little, for all that is bent until it is before the fracture thus with sperry and the broken bone returns.
Then place powder upon the instep and when he wants to urinate let him moisten the heel with facility and indeed urine, and reduce it and return that according to the way according to which you measured it at the beginning, and indeed return to his first powder.
And do thus for seven days or environ those, for that is restored.
And if you want, take a woolen bag and tighten over the hole of it a tube of reed; and insert the whole bag in the heel, and indeed blow into the tube with strength until the bag is inflated within the heel, for the fracture returns.
Then let it be filled with cotton and stay for some days according to that we have instructed, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the instep of man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and piercing of it what we have instructed in the bone of the hip.
And what is straight is not hidden in these close fractures and that hardly comes to mind, indeed listen best to my free speech; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions way straighter in the restoration and in the string of it, and therefore understand well.
But when the penis of a man is broken or fractured, take a gourd of walnut wood and insert the penis into it; then wrap a cloth around him, and have him wrapped up, and leave him for three days or so, and he will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractures in bones when they are infected.
It is convenient for the person to whom a fracture happens to have the plague, and especially if the bone is large as it is in the thigh or the adjutorium, or similar to that, which you treat with cauterization and bleeding as soon as the conditions of cauterization indicate to you, as we have said above.
And if the plague flows with blood, then you should take care to stop it in such a way that you powder over it powdered alder bark, unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should postpone the restoration of it until the ninth day, while the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you will cause ill effects.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then take care to reduce and draw it back with your hands with ease and with little extension.
But if extension is not ready and the position of it with your hands, then you should reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven digits or eight and its breadth is according to the quantity of the plague; and it is necessary for the doctor to take one or two of these, according to the quantity needed in the cure in every kind of fracture.
And it should be round and not have much thickness in it so that it is not bent under the pressure upon it during the operation.
And its upper part should be thick and its middle part should be thin and into the edges.
And this is the shape of it:
And in Greek it is named “labro volenz atelarem”, and it is a little spatula.
For it is necessary that the end of it be placed elevated upon the end of the prominent bone.
And push it into a groove until it returns to its position and let it be drawn into any position.
And then try to draw the ends of the fracture together; and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not take in that instrument well, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can do its work.
But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then insert that into whatever is convenient for it of the chisels which we have mentioned; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
And then smooth that which protrudes in the bone with roughness and tiny scars.
And when the bone is reduced and especially when the reduction gives the patient great pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great benefit.
When you have completed your restoration which you do to the bone, then immerse cloth in black vinegar and especially if it is summer, and do not put ointment or any other cause on the plague in which there is oil, so that you will not cause rot and corrosion on it.
And then administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered so that you insert the thread with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And beware that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times they have done this the foolish doctors, and have caused death or corrosive putrefaction or putrescence on their patients, and it is a sickness. And if your grip is loose, soft, different from the grip of the other fractures.
And if the plague is large or evil, and you fear some ill effects on that which we have recommended, and it hurts in the place, then do not put stars over that but put on that bandages of hard cloth in place of stars and bind it with those.
And when one or two days have passed and the plague has begun to become heated with inflammation, then take off the cloth which you had put over that with oil of vitriol, and then apply warm poultices, as from our custom is that we medicate plagues, thus with tetrafarmacon poultice and similarly.
And it seems good to you that you loosen the bandage and consider the plague every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and let the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction runs from it to the ends below with ease.
But if days pass on the plague and it is not consolidated or the inflammation is not removed from it, then know that there are hidden things within that which cause you to tent the plague. And from those things which are separated and extracted, those that when they are not separated cause the member to be in pain, then pierce them according to what you can do it possible.
And if the plague becomes suppurating or ulcerous, it is putrefying or another kind of corruption and putrefaction occurs, then do not pause over either one of them what benefits him in the cure of which there is a precedent in his chapter.
And about that in which there is the middle term and you make your own judgment: when a bone is broken, protrude over the member like the bone of the thigh or the adjutorium and similarly to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction on it, nor its extraction for many times death occurs from this; have left that as it is so that putrefaction occurs, for it falls very firm by itself after twenty days or thirty. And then cure the plague if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter 20.
Of the cure for knots which happen in the path of a fracture.
Knots often happen in the path of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and it changes the shape of the limb; and it strongly prohibits the limb from its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the knot is recent and administer to it medicines which have a styptic effect like aloe, and aloes, and myrrh, and similar things; and take some or all of them and mix them with white vinegar, or with sour wine, or with sharp wine, and apply that to the knot on a piece of cloth, and constrict that around it with a good constriction.
And let the constriction not be loosened for several days; and then loosen it and repeat this, while the knot is being reduced; or place a sheet of lead over it, leaning downward, because lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in the limbs.
But if the knot is already converted to stone and it is constricted and necessity demands cutting out that knotted part completely, then split that from its most upper part, and cut away the excess and prominent part, or pierce it with some sharp resoring instrument until it is reduced; and cure that as it heals.
Chapter 21.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and the limb underneath it is subtle and fragile, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb underneath it is subtle and fragile, that is not done but for several causes: one of which is too much solutio of the ligament and of its ligature not according to how it should be; or by excess of constriction of the ligaments so that nutrition is prohibited from running to the limb; or by too much superfluous embrocation; or by superfluous movement not at the right time; or by lack of blood in the patient's body and by weakness of him.
And the cure for this is to give the patient food and make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and apply heat and lard on it.
And then place a plaster over the limb so that the plaster brings it much nutrition, or continue embrocation of it with warm water until the nutrition runs and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibit their operation from that which is natural to them.
When it happens to the limb already restored that its healing is crooked and prominent at the broken bone and knotted, and it is fed by form of the limb, but nevertheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural function; yet do not believe the word of him who examines that limb that it is newly broken.
But there have already been several foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very reproachful, presenting great danger, the sign of which is deadly.
But if the claudication and knot are recent, then let them be embrocated with warm water in which soft herbs are steeped, like leaves of holly and roots of it, and mallows, and similar things to those medicines that are named, brother consolidatio; or let it be plastered with a plaster made of mucilage of roots of holly and let it be bound with linen rags or with cotton wool, and let it be plastered with that; or let them be bound with fat figures and bound with dove droppings, and similar things to those medicines.
And some times it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which should be done with the hands moistened, and movement of the limb in every direction at all hours should be administered.
But if the crookedness has already gone forward and is made strong and converted into stone and necessity demands curing it with iron, then let the pus be removed from above and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and that which superfluously knots the muscle at that bone be cut by subtle incisers, and facility be administered in that by solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is dislocation of one of the joints of its place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and changes the shape of the limb, and brings great pains and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when dislocation happens, then let it be forced to be reduced immediately, and do not delay its reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint will become inflamed, and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for that reason let it not be bent or stretched during the inflammation, because many times it causes spasms and pains in them.
But when that happens, let you care for the phlebothimia of the patient, and then let it be left until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be embrocated with warm water and oil, and then reduced with facility.
And every limb should be cured by that of which the remembrance will come to its place.
And you have ordered the chapters of dislocation according to that which precedes in fracture, from the highest part of the body to the lowest part.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both mandibles are dislocated if not tart; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that they are swollen from their place by little motion, and become soft a bit; or are dislocated by entire dislocation and complete, so that they are swollen at the joint where saliva runs from the patient and he cannot hold that nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its speech.
But when the dislocation of it is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
And let the minister hold the patient's head, and let the doctor insert his finger of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth of him if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers be out with which he hugs; and command the patient to cease his mandibles and release those from every part; and let the doctor hug the mandible and press the mandible so that it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated together, then administer embrocation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both be made gently and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And then when they return and are hugged, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not made soft, then place over them powders of cloth with cerot, and let it be made of wax and rosin rubbed; and then let it be bound by facility with mild ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not turn to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to open for any cause; having his food be lean meat, so that when the pains are reduced and the mandibles are swollen, then let him open what he will.
And let this be administered with ease, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth because of eating, drinking, and speech, while the jaw is numbed and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce both mandibles when they are dislocated at any time and are not returned to their places, then often sudden fevers occur, as well as continuous vomiting, and the belly of the patient quickly becomes swollen, and he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is lethal; many times the person upon whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter 25
On the reduction of a dislocation of the collarbone and of the end of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated on the inside by its connection to the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and this is indicated by sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. Then press the spot hard with your palm, for it will return.
And apply plaster and powder to that spot, and strengthen it.
But the end of that which is connected to the collarbone and continued from it is not dislocated at any time; therefore it must be reduced and bound as we have said, and as your tools allow.
And apply plaster and powder and a binding to that spot, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And by this treatment the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26
On the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the end of the tendon at the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this occurs seldom; it is not dislocated at the sides by the shoulder, nor at the front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and exits out at the lower parts by the tendon, and mostly in those of whom there is little flesh, it is dislocated with ease; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
And quickly occurs in some men by concussion or blow, and the muscle of them is apoplectic from apoplexy, and it is cured because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore know this while you are in supination of it, and then proceed in the cure of it.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower parts by the tendon; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, for you will find between them manifest difference; and you will know it in the head of the muscle concave and below the tendon because of touch, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear on that side, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated behind or inside, and you feel touch clearly and it is not concealed.
And this dislocation has an easier reduction when fresh and the patient is young.
And its reduction is that the minister lifts the arm of him up above; and then place your fingers below the tendon of him, and elevate the joint with strength towards its place, and the minister lifts the arm of him, and extends it upwards; and then place that below because it will return easily.
But if by what we have said it does not return, and only after the dislocation occurred, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered an embrocation that softens and lubricates as if his thigh were razor-cut, with fenugreek, and honey in water, and be administered.
And then the patient is supinated on his back and a pillow is placed below the tendon of him, and he awaits in elevation and compression, and the doctor places his heel over the joint, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not pulled down to the lower parts; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not pulled down, for then that returns at once to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side, and insert his muscle below the tendon of the patient and lift the tendon of him up above while the patient is suspended in air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower parts of his belly. But if the patient is light, then know that with him who for another cause is suspended, for gravity brings about the return of the dislocation at once.
And it is reduced likewise according to another manner: and let a long post be placed in the ground, the head of which is round in figure, like mortar, that is not thick nor thin; and then let the patient be placed below, and let sheets of linen be placed over the head of the post, and the patient stand according to the length of the post, and then let his arm be extended from the lower parts on the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place with swiftness.
And if its reduction is difficult for all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and take a post whose quantity is in the length of two cubits, and the breadth of it is of four digits, and the thickness of it is removed in the length of the tendon according to this form:
And then over the round head are tied linen sheets so that the patient does not slide down.
And then the tendon of the patient is placed below, and his arm or hand is extended over the post to the lower parts; and the post is tied over the helper, and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed over a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand is extended to the lower parts; and the other body is suspended from the other side, for the joint enters at once.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever manner is possible for you, and then know that you place below the tendon a sponge of wool of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from powder of moly with honey over all the muscle, as it is rolled above; and then bind it below the tendon with binding decently; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and his hand is attached to his neck, and he is let loose, and his hand is not pulled for seven days.
And know that the food of the patient be lessened while the member is comforted, for it is easier for the cure of him.
And then food is given more freely, and exercise is added; and if it is firm and not soft, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times by moisture that occurs in him or for another cause, then know that in that be administered cautery with three punctures, according as it is said before in the chapter of cautery.
And if all of this is done, and then after seven days the bandage and binding are removed from him, and the joint is not firm, and it is cut and catched, and he cannot lift that arm to the upper parts, know that the nerves of him which are in the head of the muscle are already incised or extended or soft, and know that the joint never returns to its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from behind the feet and the breasts or the parts, the reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, while returning.
And be administered in that other constriction, and cure that one until it is healed.
And if the healing of the body part happens slowly and with difficulty in its movement, then the patient should take many warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and the body part returns to its original state.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of dislocation of the neck.
Know that the neck joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated from all sides, and especially from the front to the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you move the neck joint or touch it according to how it is dislocated, this will be made clear to you, for the joint is hollow and cannot bend the arm, nor can it reach with that hand.
And when you see this, and reduce the dislocation immediately before it comes to an abscess, for if it comes to an abscess, its reduction is difficult, and often it will not be healed at all; and especially when it is on the back side, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and more painful, and many times results in death.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is for the hand to be extended with two hands, and for the arm to be expanded, and for the doctor's hands to be on the neck and below it, and for him to push the joint with his finger tips, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is on the front side, then it returns as he bends his hand with his own hand, while he strikes the neck with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a violent extension and a very strong push.
And two ministers should extend the arm and hold that joint so that it is not wrenched because of the extension.
Then the arm is wrapped around with a long piece of folded cloth or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should smear it with some oil so that it may be caused by those things which help in lubricating the joint with ease; and then push the joint with a violent impulse until it returns.
And then its reduction should be made over that plaster in which it has been stiffened and dried with white of egg, and tightened with a descending bandage, and the arm suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
And then it should be unwrapped, and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should unravel the bandage from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not stronger, then you should repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is tightened, and then unravel it.
But if it happens to him that the heaviness remains after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is for movement, then administer moistening in a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until he is relieved; or pause on the joint, olive oil so it is a fat of quick action; and then bandage it, and leave it for the day and night. And then wash that one and put him in a bath; and when he has bathed, then you should rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat on that olive oil, so it is of quick action, once, and the second, and the third. Corruption has already come upon the inner part of the brain, as it were a membrane.
And if you wish, place over that cow's udder which is wet and warmed with butter and stretched over it; and do this several times, for this is wet and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
The elbow of the hand sometimes becomes dislocated, and its reduction is easier than that of other joints, except when it happens in the hour in which it is displaced, before the place becomes abscessed or an abscess comes to it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the minister extends his hand from him, and the doctor places his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
But if it is considered that the palm has already been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient should place both of his hands on a table because of extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding from the hand, then let the position of the hand of him be intrinically over the table, so that the hand of the doctor falls on that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; but if not, then tighten that with plaster, let the abscess pass and leave it; and do not repeat this, for otherwise, he will not bear nor be able to endure the reduction of it more than days have passed.
But if the joint becomes twisted according to its tortuosity; and the patient feels no cause, except that his hand is made soft and cannot be tightened for any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or cut, and then there is not pain in him except that it is tightened with cautery near the place of it and very often this indicates no cause.
Then when the elbow is returned, then place over it the plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for a few days; and then unravel it and leave it, and the hand of him be exercised.
But if its movement is hindered and some heaviness comes to it, then loosen that with warm water and with friction several times, until he is relieved.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes they are dislocated on all sides.
And when some finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or the belly of it, then push the finger and drive out its dislocation with your fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend that until it is straightened out in that its day.
And when evening comes, loosen that according to that narration, and do not cease to unravel it in the day and exercise with movement, and loosen it at night; and do this for several days until it is tight.
And make it like that if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and loosen it to that side and do to it its first operation, until it is healed.
And likewise do to that when it is dislocated on other sides.
Chapter 30.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joints.
When dislocation comes to one of the shoulder joints or the neck, and only dislocated joints remain in their places, then there is no cure for this, for death draws near the patient.
And a sign of this is that the patient's excrement is discharged without their will, and they cannot retain it; and sometimes some of his limbs or both legs or both arms, or one of those, are made soft, or a vertebra in his spine is dislocated, for many times it is dislocated and many times the removal of those [vertebrates] is done in four parts.
Thus that which has been dislocated to the back is called scoliosis.
But its treatment is that when you consider if the scoliosis happens in children, because then there is no cure for it nor any healing at all.
But for that which comes from falling or hitting or similar to those, the Ancients spoke of many ways of treatment with lengthy speech, of which the most beneficial is to return it [the vertebra] with profit; but I have abridged that of which little excuses itself through too much of it, due to my proximity to its intention and exposure, by which I have expounded and formed from diverse instruments of that by which I will show and space out that.
And of those there is no cure except that which happens specifically in the back with what I will account.
And that the patient should be laid down on his back close to a wall, and that he be extended downward by his feet being raised so that they are not bent.
And then a straight post should be placed and fixed in the ground at the end of the bed near the patient's head, and another post under his feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister should hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other second in that form.
And then wrap around the patient's head and down under his armpits a lion-skin firm; and extend the end of the skin to the post which is near the patient's head, and attach that there; and then tighten the other strap over the patient's hips and his knees, and attach those to the other post which is near his feet.
And then each minister should extend the strap to the end of the post, and that the two posts and the straps at their locations where they are attached are not dislocated, but rather are tightened as I have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the vertebra with strength while he returns it, or that he leans over it on a table, and then that he tightens his feet over the table as he returns it.
But if it does not return by this form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in the direction of three cubits, and dig into the wall of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which fits the end of the table. And then place the middle of the table over the vertebra, and the doctor should place his feet over the other end, and tighten well while the vertebra is constricted and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open with a turn which is rolled by the hand; and it that you fix in the ground beneath the patient's head two posts, the length of which is one cubit, and fix the patient's head at the end of the bed two posts; and let the length between each post be a palm, and now there are made in each post holes in which runs a rope, and each should be tightly fixed in the ground so that it is not dislocated.
And there should be another round post in which is the turn, and it should be rolled in the two holes of the two posts.
And at its end is a hole in which is formed the post, the length of which is a palm by which it is rolled; and in the other two posts there is similar to that.
And then tighten the straps which you have tightened in the patient' s feet at the hole by which is his head, and the straps which you have tightened in his thighs at the turn by which are his feet.
And then fix each turn and have a minister who twists the turn by his hand, and the doctor similarly the vertebra as we have said.
And after the vertebra is returned and the location is warmed, then put that you apply a plaster of honey with albumen, and then stop it; and then lean over the plaster a board of which the breadth is three digits or surrounding those, and its length is quantity that takes up the location of the scoliosis, and over the end of the vertebra as well.
And then it should be tied with the strap which we have said, and let the patient take subtle food until he is healed.
And if there remains any swelling in the location at the end of the healing, then put that are administered medicines which moisten and smooth with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recounted; and now is administered in that location leaf of lead.
And sometimes swelling occurs in the end of the vertebrae of two, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which now causes so that there should not be made protrusion to him with this medicine, because strongly he will cause death to you.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not occur unless dislocation only, and it does not happen to those which happen to other joints of small removal and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated at the inner parts, or at the outer parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated at the inner parts, and seldom at the front or back parts.
And the sign of its dislocation at the inner parts is that when you straighten the patient's leg with the leg, it is longer and the tendon is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot due to the tongue, and the location which the tongue comes from has become pus-filled here.
And the sign of that to which dislocation happens at the outer parts is that its accidents are contrary to those accidents.
And the sign of that to which dislocation happens at the front parts is that it expands his leg according to compliment, but it cannot bend without pain that is in the tendon, and if he goes forward and does not bear weight on his foot; and his urine is retained and his tongue is pus-filled, and he bears weight on his heel.
And the sign of that to which dislocation happens at the back parts is that it does not expand the tendon, nor can it bend without that which bends the tongue, and his leg is shorter than the other one, and the tendon is softened, and the head of the hip comes from that location.
But the reduction of the kinds of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, as it is aged by having been given for a long time, then there is not in that a cure at all; and thus there should not be made protrusion to him.
But in the case of a recent dislocation which is one of the four species of dislocation, you must apply to the joint what makes it return and extend it to those on the inside and outside, and especially to that of the right and left, for it quickly returns and does not need another treatment.
But if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the part most below, or with his own hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the leg above the pain; and another minister extends the hand of that one above so that he puts his hands below his ticklish parts; and then tighten with a lion's hide over the root of the thigh, and have another minister hold the end of the hide.
And it should be extended from within to the angle of the breastbone, or from behind to the part of the chest.
And all of these should be extended while the patient is elevated from the ground and his tongue is hanging out.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in every species to direct the appropriate cure.
In the proper reduction of a dislocation, when it is to the inner parts, the patient should be laid on his side; and then place the bands over the root of the thigh in that spot between the head of the thigh and the part below the tongue; and then extend the band up from the angle of the breastbone to the highest part of the furcula.
And then another strong minister should take the arms of him and press on the large part of his thigh and extend it to the outside by violent extension, for that will return to its place.
And this species is the quickest cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other species.
But if he is unconscious and doesn't obey you when you try this species of cure with both, then you should tie both feet of him together with a strong band, quickly, over both heels and over both toes.
And the length of each of his parts should be the quantity of four digits, and the leg that is dislocated should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two digits.
And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the beam and in the middle; and his length from the ground should be the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong young man to lessen the head of the thigh, and another young man should be suspended with the patient; and the other young man, lessening the thigh with strength, should push, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction when it is dislocated to the outside, he should lie on his back as we have recommended in the part about having coldness; and the band should be tightened over the thigh properly and over the feet of him.
And then two beams should be placed, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then beams that are close to the middle of the beam that is laid over which dampened sheets are wrapped should be placed, so that the patient is not damaged by the beam being between his thighs, for then the extension to the lower parts will not be drawn up.
And then each minister should extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand should guide the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then the leg should be extended quickly, and according to this narrative it is in this way on the beam; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the tongue of the patient, and then he shortens that with his other hand, and with that shortening he extends it to the lower parts to the part of the toe.
And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the lower parts, and he is elevated from the ground; but he should be placed on a hard cause, just as we have said when the shoulder is dislocated to the outside, according to what we have said about his placement on two beams; and he lies on his face and the bands are extended, just as we have said, without delay.
And let compression be administered with a board over the place to which the joint extends.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what you have — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both thighs, and when you see those angles and the patient stretches his thigh and expands with no excuse, then know that the member according to which he has returned — and then you adjust both thighs and pause compression and tighten with a band so that the broad part is not bruised in either of the parts; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the band and the paste, and compare one leg to the other.
And then if you see those angles in view, then know that the dislocation is already stopped, and let him leave after.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and tighten it according to your first tightening, and let him leave after three days.
And then loosen that, and let him delay walking on crutches for several days, until he is comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
The toe is dislocated according to three manners, for it is dislocated to the outside, and to the inside, and to the lower parts more than to the back parts; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of him is that you command the patient to apply his leg against his thigh; then know that the toe is dislocated.
And the restoration of all his manners is that you make the patient lie straight, so that he extends his leg, if he can on that; have him adhere his toe to the face of him, and pause his foot between his feet; then let him adhere his toe with your palms, and hold those between your fingers over the toe of him with strength, and another minister extend his foot while the toe returns to its place.
And the sign of redemption of him is that his leg adheres to his thigh with non-laborious elevation.
And then plaster that and let the band adhere to his thigh, and then have him lie those together with a band for three or four days, and then loosen those.
And do not use the patient for walking for several days until he is healed and comforted.
But if his reduction by you is excused, then administer strong extension with bands of which in the cure of the shoulder preceding narrative was spoken.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
The toe sometimes is bruised by minor removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to compliment, and its dislocation is made either to the inner parts or to the outside.
And the sign of his dislocation is that you see the talus [ankle bone] swollen proceeding from the part where it is dislocated.
But the cure for his removal is a gentle reduction and that he be extended with ease by hands and wrapped while he returns [to his normal state].
But in the cure of him when he is dislocated according to nature, one should make the patient lie down straight and have a strong and valiant minister from behind hold his hips in the middle of his back in that very spot.
Then with your right hand take the foot from its highest part and with your left hand from the lowest part of the foot in the spot of the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and with your left twice, then extend it with your left; and press the bottom of the foot with your right behind the leg as you work.
And do this twice according to what we have counted.
Then press the bottom of the foot to the leg on the third round and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one or two rounds according to this manner and you see the foot wrapped, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation upon him until he returns.
But if it is prohibited to you to reduce him with what we have recommended then let the patient lie on his back on the ground and stretch a mat firm on the ground and place a pillow between his thighs and wrap a cloth around him so that he does not turn over.
And let the minister of him have his thighs and let another minister extend the foot with his hands or with an instrument that lies upon the neck of the foot; and let each minister extend against the extension of his party, and let the pillow be extended between the patient's thighs holding it there so that the body is not drawn to the parts below its extension.
And let the doctor wrap the dislocation with his hands and let another minister hold the healthy thigh at the parts below, for the dislocation returns with ease.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and you see the health of its reduction, then pause plaster and stretch that with strong instruments and tie the foot to the leg.
And take care of or guard against the nerves which are behind on the talus that the instrument upon it is not violent and lead that strongly.
Then let him leave it for two or three days and if the instrument is softened then stretch it.
And let him loosen it on the third day or fourth and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. But if he is forced to go before that space it is not secure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted upon him and let there be no cure upon him.
And if there happens to him pus by cautery then let you minister to the ceasing of him that in which we preceded our narration, in another place of cure and embrocation, until it is cleaned out.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of cure for dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Let him who is dislocated be wrapped with little extension without difficulty and before it is easier.
But if the dislocation is in any part of the neck of the foot then let him lie down with his foot straight on a flat place upon the earth or table and be standing there as if he were walking.
And let you stand on your feet and place your toe upon that which protrudes from the joints and let you press it with your foot with strength until he returns and see that it is wrapped and there does not appear in the spot any eminence.
And let you place beneath the belly of his foot a table which takes up all the foot and let it have two ends, and let you stretch that with decent and firm strength for three days; then loosen him and let him rest from walking for several days until he is stretched out and his reduction is secure.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the kinds of dislocations which are made by blow or by fracture or by any other impaction.
When that happens for any cause and you are proficient in the cure of that and in the restoration of him, several times succeed death.
And for that not let you presume upon the cure of him but he who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and let him use in the commencement of medicines which yield pus by cautery only, and let him examine the patient to the divine judgement, unless one from whom you expect salvation, from wickedness alleviation, and in which appears some hope. And therefore make haste to do the reduction upon him at the commencement of the cause, before he goes into pus by cautery.
And therefore if the member returns according as we will let you then minister regime which yields pus by cautery and cure the wound with that which suits him of the dry unguents.
And if dislocation is by fracture and impaction happens in the bones separated let you be proficient in their setting and do in that what we have said in the simple maladies of those which are preceded in their places.
And guard and avoid according to your strength that of the instrument in ways of fear according as my prediction is preceded for you are better before your creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your body will be seen those in your time. Thus end the words of Albucasis perfectly of which God be beneficent. Amen.
