O sons, since I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the end of the science of medicine, by whose completion in it its end has come to be, and through whose expositions and declarations, it is apparent to me that you will complete that which concerns you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, so it is surgery.
Because the operation by hand is spread throughout our realm and in our time deprived of all, while the science of it greatly perishes, its visions are obscured, and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which alter most things and lead to those errors and hesitations that are hidden within their minds, and the strength of the art is prolonged.
And it appears to me that you will enliven that through the arrangement of this treatise in accordance with the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work come through addition of the declaration, and through preparation of them, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which no good artist is attained by his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that its performer must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the parts of members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and sinews, and the number of those, and their exit; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their issuing.
And because of that Hypocras says that by name is much, but in the work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said about anatomy is not evacuated so that he does not fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor open an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed, and the woman died under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who, when he was called, pulled out a stone from a man who had a process in his state, and the stone was great, and he came to him and took out that stone with a piece of the bladder, and that man died on the third day.
And I called upon extracting that one, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient I knew he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and thus he did on a black slave whose leg was fractured; and prepared by his ignorance, extracted the fracture over the wound with powders and splinters with strong compression, and did not allow the wound breath.
And he bandaged it according to his desires, and he lay for several days and commanded that I loosen the bandage, and so he was for many days and commanded that I loosen the bandage; and he stayed like this until the thigh and leg were apostemated, and came to perdition.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and there was tranquillity and relief from his pains.
But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it and the corruption did not cease to wander in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the malignancy of it grew great with its lord.
The which cause is that the old cautery is pure of melancholic humor, and it does not come to it from iron in any way, but that it be in a member who suffers so that it comes from all.
And because of that, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation by hand be devised in two ways: so is in operation to him who is associated with health, and in work to whom it is perilous in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already exhorted that in every place of this book where there is an operation in which error and fear come; so that it is necessary for you to guard that and leave that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and discourage you.
And thus take your weapons with solicitude and with protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the better way through the grace of God that they may go to health and glorious success, and lay those terrible diseases of difficult cure, and display your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for it remains to your glory, and beyond in the world to your sanctities.
Gaulish already said in some of her warnings: Do not heal wicked illnesses, so that wicked doctors are not named.
And I have devised this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered from the head into feet, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of wounds, and of extraction of thorns and similar things, all capitoloized and ordered in the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure of torture and of similar things; capitoloized from the head into feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
That I may tell you the quality of the elements of that cautery and of its pains, and in which complexions cautery is prohibited.
Then I say that the word of the quality of the element of cautery and of its pain is long and prolix, and subtle through science, and secret hidden; and many wise have spoken much about it, and they have been disagreed about it, and for me a little of their words is enough, fearing prolixity.
And thus I say that cautery confers universally on all complexions which are by matter or by its matter, excepting two complexions, which are cold complexions.
In the cold and dry complexions by matter, they are disagreed; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in an illness which is by quality and dryness, for fire's nature is quality and dryness, and it is convenient that an illness be cured when cold and dry.
And he says the contrary of that, that cautery is done benefit in all illnesses cold and dry which we see in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexions of fire, you rub the body of man dry.
And I say through his word that experiment that one has already seen me several times to be discovered.
However, we do not believe that anyone should come to this who is not experienced and practiced in the chapter of cauteries by recent exercises, and has known the diversity of complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
But in other complexions, there is no fear over them, especially in cold and moist diseases; for all doctors have agreed on those, and are not disagreed on using cauteries on them.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and of its goodness is that cauteries with medicine that burns are when fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not affect another member adjusted to it except with a small injury.
But the action of medicine that burns reaches to those members from which it is distant; and it makes difficult healing come strongly in the member with disease, and strongly it drives it out.
But fire, through its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except to make superfluous; And it is known to us by experience and by longevity of service of study on the truth of causes; And because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that I was not read in my free time in this pause with you, a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, with philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your ears.
And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to do cauteries, and they pause the best time in spring.
And I say that cauteries are convenient in all times, because the harm by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or of necessary pains, strong and fiery, which do not suffer delay so that evil comes from them, which is greater than a little harm coming through time.
And therefore do not fear in your ears, o children, that which is not judged except by the common people and foolish doctors; It is that to that disease which is healed by cautery there is no reduction of time at all, and they pause on the consequence of it.
And the cause is not as they think it is, because cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause that pain comes.
But cauteries are superfluous over medicine by willfulness of their strength and power of their operation, and greatness of their Lord.
And it is possible that his disease will return at some time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and its power, and what is prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities in him, and what comes to him in his acquisition in foods and like those causes; But that disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humidities, as well as cauterization of a tooth for pain and likeness to that, it is possible that the same pain will not return in him, but this happens little.
And popular speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine; And it is a true saying, not that they understand in it, because they think that there is no healing that benefits from medicine or anything else besides cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; And the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer it, and especially at the end of the cause we administer cautery to them, and it benefits that. And from here we see that cautery is not the last remedy of medicine according to the intention which the vulgar and foolish doctors understand it.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say that except for the equality of gold and sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make brawn, although that is not absolutely true, because I have seen that it only happens in some bodies and not in others; And cauterization with that is good and better than with iron as they say; But when you do cauterize with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rust of gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; And if you adjust it on fire, some leaves are heated so that the gold-smith can pick them up with the occupation of that.
And because of this, cauterization with iron is done to us more lightly and closer to rectitude of operation.
And I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head into the feet, so that they ask me what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers with humidity and coldness on the servant accident of which there are two causes; It is a cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called rhachitis, from the parts of the ears and the nostrils flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and pain in teeth, and of the golaryro, and universally of all disease that comes through friction, as well as paralysis, stroke, and like in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this: that first you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
And then command that he should shave his head with a razor, and then make him lie between your knees on a low bench, and let him rest his feet on your lap.
And then pause the edge of your palm above his nose between his eyes. But however, when the place of your middle finger is reached, sign that place with your thumb, and then ignite the cautery olive, of which this is the form:
And then pause that over the place marked with your thumb, in such a way that it descends, and while your hand is pressed little by little, you revolve that.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see some quantity of the head removed, as well as the quantity of hair, then lift your hand again, and if it does not return with that iron, with another, if it is chilled, while that is seen by the eye what I have said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the place and let him lick that for three days.
And then pause upon it the cloth soaked in vinegar and let it lie on it while the ash of the fire is destroyed. And then heal the place with tetrapharmacon unguent while it is healed.
And they said that when the Roman plaster is open, as many meals are poured onto the brawn, because it is better and more beneficial.
And they said that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held within it while some part of the nature of the bone is burned.
And then it should be wiped with that which is astringent to the bone, and then healed.
Others say that with the cautery it reached the bone, as the strong pressure on the bone made the bone break, and this is the form of small aphecata. And they believe that from that location the vapor from the head expires.
And if the ulcer has been open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery at all, except in a few cases out of fear; and for me, it is better that he be saved, if possible, because the head is devastated by the solution of continuity as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it both ways to save lives.
Chapter two:
Of cauterization of the head:
When in all the head occurs a chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garlic and leeches and scabies and plasters and poultices and bandages and hot stones and similar things, especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery but none of those remedies benefit him, then consider that if the patient's head is of a strong creation in its nature, and not frail, and you find a great deal of coldness there, then cauterize it again with another cautery beneath that one a little. Then cauterize the top of his head with a cautery until the scalp is split open. The scalp split open and the quantity we have recounted discovered and cauterized with a cautery in the back of the head in the place which is called a vessel — and it is that place in which the ventouse is stopped. And press your hand there and do not discover the bone, because through this the patient feels great pain unlike all other cauterizations of the head.
And I say this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it:
Chapter three:
Of the cauterization of not antique emigration:
When a strong pain in the front of the head or a pain extending to the eye, the head should be evacuated with medicated cleansing agents, and the other cure should be administered, which I have described in the diseases of the head; and if all fails, cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
But cauterization with a burning medicine is to take a piece of charcoal, and to scorch it and put the ends of it on both sides of the head. Then cut the site of the pain in the temple with a sharp-pointed lance until it is done underneath the scalp, so that it is hidden.
And then press on it with a descent constriction, and let it remain there for three hours; and then remove the charcoal and treat the wound with cotton soaked in wine or vinegar until the location turns purple.
And then heal that with ointment once it is healed.
And if you want to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treaties on burning medicines:
But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: heat the cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called a peg-like nail, because the head of it is like the form of a peg with some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small protuberance.
Then rest your hand on the site of the pain — so that the nail is not burned underneath — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the amount of it that is burned by the thickness of the scalp as far as the size of the nail, and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned, so that no flow of blood comes.
Then moisten cotton in salt water and place that on the site, and let it remain for three days; and then place cotton moistened with wine, and heal with ointment once it is healed.
And if you want to cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cautery, and beware of cutting the artery in this not-ancient emigration:
Chapter four:
Of the cauterization of antique emigration:
When you cure emigration with what we have said about the preceding cure, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the disease which does not suffice it is what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then where you ignite the cautery-scalpel until it turns white, then indicate on the site of the pain with a line the length of which is the size of your finger, or however much; and having pressed your hand there for an outlet and strengthened that there, pierce the artery within and enter into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the mandible, which is damaged by chewing, and that the joint not be burned and the nerve which controls that, and that no spasm ensue.
And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood from the artery which has burst, because there is danger in the burst of it, especially to him who ignores what he does and is not skilled and experienced; let the operation be done at the beginning.
And I will come with a reminder of the regimen for accidental blood flow from an artery according to its own manner in your free book.
And if you see that this disease does not suffice this cautery and the body of the patient tolerates it, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and heal the wound once it is healed.
And if you want to administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of an artery with cautery having two edges, it is better and more appropriate cauterization.
Chapter five:
Of the cauterization of the pains of ears.
When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is cured by lactic causes and with the other cure which we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
Then pierce it with the point and let it be guided around all of the ear as it is rotated, or in the circuit of whichever one if the pain is in either one. Lengthen you with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little so that it tests the place with feeling.
And if the cautery of ten points in all the ear, and which one, then heal the sites once they are healed.
Chapter six:
Of the cauterization of torture:
Torture which is cured and cauterized with spices which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization with the species which comes from dryness or by spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of torture with herbs and poultices and compresses, and your cure does not confer, then where you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first pierces the root of the ear, the second a small one underneath the temple, and the third pierces the junction of two lips.
And apply your cautery to the opposite side of the sick person, because softness does not appear except on the side where there is an appearance of healing.
And the way of cauterizing is that you cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the upper part of the ear, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the finger toe, and place your hand holding the cautery until half the thickness of the hair has been burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special instrument of the surgeon, the form of which is shown in front of the table. However, more subtle is that one a little like this; and cover what is in it of superfluous thickness a little.
Then treat the area with what is before it has been processed until it is healed.
Chapter .vii.
Of cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not work, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said; and cauterize him in the neck. And the manner of cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and let it be cured with what processes.
Chapter .viii.
Of cauterization of oblivion made by flame.
Let large jars and pills be given to the patient in the beginning by the servant who cleanses them.
Then scrape all of the patient's head and place on his neck a poultice of cedar described in the treatise on poultices.
And apply it several times, for that is the way of cautery. And do that according to what medicine orders which we have already said.
And if he heals well by those, and if not, then do to him three cauteries in the back part of his head, which descend from the highest part of his head into the lowest part of his neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and treat the cautery with what has been said.
But if you want to increase it and the patient can tolerate it, then do cautery in the middle of his head; and if you see greater increase, then cauterize him on both horns.
Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the form given before.
Chapter .ix.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of all the body.
Let the servant cleanse his head by jars and what we have said; and scrape the patient's head, then cauterize him with cautery in the middle of his head, and with cautery on all the horns of his head, and with cautery on the back part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of his neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body's paralysis that he tolerates and the illness is strong, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, and finally with cautery until half the thickness of the hair has been burned, and raise your hand. Then treat that until it is healed, and let that be an olive-colored cautery.
Chapter .x.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And so let the servant cleanse his brain with herbs and with the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if the patient is a child who does not endure medicines, then let the servant administer to him healing drinks and masticators, before meals, with good food.
Then scrape the patient's head, and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of his head according to the preceding manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and cauterize on each horn of his head. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
And let it be an olive-colored cautery according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter .xi.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess phlegm declining into melancholy, and the patient' body is cold, then let him drink what cleanses his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
Then scrape the patient's head, and then make a decently twisted bandage of it over the circle, and place that on the middle of his head.
And let the patient be in a sweat, and let him be held in every part.
Then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of an old ram of sheep. And let that be heated over the fire with moderate heat, which he endures when it is within him. Then apply that in the middle of his head on the circle, and let him be within until he is deflated.
And do that to him once every week, with his other regimen well within until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him making small points according to his temperature, but have your hand on a cautery otherwise ordered: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain equally.
Then apply that cloth wrapped in wool or in flannel of wool.
Chapter .xii.
Of cauterization of water descending into the wound.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the wound by the signs which we have said in the division, then begin and give to drink what cleanses his head, and guard it from all humidities.
And let that boil in water in a pot for several days.
Then command him to wash his head, and cauterize him with cautery in the middle of his head; and cauterize him with two cauteries on two temples if there is the beginning of water in two wounds, or on one side if there is the beginning of water in a wound.
Enter with cautery all the veins and vessels which are beneath the skin; and let the cauteries be as long in length as the temples are wide.
Guard against blood flow when he is cauterized; and if you see from him blood flow, or stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And come to know by experience which is in extraction of vessels and with incision of those, and guard against flow of blood.
And some vessels are cauterized beneath the bones at two cauteries produced by the end.
Chapter .xiii.
Of cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the eyes are chronic and flow through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious place on the head and it is confirmed that this is caused by excessive phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery the one which we mentioned in the chapter on water entering the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries below the temples, and with two cauteries below the bones. And if there is a need for more cautery, then cauterize all around the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14
On cauterization for nose bleeds.
When you treat someone with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not help, then prepare and give the patient enemas for three nights; then shave his head and cauterize the middle of his head with a small cautery made from olive oil. Then cauterize the top of the nose with two cauteries above the eyebrows under the hair, a little one.
And be careful with the cautery so that you do not burn the area.
This is the form of the cautery made from cloves.
Chapter 15
On cauterization for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries all around, and let them be extended from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the upper part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter 16
On cauterization for the eyelid of the eye when hairs turn to the inside and poke the eye.
When the hairs of the eye turn inside and poke the eye, there are two ways to treat it: either with a cautery made from fire or with a burning medicine.
If you treat it with fire cautery, order the patient to open his eyes so that you may cut off the hairs at their roots, while they are prolonged and curling; and if he pokes his eye, then you should compress his eye with a bandage so that it is not damaged until the hairs have grown back.
Then when they have grown back and curling, then place the patient's head in your lap, and apply a sign with ash on the eyelid of his eye with a sign, the shape of which is like that of a dead leaf; let the beginning of this sign be close to the hairs.
Then place cotton soaked in white vinegar or in mullein tea on the eye.
And heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the eyelid which is like that of a myrtle leaf is completely burnt and appears properly.
And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it elevated above the puncture of the eye.
And so elevate your hand and lay that for three days, and then place on it a poultice with a bandage until the scar is healed. And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for any cause and the eyelid is softened again, then do the cautery over that area again as you did first.
But if the hairs are under the eyelid, then cauterize that area so that it is elevated to its natural place and is curling and the hairs do not poke the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you order the patient to open his eyes so that the hairs are prolonged and curling; and then let it be made of linen the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take of soap with aconite one ounce. [ missing text ] Take that and mix it with honey, and then make that into a poultice so that it is not too loose; and apply that on the linen which is made like a myrtle leaf, and place that on one eye or both eyes; and let the patient's head be in your lap.
And hold the end over the medicine and press that a little and do not harm him until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for it bites like fire.
And when you perceive that it bites, then take away the medicine and moisten that with your finger; therefore when the biting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid already lifted as it is washed by fire or by incision, for then it is well; and if it returns to that of the medicine on the area where the medicine has not bitten and does not turn black until your operation is healed and the eye is contracted.
And then place on it a poultice with a bandage until the scar of the abrasion is healed, and then treat that with ointment made from defininicum or another one until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you that after your operation to be careful with great diligence that in the eye does not fall any of the medicine; and if the eyelid after a few days becomes softened and for some reason the hairs poke the eye, then repeat your medicine over that area which of the eyelid became softened and just as you did at the beginning, and compress it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, therefore according to that is made your contraction.
And do not moisten the end of the wand in water for that person to whom it is taught in this art.
Chapter 17
On cauterization for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not help, then do that you cauterize that according to this way: order the patient to place his head in your lap, and let him hold his head by someone between his hands in such a way that it is not harmed or moved with his head.
Then place on the eye of him cotton soaked in white vinegar or in mullein tea.
And heat the cautery, of which this is its form:
which shall be hollow, like a straw or a feather, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you see that it penetrates into the other end. And if you want to be drawn out like a tent.
But what is hollow is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it pus and dry that. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the swelling of it.
And then place on it the cautery that is well kindled, and hold your hand over the eye to prevent the patient from moving or the patient being disturbed, and then place the cautery on the grays of the eye and touch that.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you perceive that it has entered into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place over that spot a poultice and surround it with a dried ointment until it is healed.
But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then place over it a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And there is another way to do cauterization of a fistula, which they first said: enter into the location of the fistula and cover it; and then pause in that fissure a subtle caustic of which its form is made of. And pour into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with the caustic with good retention, and do not harm the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the hole of that; and cover what you pause over the hole of the patient with a cloth soaked in vinegar or water, for the lead will adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal speculum and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter 18.
Of cauterization of the slit of the penis.
Many times, slits occur in the labia, and mostly in children's labia.
Therefore, when you heal those slits with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not benefit, then light the small knife cautery according to this form that is enclosed:
And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then pause that gently in those slits until the cautery reaches the bottom of the slits.
And then heal that with bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an ulcer and it becomes swollen, and then it is broken, and then it becomes old, and the ulcer and a fistula are made, and you heal that and your treatment does not benefit, then when you light the cautery according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and then put that lit iron into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and do that one or two times; and then heal that with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
And therefore, if the wound is healed and healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of cauterization of teeth and of softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are hurt, and you heal those with medicines and they do not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap, and then light the cautery, the form of which will come here soon, so that you place the quinin over the tooth and insert into that the lit cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then lift up your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the hurt tooth is hardened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter 21.
Of cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is from coldness, or in it is swollen or red, or the cure with medicine does not help, then cauterization in that is according to two ways: either cauterization with cow's bile, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with bile is that you take cow's bile and boil it in a iron pot, and then take the tip and wrap it in a piece of cloth, and then dip that tip in the boiled bile and place it quickly on the painful tooth so that it is made cold.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, dip wool or cloth in the bile, and place that on the painful tooth, and hold the lit iron over that so that the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the iron needle or wire, and let it have some thickness and the acuity of the fire not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then light the cautery, and place that on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is made cold; and do that several times because the pain is increased or in that day or the next day.
And let the patient fill his mouth with good bile and hold that for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize with what you want according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the needle:
Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of hernia.
When hernia is of phlegm and cold humors and does not become hard with digestion by medicines, and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you light the cautery so that its form is as follows, having two tips so that it produces smoke from one tip while the cautery is lit from the other tip, and place that lit cautery on the hernia once, and if it does not help, do that again until it reaches the bottom of the hernia.
And if the hernia is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the hernia, and let it be for three days and place a poultice over it soaked in bile so that what the fire has burnt is softened.
And then heal that with ointment and bandages and linen until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cauterization of voice hoarseness and of ale constriction.
When humiditys come upon the bronchus of the lung, and especially when that is from coldness of complexions, then let the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that by the root of the larynx in the place of spitting.
And be careful that you do not reach with the cautery to the larynx or burn the cords of it, but a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery by the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it. And the cautery of it is like a nail, in the previous manner.
And then heal that with what is preceding until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of cauterization of sickness of the lung and of cough.
When cough and sickness of the lung are from cold humors and the patient does not have fever or typhus, and it is old sickness, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the breastbone at the places of spitting and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be like a nail according to the previous form.
And if you wish, make a small hole with the cautery called "punta", the shape of which is described in the section on ear pain.
And make a small cut in the skin and apply that which is mentioned earlier, so that it may heal.
Now there are three types of cautery with this tool; you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25:
Of the cautery of tics, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the assistant is displaced due to slippery humidity and does not return to its proper place in due time, and a slight movement causes it to be displaced, as we have witnessed, you must first reduce the displacement, and let the patient lean back on his back or on his side; then raise the tendon which lies within the tic at the upper part by the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated there.
And you must heat the cautery, which has two ends; and this is how it is done:
And cauterize the tendon so that it penetrates to the other side; and you will see the pattern of cautery from both ends.
And sometimes they are adjusted according to this count, for that is why there are 8 cauteries.
And you must place on the cautery some powder, and let the patient relax, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the displacement is at the top and it is done, then you must cauterize the muscle with a nail-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, and the humidity is removed, and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26:
Of the cautery of the stomach.
When the stomach is filled with cold and moist humors that are extracted from its natural state and multiply there, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer, then let the patient lie on his back, stretched out with his arms and legs, and cauterize him with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet according to the amount of a finger using a nail-shaped cautery; and two cauteries below the rib cage of the cautery so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and lengthen between them so they are not close together, for they will cause burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
And the figure of the cautery is according to this addition, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach is cauterized with small holes according to that which the cautery fears: and you should feel on the stomach points according to the amount that you want with pain, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and cure that with the cure that is mentioned so that it may heal.
Chapter 27:
Of the cautery of the fried liver.
When the liver has pain from coldness or humidity or gross fullness and is driven out of its natural state by excessive outflow, and it is cured with what we have said, then let the patient lie on his side over his chest, and feel with pain three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed on the liver below the hypochondria, where the man lies.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body right side.
And do not press with the cautery.
And if the amount of what is burned is according to the thickness of the width of the tendon, and it is not very tight; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie down, for he has already extended his limbs, and raise his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a spoon-shaped cautery when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to go too far in cauterization, and let the thickness of the whole tendon be burned so that it reaches into the intestines, for the tendon is here subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28:
Of the puncturing of an abscess on the liver with a cautery.
When there is an abscess or ulcer on the liver and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient's breath will be labored and the pain will be acute.
And if it is in the membrane of the liver, the pain will be very sharp and often the doctors have tired themselves with its cure.
Therefore let the patient lie on his chest; and feel the location of the abscess with pain; and heat the cautery which is formed like a needle, the shape of which has been described in the other page. And cauterize with that cautery so that all the tendon is burned, so that it reaches the brain, where there is a boil.
And cure that by the cure of other abscesses so that it may heal.
And do not use this form of cautery except that by which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and through the hand of which many illnesses are known; but rather that one, although it has been tested in some ways, let us know about it, for it is better.
Chapter 29:
Of the cautery of a hernia.
We shall describe the old cauteries of the roots of aristology for a hernia caused by cold according to this manner, and it is this that you should take from the roots of aristology: a long dry root which has been found; and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and put it in the fire, and cauterize by a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula with the collar bone; and by two small cauteries below the guids, one slightly declining towards the part where the beard grows, and by two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the clavicle, declining a little to the back parts; and by a cautery in the middle of the foot; and by another cautery over the stomach; and by three cauteries of the back parts; and by a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and by two cauteries on the sides of the chest below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, but let it be in the manifestation of the tendon in action.
And we have already described the ancient ones which are of men, for whom they use cauteries of iron similar to a needle and heat it, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, so that it reaches by that to the abscess and there is suppuration of pus, as we have said in the hernia of the liver.
But in this piercing with cautery, there is no fear, because the humor will immediately enter the fistula which has no cure.
Here comes the next line:
Of cauterization of the melsa.
When you heal the ailment of the melsa with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not differ your cure, then cauterize it according to three ways which are all right, the first of which is that you make three or four cauteries, depending on the length of the melsa, according to the figure of the cauteries of the finger, the figure of which has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the same as that which we have described in the cautery of the finger equally.
And do not press with your hand upon the cautery, and let the patient be elevated upon his side.
And there is another way of cauterizing which is that you ignite the cautery having two windings, the cause of which we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the direction of the melsa where it passes by the sitting of the left patient.
And let your elevation be with which you elevate the tendon according to the length of the body so that there are made cauteries according to the breadth of the body.
And then introduce the two windings, ignite them hotly, into that space through which you penetrate the tendon from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three windings.
And then you cure the cautery after it has ceased to emit heat for several days because it is more convenient than the other causes preceded in the cure.
Here comes the next line:
Of cauterization of the melsa.
Cauteries do not cauterize in an eardrop but in alkantide properly.
When you heal the eardrop with the manner of cure which we have described in the division and do not differ your cure, then it behooves that you cauterize with four cauteries around the ring of the eardrop and with one cautery upon the stomach and with another cautery upon the finger and with another cautery upon the melsa and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back and with one cautery in the right of the foot and with another cautery upon the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
And then let the cautery remain open for so long that it gets heat for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure after the cautery with that which it is needed so that there are added to him two tendencies and are prolonged for him with aid of cure.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be according to what the shape is above it, and that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to what its shape precedes.
Here comes the next line:
Of cauterization of the melsa.
When the feet are swollen in drops and are filled with yellow water, then you should cauterize the feet over the bone of the foot in nocary that which is between the auricular and annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand and do not return that at all, because the yellow water oozes.
It is the cautery according to this shape: and then make upon both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh let there be made cautery with the tip of the blade of the cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh, and from below the knee and the other by the middle part of the thigh; and above each thigh two cauteries.
And let the wound remain open after cure for a long time so that no water oozes from it.
And then cure with those causes which we have described.
Here comes the next line:
Of cauterization of the melsa.
When the body of the belly is by rubbing and by moisture that weakens the muscles which are in the stomach and in the intestines and it is cured with those manners of cure and does not differ and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization of vertigo, then cauterize him with large cautery over his stomach according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries around the ring of the eardrop subtilly, and let there be cautery subtilely; and cauterize on the alkantide over olozis greatly or with two cauteries.
And if you see the moisture exuberaunt and the patient bear it, then cauterize him on the pentacle and over the intestines and firmly near two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin because that is a perfect cure of youth from which there is no error.
Here comes the next line:
Of cauterization of the melsa.
When there are in nature ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupt moisture and they are cured with that which we have said in the division and do not differ your cure then cauterize them with three cauteries over the pus below the small vertebra of the back small triangularly, and cauterize above the navel by two ditz.
And if it be seen that the stomach of him is swollen and his food not digested and his face sometimes swollen then cauterize him over the stomach with large cautery according to what precedes; and with one cautery upon the finger and with another cautery upon the melsa of him with cautery subtilely, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and then cure it when he is healed.
Here comes the next line:
Of cauterization of the melsa.
When you excise atheyl then you ignite the cautery that is assemled to a ray. Then introduce that ignited into that atheyl excised and last your hand until it reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do that one time or two because if they are several then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted and then cure those with that which agrees to them in the gums until he is healed.
And if you cauterize with large cautery upon alkantide then it is better for youth.
Here comes the next line:
Of cauterization of the melsa.
When nature does not obey the work which we have commanded in its place and the patient is frightened by that then let him be healed by cautery.
Therefore when someone sees a fistula in nature and it is ancient, corrupt moisture and therefore that which is most worthy to be done is to probe it with a subtle tent and then know the quantity of its depth with the tip of the said tent.
Then ignite the cautery which is assemled to a ray. And then place that cautery in the fistula according to the amount by which the tent is inserted.
And repeat this cautery until those corrupted humors are burnt up, once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And beware of burning nerve or vein; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
Then heal the place where it was.
And if the place is sealed and the humors are drained from it and remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the humors are not drained from it, then know that they are penetrating into his bone or his bones are corrupted, or it happens because of those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Chapter 37:
Of cautery of the hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain because of friction or from being bloated, and therefore the anus of the patient is damaged, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on the hemorrhoids with a cautery needle, of which you will learn the use later.
And soon after cauterize them lightly with a small needle, so that three cauteries will come out lined up, and then more will follow in succession.
Chapter 38:
Of cautery of the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to friction and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area at the bottom of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side of it, and with another on its left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the openings of the urethra; and cauterize that area with a cautery at the bottom of the penis, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use a cautery needle according to how it is applied.
Chapter 39:
Of cautery of the hernia.
When there is friction and humidity in the hernia, and therefore impregnation is prohibited, and its menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their retention, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three cauteries around the navel, as we have already said in the cautery of the bladder; and cauterize with a cautery on the bottom of the penis, or with two cauteries, and use a cautery needle.
Chapter 40:
Of cautery for the dislocation of the elbow.
When mucous humors are infused into the part of the elbow, and this is caused by the displacement of its joint, and a sign of it is that the bone is prolonged over the other when they are compared to each other. And the place of the dislocation is blocked in the place where it hurts most.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the elbow with a round cautery needle, once you have probed with a tent in the circuit of that part as it is turned, and so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.
And use a cautery needle with a shape similar to that mentioned in the cautery of the stomach.
And if that cautery needle is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three cauteries using a large olive-shaped cautery needle.
And perform the cautery according to the amount of thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that area once it is healed.
Chapter 41:
Of cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the part of the elbow, and its cause is friction and humidity, and it is cured by what we have said before and does not improve, and that is old, then it is necessary to loosen the patient from thick humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that area.
And the manner of the cautery in that place is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
They go according to two known methods: the first is that you cauterize that area on the part of the shoulder with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep. And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery needle is olive-shaped or large.
Sometimes it should be on the middle part on top of the elbow, so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the shape is preceded in the cautery of the dislocation of the elbow, and so that it is a containing circle and burns the thickness of all the tendons.
And this is the manner of cautery for sciatica when pain is adherent to the elbow and is not extended into the hip.
But if it is extended into the hip, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the hip over the place to which you turn the patient, and with a cautery on the shoulder for four fingers a little distance from the hairy part.
And if it is cauterized with a knife, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
And if the pain is extended into the place near the fingers of the feet, then cauterize that area where you turn with a cautery for three points or four or more if needed.
And if the pain is turned down towards the knee below the hip, then cauterize that area there with a cautery needle.
And beware in all cauteries that you do not go too far with the cautery so as to burn nerve or large artery, and so that through it there is harm to the patient or contraction.
And you have seen one of them who was cauterized on the shoulder and it ended in cautery, and the fire was kindled within so that the tumor obtained the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted all of the foot. Then afterwards there was a violent pain in the abdomen, and then death followed.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this manner.
And the wise say in the cautery of the elbow that this is the manner of the cautery: make it similar to an iron ring, and let its circuit be the width of a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of an almond or a little more.
And within that circle let there be another third one; and the space between them should be the quantity of the thickness of the fingers of the hand; and those circles are bent into two parts; and let the length of them be a finger or two fingers, and make their edges of iron decently bent in the circles; and this is its shape:
Then let it be heated in the fire so that it bends inward and gives off sparks, and then let it be placed over the part of the elbow, and let the patient lie on his side. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries around in one go.
And let it be left for three days; then plaster that area with wax and let the poultice be moist for several days; and then heal that area once it is healed.
Al-Bukhari's sons: Oh, children, we have used few of this type of cautery because of the fear of watching over him, and because we have found few who watch over him.
Make some of the best cauteries for him who suffers them, and find out his place.
Make a cautery with medicines that burn, you do two circles having a perforated armlet in which the wing of the door of iron is put; let the length of the parts in the nature of them be two nuts or whatever.
And if the space between each of the quantity of the thickness of the finger is; and they are open below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this form:
Then pause on the part of the inguinal of the patient sitting on his side, and press your hand on the part of the inguinal; and take water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that is with the fire little by little, and hold it for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient endure the biting and the compression of him — because I found biting like that with the fire — until the biting stops.
And raise your hand with the instrument and wash the warm water of all the inguinal area with tepid water.
And let him fast for three days and pause on that wound until the blackness of the compressed bruise goes away, and let him fast for some days, and pus will run from him; this is last in healing.
And cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make him a statue that contains water according to how it is done in the inguinal area.
And this is the way of warm water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and non-extinguished ash of both ends one part, and grind them and place in a new wave of which the bottom part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into him.
And pause below the bottom of the other wave the other wave with the holes facing down, and pour over that alkali and live ash with tepid water in which you soak those for one finger, and let them compress with your hand by good compression, and let the hole from which the acute water descends into the other wave.
And adjust all that water and pour it over the other live ash and other renewed alkali, because that time is a very strong cure which is administered in medical operations and in cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
And some medicines are cauterized widely, like thizyc and honey with unsaturated vinegar and ash with soap that they may be mixed.
And Walia recounts from an old man the operation and the cure by which it is healed pain of inguinal and sciatic vein, and magnifies much goodness of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by one washing like this as it comes back with heat, because very much that goes in bath.
And let it be taken from the fresh juice of figs, and if it is not obtained, take the fig, and let it be ground with a little salt and placed on the inguinal area where there is pain, or in the thigh or leg, and let it be bound.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient tolerates biting of the compression.
And raise him in a bath and when his body is warmed, put that in the sun, because the pain stops and it is healed.
And know that there is no cover for someone to use cautery with these medicines except the evacuation of the body.
And now Scrotides said that when with goat's fennel the sciatic vein is cauterized, it would be good to him; and let the cautery be on him according to this way: take wool and be dipped in old oil, and place it between the instep of the foot and between the ankle.
And take dry fennel and inflame it with fire until it is made charcoal; and pause it over the wool and let it go into that until it is extinguished. And repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the biting sensation comes into the inguinal area and the pain stops.
And this way of cautery is called cautery of cows.
Chapter .xlii.
On cauterization of pain of two.
Some pains are in the back for various causes, such as by chafing or piercing or by excessive discharge, and for similar causes, by infusion of matter rubbing and wet.
And cautery does not apply except in this one species which is made by effusion of matter rubbing.
So therefore, let there be evacuation of the patient with suppository pills that are similar to them, which are made on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of him, and let brands be made with cautery or burning, according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the patient and his strength.
And let cauterization be made by cautery of point.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four as cautery nail medial according to this form:
Chapter .xliii.
On cauterization at the beginning of gangrene.
Many times this sickness happens to small children; and sign of the beginning in children is that they get stiff on them the navel by lifting up and down, and movement.
And push on the last vertebra of the back and the knots that it already begins to rise above the others vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit, then cauterize that with cautery which is circle according to this form: that take the cautery on all part of the vertebra evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with cautery of point two lines or three. And let the points be close to each other.
And cure the place where it is healed by that which we have said.
And beware that cautery not be administered in gangrene that is made by spasm of nerve.
Chapter .xliv.
On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when it is healed gout from cause rubbing with way of cure and the pains are not gone, then let it be cauterized.
And let you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with nails cauteries.
And let it be cautery olive of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains come into the tendons or to the other joints, and it comes many times, then cauterize that on every tendon with three cauteries or four of all part by this cautery olive.
And if nails cauteries that those cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too much your hand on the cautery before, but only surrounding the thickness of the cord.
And if the pains spread to the chest and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sciatica, then make a point in the circle of the sciatic nerve where it is turned, in those two lines.
And if there is remaining pain in the fingers, then make a point in the circle of the nerve around each joint and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pain is for several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of those parts of the limbs.
And do not discharge the patient from good treatment and the reception of medicines, for if there is good treatment and inflammation is discharged with this cautery, they will be healed by God's help.
Chapter 45.
Of cauterization of fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the angles and hernia protruding through the fascia to the peritoneum, and this is where it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from food for his day and use mild remedies so that the swelling will subside from his belly.
Then follow the patient's back between his shoulders and command him to hold his breath so that there is pressure on the area where the hernia has either protruded or appeared.
Then return it with your fingers and press the fracture onto the bone of the arm by signaling the extremity of which is similar to half of a circle on the ascending parts of the body.
Then ignite the cautery of which this is its shape:
In its first stage, you cover it in the form of a penis, and you press it into his back with pressure from the penis-shaped object. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that signal with your hand using the cautery tool directly, and hold it there until you feel the bone of the arm within the muscle; and repeat with another application if you have not achieved this in the first application onto the bone.
And be wise to the sensation of the hernia in the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn it so that over the patient there may come death or another great malice.
And be aware when with the cautery you do not touch the bone, your operation is useless.
And see that the cautery of children is subtle according to their size and age.
Then dress the site of the cautery for three days with plaster until the scar of the fire is healed.
Then care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days while the site is sealed and healed.
And see that he receives nourishment according to the length of time of his cure which the bandage on his belly, and so that the hernia does not protrude out due to the effort of healing.
And when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a gently made bandage and have him wear it for another 40 days.
And he should abstain from work and consumption of food and drink, and violent movements, for when he uses this regimen of healing it will heal entirely.
And I will describe the healing of fractures in the other parts of the belly and so at the beginning, and you do not want to delay it, then cauterize the fracture of that with a red-hot cautery according to its amount, and it should be what is extracted from the codon as well as the third part of it; then care for it with what we have said, and it will be fine.
And now some first people say that a fracture should be cauterized with a triangular-shaped cautery according to its shape, for it is touched by pressure:
and there is placed a line that extends by the width on the top of the fracture and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization of dislocation.
When it happens in any limb due to displacement or impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to any healing with medicines, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery of every limb should be according to its size and smallness, nature and dislocation of it, location and pain of it.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary of those pains to be punctured from one limb to another nearby, so that you achieve it with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
Of cauterization of leprosy.
The lepers in some ways are cauterized for great benefit, and greatly if the nature of leprosy is made by putrefaction of fire and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is composite and not cured by what we have said in the division or vice versa, and beware of the patient if the corruption extends throughout his body and all its functions, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle part of the head, and the second below it, avoiding the forehead; and both over the horns; and one behind, over the nape or neck.
And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little onto the bone so that it makes a slight impression, and of him there are displaced the scars so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from him; and cauterize on the pustules according to what precedes.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned in the head; and cauterize on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on the two jawbones, and two cauteries on the two collarbones, and six cauteries on the two shoulders, and one large one on the collarbone near the chest, and one on the breastbone, and two on the hips, and two on each thigh, and two on each leg, and one on each ankle, and two on the heels.
And beware of the nerves which are over the heel so that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the arm's bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the anus.
And be aware that when you draw closer the cauteries, there is greater benefit and they work better; and be aware that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, as well as those who have it, for the body of him is already stunned.
And see that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and joints according to which it is preceded by the properties of the tools.
And then treat the cautery wound with a paste made of rye flour, honey, and other healing remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On cauterization for paralysis.
When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and is not healed by medicines, oils, and poultices, then cauterize the affected limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the thickness of the vein a little. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes paralysis is cauterized where the pain travels to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back, and follows the path of the nerves which move that limb, and the paralysis is relieved.
But do not presume to do this unless you are skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Chapter 49.
On cauterization for white leprosy.
When leprosy is old and does not yield to any of the healing ointments, then cauterize it with a hot cautery a little according to the thickness of the vein until the whiteness and color are relieved, and its color changed.
Then treat it with a paste made of rye and lentil flour, roasted olive oil, and leaves of wild rosemary, and pigeon's blood or chicken's blood; let each ingredient be a portion, and all be mixed together; then dip a cloth in it and place it on the affected area until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On cauterization for cancer.
When a cancer is starting and you want it to stop, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along its rim as it is being rolled.
And the wise say it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its very center; but I have not seen this, for I am afraid it might become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
And it is more proper that it be cauterized along its rim with a circular cautery as we have said, or with pointed cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On cauterization for ulcers.
When an ulcer is slow to heal, and this is due to an excess of humor which causes it, or to the state of the patient, whether he is old and feeble, or lacking in blood, or due to the season, and you want to hasten the healing of the ulcer; then cauterize along its rim with small pointed cauteries; and then let it be bound up so that it will hasten in its healing.
But if you want to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place it on the very center of the ulcer so that it may penetrate the vein.
And if the cautery is in a place which is lower down, so that the arm may be stretched out; then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
On cauterization for sores.
A sore is a corruption that wanders in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see this sore in a place which can endure cauterization by fire, then heat small nail-shaped cauteries, and large ones according to what is appropriate in the place where the sore is.
Then cauterize it all over so that you remove all the corruption and do not leave any cause for it to return.
Then let the patient lie for three days, and place a poultice of ground herbs soaked in mixed oil over the cauterized spots so that the scars are entirely eradicated and all corruption.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
But if after three days the flesh is born and is healthy where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization over what is rotten in the affected spots.
And sores are sometimes treated with sharp medicine, for that is mild in place of cauterization. But cauterization by fire is the surest remedy.
And I have already described its cure with sharp medicine in division, so take that one when you see an inclination towards cauterization.
Chapter 53.
On cauterization for warts and similar growths.
Many times there are growths beneath the sole of the foot which cause great pain, and they are called warts; and cauterization for these is according to two methods: by fire or by water.
But cauterization by fire is that you heat the cautery which is bent like the beak of an owl, and let it be made of iron according to the thickness, and let it have sharp edges.
Then place this heated cautery on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery along the rim of the wart so that the cautery may reach the depth of the wart. Let him lie for three days until you see the arm begin to swell. Then treat it with a poultice made of crushed mallows and salt, and place the poultice on him for one night, for this will uproot it from its roots.
Then treat the spot with an ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert and sometimes occurs in the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then understand that you must administer cauterization by water, and take a cannula made of horn or iron or the beak of an owl, and place this on the wart; and let him hold his hand tightly so that he does not move it, and pour a little water into the cannula and drop it on the root of the wart; and wait for the patient for one hour, then remove it, for the wart will have been uprooted with its roots.
And thus do for all of them wherever they occur in the body.
Then treat these warts whose roots are eradicated with ointments that generate flesh.
Chapter 54.
On cauterization for trembling.
When one suffers trembling from chafing of a nerve or from fever caused by chafing, or for some other cause similar to these, then understand that you must cauterize him with four cauteries or with V-shaped cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and let him hold his hand tightly so that he does not move it, and cauterize the feet, and over the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and the health of the chafed improves.
Chapter 55.
On cauterization for accidental wounds in the body.
When the body is pierced and pustules are formed which are opened by thick corrupt humors, then understand that it must be cauterized at the very beginning when it appears, and let it be cauterized over the entire orifice of the wound with a fine-pointed cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with the edge of a long pair of tweezers; or with a broad cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized by the release of the humors at the beginning in this way; and if they are not broken, the corrupt humor is expelled causing them to be healed.
But nevertheless it is better that this be done with an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
Of cauterization of a flow of blood accidentally by incision of an artery.
Troops seen there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut due to the wound or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and when it looks similar, and it is difficult to stem that flow.
Therefore if it happens to someone, then you should cover the opening of the artery with your hand and place your finger on it so as to narrow that opening so that the flow of blood is stopped and does not continue to flow.
Then place on the wound the olive cautery, few but large, and many times, and exhale over it so that they are ignited many times.
And then take one of those, small or large according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly, only after you have stopped the flow with your finger, and apply the cautery so as to bind and restrict that blood flow.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery that has been heated in the fire, and then do this repeatedly until the blood flow is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerve which is here, and that nothing else bad happens to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow with anything except one of four things: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it has not been extracted, for when it has been extracted, its extremities are burned and the flow is restricted; or that it be bound with a ligature or with a string with great strength; or that remedies whose virtue is to restrict blood flow be placed over it; and that they be bound with a bandage tightly and decently.
But he who administers restriction decently with a string and with compression by means of burning causes or similar, does not confer it but slowly.
But if this happens to someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open the wound on the finger over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great restriction of it so that the blood is stopped from the main part of the wound; and on the artery, the finger must not be released; and over the artery, pour water mixed with a great deal of coldness so that the blood becomes congealed and thickened; but if there is need of cautery or medicine.
Of incision and piercing and lancing and phlebotomy and of wounds and of their likes.
We have already said in the first chapter all of the illnesses for which cautery with fire and medicine is convenient, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and we have ordered the chapters from the superior part of the head to the feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter in that same way, so that the reader may be eased from that which he has demanded.
And before we begin that, know, son, that in this chapter is what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And therefore, be very careful about it, for in the operation which is in this chapter there is often an evacuation of blood by means of which life is at risk due to the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of a wound or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of a stone or similar. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their case death often comes about.
And I admonish you that this does not happen to you in which there is danger, for some times a case of illness due to the manners of men. And from them some are driven away by their illness and they die, and others due to the vehemence of that which afflicts them, and because of the length of their illness, and there is fear with which it signifies death.
And from them is the one who gives you a sign to beware and says that he hopes in his health, and whose illness is harmful to him.
And therefore do not consent to that which he says to you in this manner, and your caution should be greater than vanity and your greed; and presume no cause upon it except certain science which verifies it for you, and from which comes laudable success.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses according to prophecy and indication of that to which health is converted, for it is an aid to you concerning acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, children, may God give you his understanding and not withdraw from you direction and protection, for it is in his hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to that which precedes in the chapter on cauteries, of the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be eased from you what you demanded and for which you had need.
Chapter first.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the heads of infants.
Know that this illness often afflicts infants due to childbirth, and when the mother lifts the head of the infant, she feels its weight.
And sometimes it is due to a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and to all of them whom I have seen it has brought death, and because of that I have seen the work of it laid out in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always magnified so that a nurse could not bear it because of the greatness of his head, and yet the moisture increased continually so that there was fire of death.
And this moisture is either aggregated between the brain and the bone, or is aggregated below the bone on top of the skull.
Because if the operation in that is of moisture between the brain and the bone and the abscess is little, then you must split in the middle part of the head with an incision in its breadth, and let the length of the incision be two notches so that the moisture runs out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And if the moisture is increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this manner:
And if the moisture is below the bone, sign of it is that you will see the seams of the head opened completely and the water is expressed when you compress it with your hand on those parts within; and it is not hidden from you. Let you split in the middle part of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
And then draw out all the moisture; and then tighten the incisions with bandages and plasters; and on the fifth day, apply wine and oil over it, and then loosen the binding and cure the wound with tenting and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
There is another way of making an incision, which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of pus; sometimes it is larger at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side. So take care with the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of pus, and finish it as best you can.
And be sure not to cut into an artery and cause a flow of blood that would kill the patient through that loss of blood.
Chapter II.
When there is pain in the ears or feet and it has persisted for a long time without response to treatment with medicines, then the best treatment in such cases is to make an incision on either side of the carotid arteries.
And so, when you want to cut those that the patient is holding his head, and you have applied something to stop the arteries from bleeding, then consider where the pulse is; the spots are usually found above the ears, pressed down by some cloth.
And you can feel the pulse on the artery, and you should cut each one with a sharp knife inserted into the bone, and do this all around the head.
If you want, insert the knife below the artery and cut through to the bone above.
The length of the incision should be about two fingers' breadth, because when a vein is cut, the blood rushes out with a pulsing motion, which causes a frequent jerking motion.
If the artery does not appear at the feeling, then measure from the ear a space of three fingers' breadth, and feel with your finger, and cut into the bone.
And that which flows out is about an ounce of wine,. and very little more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
And you should examine the wound, and if anything remains on the bone that would cause an abscess, then cut it out so that no abscess forms.
And you should press the wound with soft feathers and strips of linen cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old migraine or headache occurs, due to cold humors and qualities in the temples, or a violent ache similar to these, and it is not cured by the usual methods of medicine, then we have found that extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those veins as we have shown, is effective.
And the way of operating and extracting those is that the patient holds his head by the temples; and you should feel for the artery which appears in the temple, for it is revealed to you by the pulse, and it is hidden in most people by the force of the blood.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be held tight with some cloth; and you should feel for the spot with a sharp cloth or wet the spot with warm water until you see the artery clearly. And then you take a sharp knife of this shape: And you should cut the skin with it easily until you reach the artery; and you should cut it inwards and extract that to the upper parts, cutting it out of its sheath and removing it from the surrounding tissues.
But if the artery is thin, then you should wrap it with a thread, and cut it in one place according to how much it is stretched out and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not tied off, the blood cannot flow out at all.
And you should let out about an ounce of blood. And it is within three.
And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong double thread or cords around it, and do not cut it before the healing of the wound and so that no flow of blood occurs.
And you should cut away the superfluous part which is between two membranes; and do it in that hour or another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery tool into the bone where the ends of it are cut off, and it will be in the place of that cut artery.
And it is better done when the patient does not have fever or a heated condition; for cauterization is of those causes which help to dry up moist humors, and so it is better in youth.
And you should also extract the arteries which appear at the site of old wounds, and have powdery ointments applied to them, and it should be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with poultices until it is healed.
And if while you are operating, another vein appears and there is flow of blood from the artery, then you should squeeze that blood with your hand, or cauterize it, or cut it off at the site of the wound, and hold your hand over it so as to stop the flow of blood. And if some of these things are not present to you, then place your finger over the spot where the blood is congealed, and moisten the spot with very hot water until the pain subsides, and hold it tightly according to how you can.
And that which is easier in extracting the artery is that you cauterize it with this cautery tool which has two points, because you have felt the two spots with your finger, and let them cool, ignite it, and apply it to the bone until it reaches the bone and cuts the artery in two places, so that it is stretched out between its ends, for it is not consolidated at all by this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery tool:
And let the points be smooth. But if it is better that the points are sharp, because if they are blunt and come close to each other, then do not cut the flesh quickly.
So if there is any thickness in those, it is held that the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut away easily.
And this work is better than all others and easier.
And let the space between the two points be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter IV.
Of the cure of bodies with sharp and sour pains in the chest.
When they are sharp pains, and there is an ache in the chest of those veins which appear above the forehead, and no medicine helps at all, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and it seems that there is a walking of ants in his forehead, and the ears of the patient are exhausted, with a moisture which also causes pain, and the ancient ones cure that with a sponge.
And it is that you command the patient to raise his eyebrows, and then cut three gashes evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the gash is two fingers' breadth: let the first gash be evenly distant to the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyes, and the third from the other side.
And be wary of the beginning of the arches which are on two sides, and extend your hand away from the continuation of both mandibles. And if you space out each start the amount of three beans lined up.
And to you is a sponge prepared or dry rags moves with which you dry the blood.
Then insert the spatula at two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of its incision: That is from the start of the temples into the second incision. Exscrape all the membrane which is between two incisions with the chisel which is on the bone, and then do that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then spread that spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the side of that sharp over the flesh next to the membrane, and the other side on top of the bone, and move it so that it reaches into the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the heels.
Make sure that the incision is continued towards the membrane, and then do that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And after blood comes out in equal quantity, squeeze out the places of frozen blood clumps.
And then place in each fissure hot water from a kettle, and place on those powdered herbs soaked in wine and oil, and watch that it does not develop an abscess.
And on the third day loosen the ligament and administer copious infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure that with basilicon ointment made from rose oil and others so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
Of the cure of ulcers through cautery and from the holes descending from the parts inside the head.
When to some comes cauterizations and continuations, and they see holes in the patient's head weakened, and its guard is weakened, and ulcerated eyelids and from there the hair, and in the brain there is acute pain and consequent drawing out, then know through these accidents that the matter and cautery does not come except from many veins proceeding from the parts inside.
And the best cure for them is this: that you command the patient to raise his forehead, and then insert into it a fissure at the middle place of the forehead, small in width (and begin with the fissure of the left temple going into the right temple; and let there be an incision into the bone; and extend your hand from the lacerts of the temples which are hurt because of chewing), so that the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with hot water or with linen cloth. And then tighten them above with powdered herbs soaked in wine and oil, so that it does not develop an abscess.
And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already diminished, then know that you should rub the bone where it begins to have new flesh, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the flesh dry, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rosin and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it on these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
Of the cure of what cauterizes in the ears.
All cauterization in the ears is of four kinds, for there is mineral stone or cause like stone, just as iron and glass, or it is from plants just as chickpeas or beans, or it is a volatile cause just as water and wine and their likes, or some animal.
And so when stone cauterizes in the ear or other cause like those causes which do not produce pus in the ear, and you put the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill into that some cause of rose oil or sesame, and then administer its extract, and make it sneeze with some condiment, and dry up the nostrils because of the sneezing. And then put in the circle of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides above it, for many times it is pierced by these causes.
And if it is not pierced, then administer its extract with the instrument called a sub- delicate hook of which this is the shape:
And if it is pierced with a hook, well and good; but if not, then administer its extract with the slender needle of little bending.
And so if it is not pierced by that, then make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close around the tube with wax and with softened oil so that there is not an opening except for the tube. And then extract with your wind with strong吸引, for many times it occurs with that which we have recounted.
But if it is not pierced in this way, then take of chalk alum or of vecc prepared with which the ears are pressed a small amount, and put that into the end of the ear, and then wrap around that decently placed cloth. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry up the ear from moisture.
And so if it is not pierced by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to such a depth that it does not produce abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that you at first make the patient's vein of the temporal vein and extract blood according to the manner of its vertigo, and then do that between your hands and convert the ear to the sides above it, and end with a small fissure in the root of the ear because of the pressure on it in the place which has been touched by it. And let the fissure be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the stone, and when you have found the stone with instruments, stop it if you can; then close up the fissure at that moment with speed, and cure it so that it is healed.
And if the cause cauterizes in the ear is one of the fats which produce and so inflate, then administer its cure and extract it; but if it does not obey your command, then you take slender spatula according to this shape: and administer with that the incision of that fat which is cauterized in the ear.
And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and then extract from those with the hooks or with the slender hook, or with an incision as we have said before, for it is easier to extract it.
But when the water which is inserted into the ear causes sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with some hot water, and pour that on that ear in which there is the water, and if by that it is pierced, well and good; but if not, then take thin stones the size of a finger and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and press on that part with another stone on top of the first stone. And do not stop doing this until all the fluid has been expelled.
And do not stop doing this until all the fluid has been expelled. And once the fluid has been expelled, take some paper or gauze. and place one end of it in the wound and extend the other end into the fire until its tip is burned.
And place another piece of gauze and do this repeatedly until all the fluid has been expelled, and then place that one with a cannula just as it is said about the extractor stone.
But in the extraction of a foreign object entering that orifice, if it is a small object, like a pebble and similar to it, cure it just as we have said in the division; but if it is from a large object which caused the wound on the chest, then administer the extraction of it with forceps and tongs, and the cause of it is a pus more than all other causes that enter the orifice.
But in the extraction of a worm engendred in the orifice, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the tract of distillations and do not confer your cure, then be sure that you observe the orifice to the sun.
And therefore if any cause of the worm appears here, then extract it with forceps or a fine tongs, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula below tight and above ample of which this is the shape of it: And insert the slender end in the orifice according to the amount which the patient can bear it; and then suck with that strongly, doing this several times, until all the worms are expelled.
But if it does not obey you in the movement, then you wind and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax just as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have proved in the cure of worms, and you will find that in the tract of distillations.
And let your effusion with which you pour the medical oils into the orifice be by this instrument of which this is the shape of it: And make that of silver or brass, below tight and above flat, in which there should be a small hole, and smooth on top.
And therefore let it be as an impellence which is in the cavity of the container which is necessary here. And if you want, take the reed and wind it in the decently cut end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument or juice of any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the cannula —and that is in the orifice—, and then insert the reed with the cut top and squeeze with your hand that one with moderate compression of it until the oil is expelled in the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil within him.
And what is infused into the orifice is already made warm by fire a little. And be careful that the cause which you distill into the orifice is not too hot, because the medicines of the orifices do not bear that.
Chapter .VII.
Of the cure of inflammation of orifices.
Some children are born from the bellies of their mothers not perforated, and this happens in some men, inflammation in the middle of the orifice by plague or by flesh eaten into that; and this inflammation sometimes is done in the part of the orifice which does not reach the chest, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And what happens in the middle of it which does not reach the chest is in the major dispositions of difficult cure.
And in that in which you obtain the chest, be sure that you place the orifice of the patient towards the sun and observe it. And therefore if you see swelling appear, open it with a thin spathe of which this is the shape of it:
If the end of it in which there is a small width, in which one part is acute and the other is not, and the spathe is of two lion’s teeth on either side that it does not hurt the orifice.
And if the inflammation is by flesh born in the orifice or in the middle of it, then open that with fine tongs and cut that violently easily until all the flesh is removed.
And if the inflammation is in the middle of the orifice, then take a slender reed and heat it with fire a little, and then place that in the middle of the orifice.
And therefore if you have sensed swelling by that the patient feels with facility due to difficulty in breathing, relieve the oppression of it with facility; and be careful not to plague the nerves of the orifice.
And then place in the orifice cloth of linen according to the amount of the width of the orifice which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the plague, or take some other and soak that in waters and powder over it vinegar mixed with triturated vinegar and use it; and if you see the orifice already pustulated, then be sure to pull off that which you wrapped in linen and replace it with another which you wrap in cerot made from refined oil until the pustule is cauterized; and then cure that until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then soak sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the orifice, and use the other cure which tightens the flow of blood, which is said in the tract of distillation.
Chapter .VIII.
Of the cure of athezil which approaches the eyelids.
Athezil which approaches the eyelids of people some time with wetness, some time dry.
Therefore be sure that you have those with tweezers or tongs, and split them with a spathe of their own teeth, and then place over the places vinegar mixed.
But if pain comes with flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a small slender cautery.
And the best cautery is when the cuts and tears return after some cause of their teeth has been removed; and when they are cauterized with fire, those teeth are burned and do not return.
Chapter .IX.
The cure of greatness which comes to the eyelids of people.
Many times it appears in the eyelids of people some cause which is like greatness in its strength and hardness, and because of that greatness is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity below and above.
And the appearance in them is that you consider whether the greatness proceeds in it in anything which appears of the orifice and is swollen all around; and the cause of it is distant.
And pierce over that with a slit in the width and then scrape all around it with facility until you release it, and then suspend that with tongs and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with a stitch; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you do not incur evil by that because the humors of it restore that and flesh it.
And if the greatness is declining at the parts within the orifice of the eyelid you should eviscerate the eyelid and suspend the greatness with tongs, another that you split it off with incision, and press all around it, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then that does not notice in any cause.
And then at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and heal the area with water until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of a ulcer on the eyelid above the eye.
A grays ulcer is engendered in the eyelids above, and mainly in infants, it aggravates the eye of those who have cataracts in their eyes, and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of this.
And because of this, you will see these people all the time on their faces, and they sleep on their faces; and only in the eyelids below the eyebrows, which are moist, there is inflammation, and an apparent sign of ulceration is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the ulcer within.
And some method of operation is in that which the patient puts his head into the lap of himself, and then he puts a cloth on him and makes him warm, and then he makes a circle according to the quantity which contains the arachnoid membrane from all sides, and then he places that over it and presses with his fingers from all sides so that ulceration is gathered in the middle of the circle, and then he opens in the middle of that moist area with a spatulate instrument incident to the fissure, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in flabotomy.
But in the lower cavity you must split all the way through so that you reach the arachnoid membrane, because in most cases of ulceration it progresses into the arachnoid membrane through the fissure according to the form of grayness white.
Then, pull that out with the cloth you have wrapped between your fingers to the sides and revolve it between the right and left hand so that it is removed completely.
And be careful not to push into the fissure with the spatulate instrument so that you do not reach the eye and tear it.
But if you do not see the arachnoid membrane at the beginning of the fissure, but you push into the fissure a little with ease so that it progresses; then pull that out as we have said before, and then submerge the cloth in water and wine mixture and place them over the area and bind those tightly with bandages.
And if some who have salt and bread, place that in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains from that moist area.
And then heal it until it is healed.
But if ulceration occurs in the eye socket and becomes a cautery, then heal that with soft bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of methods of touch for the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes are born under the natural hairs and are old, then they annoy the eye and cause ways of illnesses as with constant tears and softening of eyelids and membrane so that it is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is healed in four ways: or by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine according to what was said before in the chapter of cauterization; or it is done as an incision and suture; or with cannas according to what he will say.
And so you put the patient's head in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into that in which there is pus below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above the needle, close to the margin of the eyelid in which the hairs grow, and draw the needle upwards towards the hair, and turn that with the thumb.
And then open the space within the eyelid below the hairs with a spatulate instrument inserted into the tear duct major into the tear minor; then pull out the pus and place under the eyelid small powders of cotton or cloth, and then tie over the eyelid with thread, and it should be as a figure of leaf of myrtle.
But however it is the figure according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in men, for some there is a great quantity inscribed on the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then open with the spatulate instrument over the two lines you have marked, and begin from the tear duct major into the tear minor. And if your fissure is close to the natural hairs as it is the thickness of the king's hair.
And then put the needle in one of the two angles of the codena, and then scrape that entirely, and then press with the incision the two lips with gum or fine wool, and wipe off the blood, and make adhere what overflows from the gums on top of two eyelids with some causes binding, if you want to do that, and if not, it will not be healed.
And then let the incision of the gums heal within three or four days, and then heal that.
And if you want, let the wound heal without suture, and heal that with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the wound and the gathering of it; but suturing is better. Therefore, I have said these things about tactinir.
But however, in that there is solicitude over the patient, and it is good operation, and there is not fear in it.
And there is another way in tactmyr, and it is that you mark over the eyelid figure as a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid with three nails separated and gathered according to this form:
But if it is not possible that, holding the nails, and that is not broken, then take a needle in which there is thread and put that into the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle close to the tear duct major, and the needle according to the tear minor, and press between your fingers the gums with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate all the codena over which it has been marked as we have recommended.
And then press the two lips of the wound with suture, and heal that until it is healed.
But if ulceration occurs because of your incision or your fissure, heal that ulcer with ointment and like things, and with bandages.
And sometimes to the eyelid where its hairs are converted, then you use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing in each is more artificial.
Tactmyr with cannas is according to this form: And it is that you turn the eyelid and split the figure that is within according to what he recounted; then with art make two cannas or two astelas of which the length be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of the spatulate instrument. And you have already split at the extremities of some parts where you have threads.
Then gather each one with subtlety over what overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the cannas from some parts with strong compression, and let that be for several days, because the codena will die and become black and fall off when it has put itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut it with tweezers, and then heal the wound until it is healed.
And therefore when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two cannas which you will make according to this form: and had the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
Of the elevation of hairs by the hollow needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough, and hollow, then the operation on them is that you take a slender needle and place it in that hollow hair folicle, and then you adjust its end and each one in a very slender manner. And let the length of the hair be the quantity of a palm.
And then you put another slender hair under it quickly, and tie its ends if you wish.
And then let the patient's head be in your hand, and be near the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which has a need for cunning, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly while drawing out that above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair upwards from within and insert that into the eye, and there are one or two or three hairs and not more.
And then pull your hand with it so that the hair is driven out with the eye by the natural hair.
But if the hair is driven out and not drawn, then draw out the eye with the hair that you have bound with it, so that in being driven out, the eye above it will be driven out as well.
And wash the eye with vision, for then you will draw out the hair and the eye, and each one will heal and close the eye, and leave the cloth for two or three days, so that the hair will adhere to its place and grow good flesh on it.
And if the hair is shorter, then you take a long hair from among the natural hairs and elevate it with that one or cause it to grow with it so that it lengthens, and then you elevate that one.
Chapter 13.
Of the cure for a hunchback which comes in the eyelid above.
When there is hunchback in the eye, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, due to poor consolidation of the plague or of a section or cauterization, and it is called "leporina", and this hunchback is either natural or accidental, and it happens due to consolidation of the plague or sections or cauterization, or due to similar things in their own cure.
The manner of the operation on it is that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and put in it what is between those a strip of linen cloth, and tie those so that they heal.
And do not think that you use a cure for it of the causes which dry out, constrict; for if you do that, hunchback will return worse than it was before.
Use for it of causes which soften, like fenugreek, and moisten with the water in which are cooked high and seeded herbs, or unguent of squill, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse in that the strip, and cure with that.
And the secret of your cure is to perforate it with great cunning so that it is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is not anything other than a rectification of hunchback that does not return the form of the place according to how it was before.
Chapter 14.
Of the cure for a hunchback which is made in the eyelid below.
This hunchback which is made in the eyelid below, which is properly called hunchback; and it is of one natural, or another accidental.
But accidental is made by plague or by a section or cauterization or other things.
And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle in which there is a double thread, and put that into the flesh so that the thread passes from the tear duct on the left to the tear duct on the right, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh at its sides with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it with a broad spatula. And if it returns the form of the eyelid as you wish, then it is good; and if not, take the needle and put that in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split both fissures on the sides of the eyelid below.
And let the ends of both fissures be of two angles of the incision which you have made so that they meet, and let an angle be made from them when they are gathered together, and let a figure be made from them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then sew the flesh that for the quantity which it is the side of him below him, that which holds the eyelid.
And then sew the separated parts and sew those with a thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said of the softening medicines and the poultices so that it heals.
And if hunchback occurs by section or cauterization, then see that you split with a flat fissure over the hairs of the eyelid as it was before. And then separate with the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the end of the speech of the cure of hunchback when it is above or below, let it run in the operation according to how it is prepared for the form of hunchback, and that is in the form of many different shapes.
And the skilled artificers prepare cunning in every way that is possible for them so that they make the figure return to its natural form, or near it, and let that patient according to what pleases him of the operation and of the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people so that the eyelid is hardened above it with the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of its movement and of their natural works, then see that you insert the end of the needle below the eyelid, and elevate it up or extend it with the finger.
And then you insert the adhesion with a broad spatula, which is not at the incision, have it blunt so that the patient is not bothered after the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the eye with its acuteness.
And let your incision cut that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid returns to its natural form, and let all the adhesion be healed.
And then put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it of vinegar dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of flax, and put over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then on the third day use causes consolidating so that it heals.
Chapter 16.
Of incision of nail and prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is according to two manners, for it is nervous and is like a hard, thin cipha; or it is non-nervous, like white moisture solidified, which when the iron touches it, or is forced, it takes in onus, it is split and the onus is not put into it.
And both spices do not begin but from the greater tear duct that goes little by little covering the sight and prohibiting light and eye movement.
The way to act in the incision of it is that the patient places his head on your lap and opens his eyelids wide, raising the eyelid with your hand and gently pulling out the lash with tweezers after applying a little pressure to the lash line above. Then take a needle and insert into it a horse hair or ox or cow's tail hair or something similar, or the end of the needle itself, little by little and place that in the root of the lash, and pierce with the needle, and tie it with a thread; then extend the hair above to the upper eyelid line, and cut it with the hair, which will cover the pupil. And so you continue this process with the hair going into the back of the eye.
And then you cut the rest of the lash at its root with a very thin blade or small forceps, and cut the flesh of the tear duct so that there is not continuous flow of tears through it.
And sometimes the lash is extended with just thread or with thread and cut; this is how it is done as we have said, and then it is cut with a lion's tooth blade which has this shape:
And be careful not to touch the cornea with the blade and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, pour into the eye a little ground salt or vinegar made from ash wood, and let it sit until the next day; then treat it with water that covers it to heal it.
And if the lash is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or thread it with the tweezers, sometimes this kind of lash is cured by medicine and healed as well as eye and re-attached in the division.
And if you want to cut it, then open the patient's eye and take a very thin lion' s tooth blade sharpened according to this form: with thinness. And if you see that it is rarefied and confined and has root in the duct, then distill from your eye into the eye made of ash wood or with red wine or salt water, and cover the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the operation until everything is done that needs to be done, unless an abscess has formed in the eye, because then you will cut it and heal the abscess so that it heals.
And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
If the tear duct is torn in the eye with great injury, then suspend it with thread; and cut it from that one side, and do not finish the incision so that you do not cause continuous flow of tears.
And then distill into the tear duct red wine and vinegar made from ash wood until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of incision of algusardine and of that which is born of flesh joined in the eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people, there is born red flesh and it is raised so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or presses on the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the outer edges and is attached like a balaster stone.
But the operation on it is that the patient places his head in your lap and you open the eyes of him and collect all that flesh with convenient tweezers or a forceps; then cut the flesh at the beginning so that everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful of the eye that you do not injure it by your operation.
And let your incision be by which you cut those or with a blade which we have recommended in the incision of the lash, or with small forceps with which ashbell is collected according to how it comes to this chapter.
So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is healed, then fill the eye with ground salt or distill into it red powder of similar medicines which are corrosive and place over the eye a cloth saturated in egg white until an abscess is secured.
And if there is any cause of algusardine and the eye is infected with pus cauterized, and you fear an abscess cauterized, then cut the eye and cure that abscess with something that causes that abscess to yield, and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed and similarly do with the flesh which occurs in the eye of this kind.
But you should take care that foreign body is removed from the eye by natural or accidental way, done with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations so that you see that this member suffers those operations.
Chapter .xviii.
Of collection of sand in the eye.
Sand so comes red veins which are tested on the eye and hinders its action, and it breaks up the eye over a period of days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is sand is strong and there is no other disease but sand, then you collect that sand.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with one thread or two according to your discretion; and let that thread be of very fine thickness according to this form:
or two threads graded in a cone according to this form:
And then let those veins be collected with very fine forceps, with thinness, and squeeze the pus gently hour by hour as you see those veins are raised from the eye and are drawn back.
And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the tip of the blade; and if your operation is in the middle of the eyeball, and let it stay firm in your operation so that you cut only those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye red wine or vinegar so that with its acute heat it burns what is raised from the sand.
But if it is not possible for you to collect everything in that hour, then put a plaster on all of it so that it yields the pain of it, and let him lie for several days until the pain of it is eased and an abscess is secured.
And then repeat your operation according to the manner described so that it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter .xix.
Of reduction of hernia to the nose.
When you cure hernia by cauterization or with acute medicine burning according to that it is preceded by the narration of it and is not healed, then there is no harm in it except that you open the abscess because of its maturity, and that you extract all the moisture which is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
And so when the bone is uncovered and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is formed of coarse hair, and let the tip be made of iron, and let the tip be round as it is made pointed by file or sharpened subtly (so that it is in the following form).
And place that on the place of corruption of the bone and then rub it between your fingers and press your hand gently little by little as you know that that corruption is scoured.
And let that be done several times, and then restore the place with dry and astringent causes.
If the area is solid and there is healthy flesh born in it, and it is separated from the body's sickness and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed nor pustules form, and no accidents occur, then you shall know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in it except to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you shall uncover according to which bone has rusted or become acute with medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you shall take a file according to this form:
Let the end of the rust be triangular, and its stem be first extended into the extremity just as it is.
Then place it upon the bone, and let it be near the tear; and lengthen your hand a little from the hole, and then revolve your hand with the file inside so that it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient will feel it through his touch when air exits through him.
Then restore the area with astringent medicines that dry up just as you have healed.
Then when the flesh and the area are hardened, then the matter which gushed out of the orifices returns to the nose; therefore there is pus on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the eminence of the hole.
When the hole protrudes in its entirety and no harmful occurrence nor decrease happens, then you shall let the patient be at rest, and afterwards what follows: you shall place windings on his neck after scarification and suck out with good suction; and then place a liniment over the hole which is made of pitch, aloe, myrrh, and mastic, and then strengthen the bandage over the hole with powdered herbs.
And the manner of the powders is that you take dry cloths of linen threads, and each cloth be folded into four folds; and make those into threads.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity for which the hole has need. And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth and strong binding; and repeat the suction with scarification; and remove the windings and let the hole be tightly bound during the day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament becomes soft, then you shall let it be looser.
And then remove the bandage during the day and night just as we have said.
And if you see that the hole has already been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the bandage with powders and binding and windings until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the beginning of the eminence of the venous membrane.
When a disruption occurs in the venous membrane, and it is prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids just like a grain of sand, and assumes the shape of a man through that, and wants to enter into it, then the operation upon it is just as we have recommended: you shall introduce the needle into the root of the vein at the part below, and then place another needle in which there is a double thread from the part of the tear, and make that penetrate and let the first needle be according to its disposition; and then insert the hole of the double thread and lift with it the part of the vein in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that thread.
And then withdraw the needle and place over the hole wool infused in white vinegar and let it be until the thread falls with the vein.
And then cure the hole with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather from all parts with a circular cloth around the hole where there is great eminence, and let it be penetrated by the spatulate instrument that comes to the root of the hole, and run the white moisture, and descend the hole and in the meantime.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of hawks.
This sickness which is called alconati is nothing other than putridity which is adjusted in the hole similar to water and is not that.
But the manner of acting upon it is that you make the patient sit on the seat prepared and straightened, and then take his head in your hands from both parts and hold him so that you see the putridity coming to the parts below, and let it be dried up and not descending, and let the light be blocked, and the patient will see the causes just as he saw them.
And if it does not descend below, you shall know that it is water.
But if the descent of the putridity is not prepared with that which we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and then take a spatulate instrument and press it upon him over the membrane covering a small part in the continuation of the conjunctiva with the venous membrane in the corona (within the hole), until the putridity is expelled.
Then when it is expelled, then you distill into the hole water mixed with honey in which you have steeped fenugreek and honey.
And then let it be cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the cure of water descending from the hole.
We have already said the spices of the water in the division and what agrees to penetrate with serum according to the health.
Then you shall make the patient sit between your hands over a cowl and let him incline his hole down, he tightening it.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his hole, if the hole in which there is water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
And then with your right hand take almonds, if the hole is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
And then place the end of almonds near the corona by the thickness of the vein in the white of the hole from the part of the tear, and press almonds with force and revolve your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the white of the hole and feel that almonds have already come to a seen cause.
And let the measure of the path of almonds to the root be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and is the corona of the hole; for you shall see with it the pupil through the clarity of the venous membrane.
And then place almonds within the hole where there is water, and then you shall draw it down a little, and therefore if the water descends immediately, then you shall see the patient over which he breaks his sight immediately, and almonds in his hole.
And then rest a little; therefore if the water is descended, then you shall draw it down again before almonds are pressed.
And then when it is dried up and not descending, then you shall withdraw almonds with ease, and revolve your hand a little at a time over it; and then dissolve in the water a little of fine salt of jewels and wash the hole within; and then place outside the hole cotton or felt infused in rose oil and vinegar with honey on it.
But we and those who are of our time shall pause over that come fried in white vinegar.
And if it does not obey you with almonds at the instrument of the hole because of its hardness — for it is hard in some men — then you shall take the spatulate instrument which is called albertite, of which this is the form:
And then pierce that joint, and do not finish your hand in the wound, but only to make way for a subtle place.
Then apply the salve as we have said.
And when you have finished your work, prepare the patient's bedroom in a darkened room where he sleeps on his back with all movements prohibited.
And put in the nature of him that which makes the nature of his body smooth, and do not harm his head on either the right or left side at all.
And the bandages should be according to his disposition within the third day.
And then release him from that darkened room and show him the free light, and let him see some causes, and then return the bandages within seven days.
And don't forget to do this at the time of the cure or immediately after the infusion. Have someone move that so that the water can easily and gently flow through it.
But if pus occurs, then remove the bandages on the seventh day, and correct that with something that reduces pus.
Then you open his vision and place on his face an oral orifice through which he breathes so that he is regulated for several days in the darkened room.
And then let him walk gradually and converse about his causes.
And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not excused from seeing some sights, and then you are eager about the operation.
And now it has come to us from some of those who are in the Artach, and one said that there was fire in Ayrac when a woman's eye was pierced and water was sucked out.
But indeed I have not seen it in our land, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of women so that it is over those on which he ignores:
And they are made of gold or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity like that is the shape.
Chapter .XXIV.
Of the cure of a nosebleed.
When in the nose there are various growing meats which is some cause that is assembled to scorpion of words, or to polyps; and this disease is called polyps because it is like that pee represented. And it is cancers of meat, lumpy, of dusky color; and it is that there is no lions' meat of dusky color.
Therefore in that which is in these meats of lions not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and expose to the sun, and open his nose, and pick the meat with your finger into those meats. And then extract that to the parts of a hole, and then light it with what you have understood from those by sharp spatum of one part within which you know that all the meat is already torn out; for if he bleeds from it any cause for which the abscision is possible, then you rate it with one of the subtle instruments with ease within so that he does not bleed any cause. But if it bleeds or occurs pus, then you place in him what you should; or it is of malignant pustules, then you cut and cauterize that within so that bleeding has stopped and all the holes are closed.
And then let there be placed in his nose properly vinegar and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it processes humidity within the palate, then you know that he has healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate according to that, then you know that within him is meat growing in the nose, the bones of which are not come off.
Therefore then you should put the gall of the chicken in which there is any thickness, and insert it into his nose words, nuts of the words, and place between each nut the quantity of a pea or less, and insert the patient's finger and put one end of the gall in the nose with the thumb or another cause that is possible for him.
And then after that is done, that he breathe his odorant into the passages of the nose, and let it sit on his gullet, for troops of sight make children in schools, and it is a light cause to him who wants to do so.
And then place the two extremities of the gall, one end that hangs over the nose and the other that pierces into the nose, and then administer meat with the nuts that are in the gall, and do this until you know that the meats already are on the nuts of the gall.
And then pull out the gall, and place in the nose properly an abstraction of blood a lump, and do this for three days or more until the meat has run off from the meats.
And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a cannula of lead for several days until it is healed.
But if you see that there is no healing from the cure, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument to cleanse with which are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
And do this of silver or gold, which is like a small open vase, like a little cone, and the meat similarly.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument to cleanse is flat, uncovered; with which you handle in his behind, with which you have that when heated in him oils or water that you want from the sucks and the causes suctionable.
Chapter .XXV.
Of the thills in the extremities of the nose.
Many times there is pain in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and swollen for several days until it is taken off the guard of him.
And then you should insert that in the beginning of his appearance, and you remove all that. And then place over the place a cautery or burning medicine which is in the location of him.
But if its abscission is delayed so that it is magnified, then consider if it is lappified, hard, of dusky color and of little sentiment, then do not touch it with iron which is pustule cranios; for many times when you insert this pustule for him great malice over that from whom he had.
And if the pustule is of meat touch and not of dusky color, and it is possible that abscission in all that, then evacuate the patient and insert that senseless, and bind the location with what bleeds and tightens so that it is healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the auricle when the continuity is dissolved by water or similarly.
You know that when there occurs solution of continuity in one of these cartilage, few confer in that operation but in some men.
Thus, when for any reason at all you see a fresh wound with its blood, then you stitch together the two lips of the wound and then heal that part which is inside.
And if the lips of a wound that is already separated are both healed, then you must open up each part of its flesh so that blood can come out. Then stitch together the two lips with a thread and strengthen them, then powder the wound with dragon's blood and cut up herbs, and place on this powder an ointment called diafinicon or another of the consolidating ointments, and let it remain there for two or three days, and then remove this ointment and change the ointment and leave it there until the wounds are healed by themselves, and then heal them with an ointment.
But the way of stitching is to join together the cut or with a needle as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or join the cut with fat just as you and your father have done and make it known.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come from both lips in the parts within.
Many times we see in many men in the parts within their lips some hard growths similar to grainy err-like growths, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Thus you should turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hard growths from every part, and then stop the bleeding by filling the wound with cut sage, and wash it with wine and heal the place with something astringent until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
Many times there is on the gum a growth of flesh which the ancients called albulus, therefore you should suspend it with tweezers or forceps and cut off that growth at its root, and let the pus run out or the blood flow.
And then place on the wound cut sage or other astringent or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it off again and cauterize it, for by cauterizing it will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth in the parts within the gums and between the gums are rough, hard sores, some of which are blackened and are made yellow or green by corruption and the teeth become bound.
And so you should force the patient to open his mouth and place his head in your lap, and cut the teeth where those sores appear, and get rid of the causes that appear like sand so that no cause remains hidden within them, and this will be done for the blackness and the yellowing and the others so that they are cleansed.
And so if this is done at the beginning of the cause, that is good; and if not, then you should repeat the cause over them on another day and on the second and third until it comes to the final state that you want.
And know that teeth have a need for many pliers of various shapes and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation. And so the pliers with which the tooth is cut from its root is another than that with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of pliers should be prepared by you as soon as you see them:
Chapter 30.
Of extraction of teeth.
You who should cure the tooth of its pain with every effort and delay in total extraction of it, for there is no cause that exceeds its appearance when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance that is an obstacle to extraction.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, then you must be certain which is the aching tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the aching and ill tooth is extracted, for we have seen this by the operation of barbers.
So when you are certain which is the aching tooth, and you know it well, then you should scarify all around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some medicine, so that it is dissolved from the gum all around, and then pull it with your fingers or with thin forceps little by little until you loosen it.
And then hold it firmly with strong fingers or a strong grip, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that he does not move his head, and then pull the tooth according to the straightest way without breaking it, nor giving great pain to the patient.
And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and put it under it from every side with ease and force the removal of it just as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is split or hollowed out, then you should fill that crack with cloth and tighten it with the tip of a subtle needle so that it is not cracked when you constrict it with your fingers.
And you should open completely with scarification all around the gum and guard your strength so that you do not crack it or tear a part of it, and return to the patient because of the malice so that his first pain is minor.
And take care that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity in extraction of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for often they bring upon men great diseases which are difficult to cure because they crack them or pull out bones from the jaw just as we have often testified.
And then the extraction of it should be washed with wine or wine vinegar and salt.
And if then it bleeds through that, then take some quantity of pyrite and spread it over the wound, and if it does not agree with that pyrite, cauterize.
The form of the pliers and tweezers with which you have cut the tooth at the beginning should be of long length, short handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when you operate with them.
And they should be as thick as a finger's length so that when you tighten them they are not bent, and they should have short handles.
And they should be made of Indian iron wrought with hammer and chisel, and in the tips of them there are teeth which some enter into others and tighten with great constriction, and sometimes the tips of those are shaped like the beak of an owl which is hooked, and it is strong.
Chapter 31.
Of extraction of teeth and pulling out of the bones from the jaws that are cracked.
When you should extract the tooth which is cracked for some cause, then you should place over the site a poultice for a day or two until it softens; and then insert a hook or tweezers in its tips which are joined together like the beak of an owl called ciconia or hooked, the form of the pliers:
Their tips should be made inside with a file or chisel.
And if you do not listen to me and use these forceps or tongs, then you will need to cut into the root and remove all of the flesh and insert the instrument called an awl. This is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And it should have a blunt end that is slightly thick, and not be bent so that it does not break.
Therefore if through this the root is perforated, it is good; and if not, assist yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its end in which there should be some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and very thin end.
And you are already assisted with this instrument which has two claws, whose shape is as follows: and with other instruments which are used in tooth extraction; for it is done with this instrument which resembles a large needle, and this is its shape:
of the triangular bent or short end, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
And another thing: the instruments for removing teeth are similar to other instruments.
But the wise and skilled artist in this art finds for himself methods according to what the operation and various illnesses indicate to him; for there are diverse illnesses to which the ancients did not attribute nor assign a specific instrument because of their varied forms.
But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if there is pain, then it is fitting that the foot should be cured in its place with whatever of the instruments and tongs we have mentioned for tooth extraction, and assist yourself with a gesture whose shape is as follows:
And there should be some thickness added to it little by little, and it should be pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak out until all of the bone is perforated; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small wound in the bone, then scrape away the wound and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the curing of teeth that protrude above the others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, especially when it happens in women and especially in elderly women, then you should consider: if the tooth is next to another tooth and it is not possible for there to be a hole or groove made in it, then extract that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then insert that with this instrument whose shape is as follows; it is similar to a pig's jaw, and it should be made of Indian iron with an acute end.
And your incision should be with which you insert that into it for several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not affect any of the other teeth.
And if there is a prominent tooth that has been sharpened, then file it with an Indian-iron file whose shape is as follows:
And it should all be made of Indian iron and the edge should be even; and it should have very fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected or breaks. Then smooth it in the end, and scrape away at that with a razor-sharp knife.
And if there is a tooth of which one part is broken and it hurts the tongue, then you should smooth that until the sharpness of that fracture is blunted and smoothed out, so that the tongue is not hurt or speech impaired.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver.
When it happens to teeth that they receive concussion and removal due to impact or being knocked out, and the patient is unable to hold down food, and your cure with astringent medicines has not helped, then so that they do not become rotten there should be made in those that are strengthened with gold and not silver; for silver becomes black and then rots after a few days, but gold never changes color.
And the gold should be in such thinness and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the gold and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then that it grows with two curves of the gold between two broken ones, or if one or several, so that the fabric comes to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the filling into the part from which you begin, and strengthen your work with ease and skill so that it is not broken.
And your filling should be so that you strengthen the gold over the roots of the teeth so that it does not leak out.
And then cut off the excess gold with tongs or tweezers, and add those to each location with a gesture, and smooth them over and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not hurt the tongue. And then let it be sealed as tight as possible with Roman pitch.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or them with other gold in the same manner at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the filling of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as they are bound together:
And when a tooth or teeth return to their place after being knocked out and are grown back as we have described, and they become broken again.
And it does not happen unless by a wise and skilled artist.
And some have become apt for some cause of cow bones, and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with that person for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which appears on the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which appears beneath the tongue in some people is either natural or happens accidentally due to a wound and has already healed.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, you see his jawbone beneath; and lift up his tongue, and then insert that nervous ligament according to its width so that the tongue is released from its binding.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and that is standing due to the healing of a wound, then you pierce it with a needle and cut it according to its width so that you have cut the ligament and the knotting is dissolved.
And be careful that there is not made a crack in the membrane of the flesh and that you split the artery and blood flows out.
Then wash the traces of the incision with rosewater or with wine vinegar or with pure water; then place the tongue in its socket, so that it is not moved from its socket again until it has healed properly.
But if blood flows out, place vitriol on the spot; but if the blood oozes out, then cauterize the spot with a caustic that is appropriate for it. Then that is cured with the other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes it happens under the tongue an apostema resembling a wart that prevents the tongue from its natural movement, and when it becomes enlarged so that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it dark in color or black, hard, and the patient feels no pain in it, then do not touch that place.
And if it turns white, with moisture in it, then insert the needle into it and pour in some subtle vinegar; and if blood comes out during your operation, then place a wound pack over it that is made of vitriol, until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work on it until it is healed with pleasant wine and salt; and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of an abscess from two ears and that which is in the throat, and of other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the throat, there are glands which are clustered together like cotton; these are driven out and are named two ears; when you cure them with what we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the flow of blood; before you leave it, let it become mature, and then either you will cut it out or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be pierced.
And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has rested on him completely or has diminished by any diminution; and then make the patient face the sun, his head in your lap, and open his mouth, and the servant holding his hands take hold of his tongue with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be subtle like a needle.
So when you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and you put over that your vision, then take needle and pierce that in the hollows outward as far as you can. Another is that you draw out some cause from the membranes; then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form:
Another is that you draw out some cause from the membranes; then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form: It is like tweezers, except that the ends of it are curved so that the holes of each of those are in the direction of the other, very sharp, and it should be made of iron heated in vinegar.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then pierce that with vinegar of which this is the form of it: And it should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And after you have pierced one membrane, pierce the other according to this manner of piercing, and then let the patient gargle with water.
But if blood flows out, then gargle with water of decoction of the rind of pomegranate or of bay-leaf and alike to that of the causes astringent until the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that until it is healed.
And sometimes in the throat there are other abscesses besides those two ears, and you pierce those according to what we have said in the piercing of two membranes equally.
And I had medicated a woman of an abscess which was in her throat; the abscess had turned dark in color, of little feeling, and it had closed up her throat, and she was breathing with difficulty, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she was coming near to death unless she had stayed for one or two days.
And the abscess had pushed so that it had made two bumps within that they were pus for two months.
So I cut him up with a scalpel and inserted one of them in it, and pulled that out; and there came out of him a great portion, and then I pierced the other side where I understood the other pus was, and then I bound his mouth, and held down his tongue, and then I put the needle in that abscess.
And then I cut away a great part of it, and not much blood flowed out of him. Then the throat of that woman was absolutely open, and she began to drink water at once, and then she ate food; therefore I did not cease to pierce that abscess many times for a long time, and the abscess occurred in the place where that one was, which was prolonged.
Then I cut and cauterized her throat, therefore the addition of that; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to that; therefore my marvel grew at that.
Chapter 37.
Of the piercing of the navel when it is abscessed.
When there is pus in the navel, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is named buba.
But when it is healed with what we have said in the division and does not comply with your cure, and you see that the abscess cauterized is last in him and is subtle; and if it is to that length, and it is blood-red, dark in color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then beware of piercing it, for there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient and press his tongue with the instrument of which I have described the form; and then put the needle in the new one, and pull that down and pierce that with one of two instruments of which I spoke in the piercing of two membranes.
And beware that you do not pierce it unless what is adjusted over the natural term with its addition, for if you pierce further, you will cut his speech.
And after piercing, use what we have recommended in the piercing of two membranes, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the piercing of him, beware that you use a needle in cauterizing him without fear, and the manner of the cautery in him is not but with sharp water; then let the head of the patient be in your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument of which we have spoken, and then take the water which we spoke of in the chapter of cauterization, and comply with that living cause, and pause that not thick nor subtle, and of that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the hollow of it be concavity in which is stopped the medicine likewise with the concavity of spoon of rosewater, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the navel; and let the patient jaw over his lap so that run saliva or mouth mucous membrane of that medicine, so that no other cause on the throat of him and that you lead that.
And then hold your hand over the medicine, and squeeze that on the uvula through the space of a half-hour until you see it blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take a needle and wrap that over the end of the rose water; then submerge the needle in the medicine and insert the rosewater into a tube so that the needle adheres in that tube, and do that as many times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape; then let it be blackened as it dries and falls after three or four days.
And if you feel that the medicine should be repeated, repeat it, and then cauterize it by wiping it with a cotton swab dipped in wine, and cleanse it with the water that was used to dissolve the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and treat it from the outside with embrocation, and on the inside with healing remedies until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is more safe than incision and less painful.
Sometimes, ulcerations of the uvula are healed with something more subtle than cauterization or incision: take myrrh, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic thorns, camomile, brot and similar to those herbs, and mix all these ingredients, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be soaked in mild vinegar; and the bowl should be covered with a decent lid, and there should be a hole in the middle of the lid, on which an appropriate hollow instrument made of silver or brass is placed; it should be fashioned out of silver or brass.
And the end of this instrument is inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the uvula, where it is very fogged up.
And then repeat this process several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment during the rising of humors, for it would cause too much pressure on the swelling; instead, wait until the swelling has subsided before cauterizing it.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a reed and attach a ball of wool to its end, so that it fits into the mouth of the patient; for the wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and other objects that stick in the throat, and on other causes.
Sometimes, there are things stuck in the throat or a thorn from the foot or some other cause.
So you must pull out whatever is visible, using an instrument in front of the tongue, so that it can be seen clearly what is in the throat.
And if there is something hidden in the throat that cannot be seen, the patient should be made to vomit before the food has time to digest in the stomach; for often the cause of the throat lies hidden in the throat and is dislodged by vomiting; or let the patient eat a piece of bread or a leaf of lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge, soak it in vinegar, and then swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are stuck, they will be dislodged. Or take an eel and dip it in vinegar, and let it lie there until it is soft, then swallow it, for it will be driven into the place where the thorns are stuck, and they will come out; or take a needle and push it in and pull it out.
But if they are not dislodged by these means, then use a lead instrument shaped like this:
And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at its end there should be a cavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
And let the patient tilt his head back, and be careful not to touch his throat bones, so that he may pull on it or press on the bone or thorn with his hand, or that the doctor do so with his hand.
But the patient himself should do this, for he knows best where the cause is located and can press it down from above while pulling up on the instrument, according to the amount by which he is able to relax; then it will be dislodged.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of a blood clot from the throat.
When there is blood clotting after we have described the treatment with remedies and they do not work, then consider the throat of the patient on the upper surface, for you must examine his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
So if you see the blood clot, remove it with a small needle or with a thin, decently pointed instrument.
And if you cannot remove it with that, then take a hollow, curved tube and insert it into the patient's throat; then place a red-hot iron in the cavity of the tube, and do this as many times as necessary (until the blood clot is dead and comes out of the throat), and the patient abstains from water all day.
And then take a sponge soaked in warm water, and wipe the patient' mouth with it; and do not drink anything else for an hour or more, wiping his mouth with the sponge every now and then, for as soon as he feels the water, he will spit out the blood clot.
But if it is not dislodged by what we have recommended, then smoke the patient' mouth with camphor or asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended for smoking the uvula.
Do this, according to how bad it is.
And there is another way of smoking it: take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth, and in the middle of the cloth there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then smoke the patient; let the patient tilt his head back so that the smoke reaches the blood clot, for when he feels the smoke, the blood clot will come out.
And if it does not work, then repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salt and vinegar, and do not drink water, and with this regime it will be dislodged.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which blood clots are extracted from the throat when they are seen; and it is similar to forceps except that it has some curvature: which is inserted into the throat; its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is hooked, and on it there is an aperture, so that when we press down on any object, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
Here is the sum of the discourse on the diagnosis and section of abscesses.
Abscesses are of many kinds, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
And they differ in their piercing and sectioning by two means: one is for abscesses in themselves; and the other is for those caused by moistness.
And the second way is according to the places in which they occur: for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttock; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them is treated differently by sectioning.
And there are some abscesses which need not be pierced, but only mature with poultices on them or their complement.
And other abscesses are those which are not punctured unless they are mature with poultices on them; and if they are near a joint, the flesh around it is prolonged as the pus is discharged from it, and it causes a contraction of that member, or it is near an important member, and if you delay piercing it until it is mature, then it will affect the main member; or it is near the buttock, so do not pierce it unless it is mature; or it is near the anus, so do not pierce it unless it is completed, lest it affects the parts within the anus, or it is made in the end of it that it is not healed. But know that you know the time of the puncturing of the pustule, and also when it is mature.
And know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and also a decrease in redness and pulse, and the tip of the pustule becomes blunt, and other signs appear.
And know that the puncturing should take place in the most lower part of the pustule, and also when pus comes out from the healing of the eminence.
And the puncturing should always be done lengthwise along the flesh or body, if the pustules are on the hands or feet, and in places of the joints, of the tendons, of the nerves, of the veins; and, lastly, in all places alike, in which there is no reflex; for in those where there is a reflex, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the pustule is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the puncturing be done after the digestion of it is confirmed, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the body of it is prolonged, and much filth comes out, and its lips become hard and deep.
But some pustules are punctured according to the breadth of the flesh or body, as need requires, or according to that member which feels pain.
And you shall give a small puncturing in the great pustules, and a large and ample puncturing or many small ones according to the diversity of the sizes of the pustules.
And others are of pustules in which the cord is hollow and cut, when it is made thus that bread and is made in a term that it was already, as with that which happens in trots of dublec and of buboes.
And of those are in which it is cut with three angles; and of those is in which it is cut thus as the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as well as the pustules of the armpits.
And of them are in which round incisions and lunar incisions are administered, and resembling those.
But to him to whom it is not thus with his pustules, superficial or flat incisions are made only to the superficial ones.
And when the pustule is large and has already collected much pus, you shall puncture it and not be afraid to extract all of its pus in that hour; have extracted a part of it, and then close up the pustule until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and do this several times according as there is a discharge.
And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is many times dissolved by the discharge of pus, and the patient dies soon after, and you operate on them.
So keep this chapter with great caution, and then your puncturing in which you puncture these pustules, wash the wounds and consider therefore if the wound of the pustule is small, or a flat section, then you shall administer the which of oil or of old vinegar; and if the pustule is large, and the fissures of the puncturing are many, then you shall pause with your fingers in each crack until they come together.
And if in the pustule a part of the cord is cut off or you have hollowed it around its circuit, then you shall complete it with old vinegar or with thread made of linen cloth, thus as when you treat boils or ulcers, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then process it and cure it with that which you use for ointments until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then you shall administer water and vinegar rubbed together with a linen cloth, and place that on the place of the flow of blood several times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you shall administer medicine and cure it with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the winter time, and the place of the pustule is a place of many nerves, then you shall pour powder into vinegar and hot oil, and place that on the places.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy, then you shall place powdered herbs moistened with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and do this every third day as we have said, and then open up the pustule and wash it and administer to its cure that which is convenient to it until it is healed.
And thus is what is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of pustules universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of each pustule in what manner is the way of its cure specifically.
Chapter 41.
Of incisions of pustules which come in the cord of the head.
In the cord of the head are small pustules, and they are of species of knots which contain membranes that are made to them; and the species of them are many.
And from them are bumps, and from those is contained moisture resembling lime. And from those are which contain moisture resembling powder, and resembling them; and from those are which are scaly, hard.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must extract them it does not contradict the artery.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express those with an instrument the form of which see below, the one which is called entromes, knowing that it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then split that one with an incision according to its length by a superficial incision according to this form:
And begin in the incision of line .B to line .G. So when the moisture is discharged, then you scrape that one by which it contains that moisture, and let there be no cause of any, for repeated incisions return if there is any cause from that one.
And then immerse vinegar in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with that the wound and let that stay until another day, for by that you corrode all that is broken of that membrane.
And then apply ointment to that one again secondly and thirdly if it needs it, knowing that you are confident that there is no cause of that membrane; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pustule contains a knotted vein, then you shall cut that one according to this form: By incision having the shape of a cross, and cut hooks between two lips of the incision and scrape that one throughout its length, and apply your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
But if your artery opposes you, then do that which I will tell you first.
And similarly do in the pustule suppuration of incision and cure as we have said; and incision on suppurating pustule is less bloody, for it is of little blood and little moisture.
And some times some of these pustules are in the head in some people with whom there is no moisture; the cause of which is that they have hit upon one in the head of an old woman and rubbed the pustule thus with a hard, rough, white pebble, which could not be touched, and if it hit any person, it would blister.
But for the other abscesses in the head or elsewhere that are not included in this chapter, as well as the abscesses that occur on the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, the incision of all these should be superficial.
And make the incision in those with the lower part of the pus so that it drains the body of the pus to the lower parts.
Then treat those with what is convenient for their healing.
Chapter 42.
Of the incision of scrofula which happens in the neck.
These abscesses often appear on the neck, armpits, and groins; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
And some are generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within their own membrane, as well as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have described earlier.
And the kinds of these scrofula are various: some are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, when you see one of good disposition in the Touchment, whose color of what is manifest is close to the color of the cord, and is swollen all over, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the artery, and is not deep, you should investigate that with a superficial cut from above the line of 30 degrees to below the body of the line of 24 degrees, and score it from all sides, and stretch out its lips with a hook, or with several hooks if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And be careful that the spatula not be very sharp so that it does not accidentally touch you with the incision or disturb the patient, and make an incision only where it is necessary to do so; for if you cut a vein or artery and forbid yourself from your operation, then stop the bleeding with vitriol triphate or other powders which stop blood flow, and close up the wound, and leave that which rests beneath the keenness of the abscess and let the wound be softened and begin to discharge pus. When the blood is abstained.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of the other small scrofula; therefore, cut into those and clean them.
And if there is a great vein in the root of the large scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root. But before you let it fall by itself without causing harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton wool which you have already saturated in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you have cut the whole scrofula, then you should grasp the two lips of the wound and suck gently until no more superfluity remains.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then understand how to cut its root and drain it and administer the appropriate treatment and what is said.
And that of the scrofula which contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial cut where you see the site of its maturity, and make an incision so that it drains the pus to the lower parts of the body, as we have said.
And then administer a piercing, leeches with ointment and plasters to those, so that it corroses what is left of the corrosion. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat that with generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the incision of the boil of an abscess within the gullet.
The ancients wrote about this incision in the pilhot, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
And this is the inscription of their language.
But in men who have squintiness, so that the extraction of the pilhot is avoided, lest all the veins and the major nerves of the patient are cut here.
But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the malady is not in the cane, use the incision of the pilhot to avoid destruction which is made by piercing.
Therefore, when we want this, let us cut the pilhot below three circles of the circles of the pilhot, or four with a small incision for width in that which is between two circles by quantity, and let the incision be in the diaphragm, not in the cartilage, and this site is appropriate for incision, for it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from it are drawn out.
And if the patient is fearful, then let him stretch out his gullet with a hook, and then split the membrane so that he might reach the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause for doing so.
And then cut the ciplach according to what we have described, and it is significant about the incision of the canal by the flame from which it has issued and by the abstention of voice.
And leave the wound open for a certain time.
Therefore, when the hour is reduced in which the piercing is feared, join together the two lips of the membrane of the wound and cut that only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow within so that it may be healed.
And Al-Bucasis said that the sum of our speech which we have described is this: some of those abscesses in the gullet of the patient have been cauterized, and the patient has come to death, and his throat is constricted, and some want to cut the epiglottis so that the patient might breathe over the site of the wound by any respiration, and he is saved from death.
And therefore they commanded to leave the wound open until the malady of the malady is consumed: and its malady lasts for three days, and then they commanded to close the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen by my eyes is that one woman served a man and cut him in the gullet and made an incision on it of the pipe of the lung, and he was called to his cure, and when he opened the mouth, blood flowed from the wound just as it did from the dead, and he uncovered the wound and drew out the blood which was flowing from the wound.
Therefore, he confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind came out from the wound, and he treated it until it was healed with fire.
And he did not accuse the servant unless he had raged in the throat, and then some days later he returned to his sickness of his own disposition.
Now he says that there is no fear in the incision of the pilhot.
Chapter 44.
Of the incision upon an abscess which occurs in the gullet outward, and is called a hernia of the gullet.
This hernia of the gullet is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it occurs in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in nature there is no cure for it.
And the accidental is according to two methods, of which one is like fatty nodes, and the other method is like an abscess, which is caused by a knot in an artery, and in both there is pain. And do not place pressure on him with a needle except in the case of one that is small. And you should examine him and investigate him as I have told you, and if you find it to be like a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should cut into that just as you would with nodes, and remove that along with what contains it from the skin and bursa; but if not, then you should probe throughout his body, and then treat the area with something that will promote healing until he is healed.
Chapter 45.
Of the section of the species of nodes.
There are many species of nodes, and I have already described all of their species in the division.
And one should also count the difference between a node and an abscess as causing doubt.
Therefore I say that with an abscess there is heat and violent pain until the ebullition of the superfluous matter is relieved; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain; instead it contains the lion's tooth which is in its own sack.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is with a lump and it is made in this way with vacua, either greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, for some are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I described in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, probe it and pierce it at its beginning with an instrument called a probe, according to its form as it will appear in the chapter which is next.
And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes; take this instrument and insert it into the most moist part which you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
Then finish with your hand according to the measurement of the size of the abscess; then withdraw the probe and consider what has come out in its track.
And if the moisture runs out, of whatever color it may be, then you should cut into it superficially as I have said in the other abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out from around the probe, then know that it is fatty.
And dry it with superficial incisions in the shape of a cross according to this form: thus with what you have been taught; suspend that with pins, and scrape the membrane away from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or sack, if possible, over it, and withdraw that pus along with the node.
But if it is ruptured in the operation, it is not possible to withdraw that pus; instead do so at intervals so that no cause remains behind.
For if any cause remains behind, little or much, the node will return according to the most.
And if you see that some small part remains behind, then complete the wound with some powdered corrosive drugs, and bind the wound tightly, and place something hot over the abscess, and cure it by another method until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then cut both lips of it and cure that with what it was incarnated.
But if it comes with a pulsating vein, or not-pulsating, then you should cut and fill the area around it with powdered vitriol, and let that rest for two or three days until the swelling of the blood subsides; then return to cutting what is ruptured of the node.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and piercing.
Those are the forms of probes, and they are of three species; one is large, another middle-sized, and one is small.
The form of a large probe is this:
The form of a small probe is this:
They are made of iron, of brass, and of the ends of rammed rods, so that they can be twisted in abscesses.
And these are the forms of the instruments; and they are named albar, and one of them is called berit.
And they are of three species, for one is large, another middle-sized, and one is small.
The form of a large instrument, its form is:
The form of a medium-sized instrument, its form is:
The form of a small instrument, its form is:
It is convenient that they be used for abscesses and pustules and boil, because of which they are among the bones and from other causes.
And they are made round, large, or pointed with large needles with which the veins are sewn; and they are made of ramie, or iron, or silver, and the needles when they are made of ramie.
And they are made the instruments of black plum, which one believes that through them they are opened up the pustules in the cavity of which are reflected; because of which they are reflected with their elevation by those reflections.
And they are of three species; one is long, another middle-sized, and the other short, according to the quantity of the width of the pustule and the stricture of it.
The form of a large instrument of lead:
The form of a medium-sized instrument of lead:
The form of a small instrument of lead:
The forms of pins are of many species; one is simple, which has only a curve, and they are of three species: large, small, and middle-sized.
And they have pointed ends, and they are of three species.
And they have pointed ends with two curves; and they are of three species.
And they have pointed ends with three curves, and they are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple pin, its form is:
The form of a large pin with two curves, its form is: The form of a medium-sized pin with two curves, its form is: The form of a small pin with two curves, its form is:
The form of a large pin with three curves, its form is:
The form of a medium-sized pin with three curves, its form is:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which they cut and pierce nodes and abscesses; and they are of three species, one is large, another middle-sized, and the other small.
The form of a large scalpel:
The form of a medium-sized scalpel;
The form of a small scalpel:
The edges of those with which incision is made are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp; but they should not be left in that way, except when it is done for the juice in the incision of a vein or nerve, and through that it heals the patient and gives rest to him a little by the drying up of the abscess.
And these are the forms of bandages, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of wool and only resemble the color of the skin of the patient, with which it is made.
And in its outer side, there are holes covered by the spatula, and on that side, they run to the ends, inside and out, as you wish, as you will see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers around the piercing of the abscesses and do not hurt the patient, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small. And these are their shapes:
The shapes of venesections with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; their forms are as follows:
They are made of yellow wax, rounded with some length, and thin.
And if these species of leeches are large, medium, and small, then it stops the flow of blood with speed when needed, and then when medicine is first applied to you.
But do not use them to stop blood flow in every part of the body; only use them on fleshy parts, such as on the inside of the thighs and calves, and on the insides of the arms, breasts, belly, armpits, and similar fleshy parts covered with skin.
And sometimes these instruments are also made smaller, resembling skinny slices of fruit, and they stop the flow of blood when used for phlebotomy or an incision into a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round like this:
Chapter 47.
Of the cure of men's breasts, which are similar to those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become enlarged due to a change in sleep habits when they start to grow hair, and then their breasts become swollen, resembling those of women, and they become roman-like.
And when you examine that, cut it with a lunar incision from line B to line G, and then completely remove the growth, fill the wound with medicated plaster, sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal the patient.
But if the breast sags towards the sides and becomes soft like a woman's due to its size, then cut it in two along its sides with two lunar-shaped incisions, so that each half contains the other, as the longer line contains the shorter one, from line B to line G. Then remove the cord between the two lips of the wound, cut out the fat, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders, which are necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be cut for the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what is rotten inside, and then cure the patient until he is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of piercing abscesses that come from below with itching.
Those abscesses that come from below with itching are of the species of scrofula, hard, and they contain a bag full of pus.
And some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be cut with a lunar incision from line G to line B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess of the scrofula, then fill it with old ointment and leave it for another day.
And then the ointment should be applied and the wound should be cured with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the species of nodules and scrofula is, then cut it as we have said in the section on scrofula.
But if the wound is spread so that it causes pus, then administer cauterization on it as we have said before.
Chapter 49.
Of incisions of abscesses that happen through an artery or vein.
When an artery is broken and the vein is collapsed above it, then many times there is an abscess that happens through an artery or vein: when an abscess happens through an artery, it is long drawn out into the depth of the body; and when you push on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a sound in it that indicates stridor.
And when it happens through a vein, it is round to the surface of the body.
And incision on this abscess is dangerous and especially in that which is below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its cure by cautery should be avoided, and especially in that which is at the extremities, or to the head, it should be avoided.
But if it is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut an incision in the vein along its length; and then open the incision with pincers and the artery, and loosen the tunics so that they are uncovered.
And then put an awl on it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double-fold ligature in two places, which will cause you to push it out from both temples.
And then plug up the hole between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood in it is stopped, and the abscess will be dissolved.
And then administer cure in which pus is engendered within so that the ligaments fall down; and then cure it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess through an incision of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is possible for the abscess over the vein, and then insert the awl below where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and there will be a double ligature within so that you draw out from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a strong ligature according to what we have said to you in the ligature of two parts with two ends.
But if you fear that drawing out the ligature, then insert the needle below all of the abscess after the incision of the first needle, and tighten your fingers in four places.
Then dry up the abscess in its middle part where it has risen so that what is in it is pushed out, and then insert the superfluity of the vein, and leave what is inside it.
And then place on it powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with cauterizations and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 50 of the abscess which happens through torture of nerves.
As it happens in an artery and vein, and similarly, an abscess happens in nerves when they happen in their compression or happen through a superfluous strike, and similarly.
And it is done to them in the places of the joints or in the talons, or in any place where the joints are crushed.
And it is a severe pustule, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and there are six of them on his body, and when they are pressed with force, the patient seems stunned.
And the pustule is not located in the chest area, but below the neck, and he is painful all over his body, and does not want to move forward or backward.
Therefore, for those who have the pustules in their joints, it is not necessary to use a cautery of iron, since they will soon recover on their own.
However, if the pustule is on the head or forehead and affecting the eyes, treat it with spathum. But if there are few pustules, then cut them out with forceps at their roots.
And if it is large, then open it with a scalpel, and clean out the wound; and stop the bleeding with a tourniquet, and stitch up the wound; and dress the wound so that it may heal.
Chapter 11.
Of the section of a pustule which happens to the jaw, which happens in the belly.
It happens to some people that they get spots on their bellies and other parts of the body, which are called warts due to their resemblance to mushrooms, whose roots are subtle but whose tops are thick; and indeed the lips of these people become withered, and it is found in those who are small, and also in those who are greatly magnified.
And I have seen one like this, and on his belly were two things which were most similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between them and white ones, except that their roots were thinner.
And indeed the lips of these people were withered and cracked, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Therefore I cut into one of them and found in its inside a stone weighing 15 ounces. And the other one weighed 6 ounces.
And when you cut into it, consider whether the patient is humid or dry, and if the color of the stone is white, humid, and of thin roots, then open it with a broad scalpel, and let it be cauterized in the fire, because much blood will flow from the wound; and if the blood flows, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient is fearful and frightened, be cautious about cutting with iron; but instead take fresh lead ore, and apply it to the stone in the manner we have described; and let that sit for two days.
And then tighten it in the grip of the lead wire; therefore do not cease to press down on the large lump until it is cut off and falls away by itself.
But if the stone has thick roots, then in the cutting of it there is a cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you can cut only half of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then dress the wound so that it may heal.
And beware of cutting a stone which is of dusky color, of little feeling, and with little regard to the body, because that one is full of cancer.
And I will bring up the memory of a certain cranium.
Chapter 12.
Of the treatment of protrusion of the navel.
Protrusion of the navel is caused by many things; or by fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and from it the membrane or intestine, depending on where the other ruptures are; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what is before us, or by constriction of the intestines within it.
But if it is by a fissure of the diaphragm and loosening of the membrane, then the color of the pustule is similar to that of the body; and there is little pain with it, and indeed it appears in various places. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance will be as we have described, with more violent variation, and when you press it with your fingers, it hides itself, and then returns; and soon it is found again, and is greatly magnified due to bathing and violent exertion.
But if it is by moisture, then there is little pain and it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or crushed.
And if it is by blood, then there appear with these signs the pustule inclining towards blackness.
But if it is by dry flesh, then it is a severe pustule, large and hard, and is fixed according to its amount.
But if it is by intestinal protrusion, then there is little pain when touched.
And in its treatment, you should consider whether the protrusion of the navel is by blood from an artery or vein, or by intestinal protrusion; therefore it behoves you to abstain from treating it, because there is fear and dread in that one as we have taught in the chapter where we spoke about pustules from an artery and a vein.
And if the protrusion of the navel is by the intestine or membrane, then have the patient lean back and stand extended; and indeed touch with your fingers around the entire navel, and indeed command him to stand facing you with his chest against your chest, and indeed circle with a broad scalpel around the navel over the area which you have touched with your fingers; and indeed extend the pustule towards the upper parts with a large needle; and indeed ligate around it with strong thread or with twine in a decent manner.
And then open the middle of the extended pustule over its ligament and put your finger inside that hole and probe the intestine; and if you have blocked it or restrained it by the ligament, then indeed withdraw your fingers and push the intestine towards the interior parts of the belly.
And if you have blocked the membrane, then take it with a needle; and cut off the superfluities of it.
But if it is opposite your artery or vein, then surround it a lot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and put the two needles around the pustule in the form of crosses, the which you make to penetrate; and then tighten the pustule into four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the extended flesh return to its position and fall by itself; or cut into it when it is thinned out and probed, and then dress that with what we have spoken of as a poultice onto the wound until it is healed.
And if the protrusion of the navel is by dry flesh in it or by moisture, then indeed you should suck out the pustule as we have said and draw out the blood or moisture which you block in it, and then dress that with what covers it so that it consolidates the wound.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment of a cranium.
We have already said in the division of a cranium and how it is the way to its cure by medicines, and that it is cut off in it the cure by iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have spoken of a cranium engendered in the mother and cautery of its cure.
And the ancients say that some times a cranium is found in a place where its eradication is possible, like a cranium which is on the chest or the buttock and similar to the members assigned to extract all of it, especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and severe, do not approach the patient, for I have not seen anyone heal from that illness nor do I know of anyone who has recovered from it.
And the operation on him is that you proceed and let the patient bleed and purge black bile several times, and then cut into him, if there is found a full, manifest hernia.
Then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is placed for operation, and then pierce the wound with nails that suit it; and then hollow out from all parts with a good saw, thorough examination within so that no cause of the disease remains. And let the blood flow, and do not bandage it loosely, and press out the places, and wipe off the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable to you among your instruments.
But if the flow of thick blood from a vein or artery gives you trouble, then cauterize that inside so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 44
Of treatment for dropsy.
We have already recommended in the division of the species of dropsy with water, and the characteristics of each species, of its treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altithas alone, and it must not be approached with iron to the species of tympany nor to the species of hyparka, because it is deadly.
And when you have treated this species of tympany with medicines and it does not respond to your treatment, then consider, because if the patient already has debility, or has another disease such as another dropsy, like one in which there is cough or chest or abdominal pain and similar diseases, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for fear of that.
But if you see the patient in robust health, and with no other disease but dropsy alone, and not a child or old man, then the manner of operation on him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and then press his abdomen with your hand, filling the water to the bottom of the navel, and then take thorny ash wood according to this form:
let it be of two pointed parts long, with a pointed end like ash wood; but let there be in it some small brevity from time to time, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the intestines, and let him drink that.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from part of the intestines, because then you must with section elongate the navel from the bottom, in the right of him over the navel.
But if the generation of dropsy is from disease of the liver, then your section must be on the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if its generation is from melasma, then your section should be on the right.
And do not let your section be over the side where the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not flow to that place.
Then pierce with the instrument throughout the cavity, and insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the ash wood between the cavity and the pharynx, and drain him; and if it is the quantity of a nail or more.
Then pierce the pharynx so that the ash wood reaches the desired location, and it is where the water is. Then withdraw him and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is like a tube of silver or gold or lead, to which in the lower end there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is beveled according to the manner of a feather, as follows:
And at the upper end of it there is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately withdraws over the instrument, therefore evacuates from the water in the middle quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than it should not in the hour, then the patient dies from resolution of his animal spirit, or he suffers five pains which are approaching death.
But it evacuates from that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what you see are the dispositions of the patient's strength, from his pulse and his goodness.
Then withdraw the instrument and tie up the water which causes it because as soon as it is tied by the cavity, then the hole that is over the pharynx from which you have pierced that according to that manner.
Then return the instrument on another day if he can tolerate it, and withdraw a little water, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware of error so that it does not return to the water except for a little.
But if you fear for the patient and let out of the water a large quantity, then treat him with dry medicines so that he is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the melasma and the liver, and also the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in that which precedes.
Chapter 45
Of the treatment for children who are born with holes not punctured in their urine places.
Sometimes some of the infants are born from their mother's womb and the tip of their genitals is not punctured (or is tightly drawn or is not in its place).
Then it must be treated with piercing of it as soon as he is born with a very subtle pointed instrument according to this form:
Then insert into the hole a thin nail of lead and ligature it, and leave it for three days or for 4 days.
And when he wants to urinate, let him be urged and urinate; then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place does not harm this closure.
But that from which the hole is drawn tightly must be treated with a nail of lead, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, because of that from which he is born and the tip is drawn out, the cause is that from them, that which is born and the tip is drawn out, there is a defect at the end of the tip of the penis so that it cannot urinate into the places inside, because it lifts up the penis with its hand to the places above; and it is not generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very harmful disease.
And the manner of operation on him is that the patient be bent over his chest, and then stretch out the tip of his penis with your left hand by a vigorous pull, and insert the tip of the tube into the place of the foreskin like a feather, or you cut some part, so that the meatus comes like the tip of the penis and that the hole falls into the middle place according to what it should.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens to him; and pause for him with that which you withdraw the blood, and treat the wound so that if it is healed.
Chapter 46
Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin on the tip of the penis and of swelling and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis.
Many times this white swelling appears on the penis, and it is an eminence of flesh that protrudes.
And one is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant: apply a thin ointment and cut out that part within which the swelling is located entirely; then place on that wound Egyptian ointment; then the wound will be healed with an ointment of diafinicon.
And if the swelling is malignant, i.e., changing colour, then you should administer a cautery near its beginning and end.
But if the swelling is on the foreskin of the head of the penis and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin and the other part outside, then you should open the swelling which is inside at its beginning until it is consolidated; then you cure that which is outside because if you cure both parts simultaneously, there will be a risk of tearing.
And I have seen this happen to the testicles and the foreskin, turning black and rotten, so then you should cut away everything that is already discoloured or about to rot or is rotten; then you apply an ointment over it made from ground pomegranate peel mixed with flour and sifted through a sieve.
Then heal that with another cure until it is healed.
But if blood flows from there, then administer lunar cautery as follows:
For cautery helps in two ways simultaneously, i.e., for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is rotten.
And if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed entirely at once, then you should insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in those whose foreskin is intact, and for whom circumcision is not performed; and when the adhesion happens due to a plague or an abscess), you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from every side.
And if it is difficult to pull them apart, then you should scrape with a spatula the head of the penis and the foreskin because sometimes the foreskin, when it is thin, easily pierces through its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin cloth which is moistened with water so that they do not adhere to each other again.
And let it be healed with a styptic ointment until it is consolidated.
Chapter .LVII.
Of purification of children and of the cure for those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other plagues; however, since it comes from our action and will, and the more so because it happens to children, we should assign to it better action and easier loss of health.
Hence I say that the ancient doctors did not prescribe circumcision for any of their patients because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only that we have acquired it through experience, which is that I have found most of the artisans and butchers using to circumcise and purify with a knife and with torches; they use resin as ointment and for incision they use fingernails.
And I have prohibited all these ways and found better purification with tweezers, and ointment of resin that is used in purification with fingernails because many times the foreskin escapes upwards, since the foreskin has two layers, and the one below pulls it down and forces another incision and a sure pain. And the purification which is done by apothecaries and is digital, that is used by the butchers, does not secure the incision of the end of the male member because it easily goes into its channel.
But in the operation with fingernails, iron and corruption often cause your operation to fail. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that circumcision is not needed, and I have seen this.
But of the purification that is done with tweezers and ointment of resin, its goodness, experience has shown me because the tweezers are according to a proportionate incision, therefore when you press your hand so that two acute angles are formed, and you insert them according to a comparison in one go; then compression of the resin is made into the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from every side without any error.
And the way of the first operation is that you let the child be mostly upright if he is one of those whom I understand to be a little small, and you do not lie down but only apply the resin on his penis so that it lies within him until the next day.
Then let him rejoice in all those ways that are possible for you to receive his understanding. Then let him be between your hands, set up prepared, and not tremble; and conceal the tweezers in your hand or below your foot so that the child does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
Then insert your hand into his penis and breathe on the foreskin, and draw that out so that the head of the penis is exposed, then purify that from what is accumulated in it of dirtiness.
The form of the tweezers for purification, this is their form:
The ends of the tweezers be blunt and the other ends sharp so that the nail is not cut, and the length of both acute angles be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But the mistake in purification is that sometimes the inner foreskin entirely escapes or is torn from the incision.
Then let you extend that from your finger with your fingernail in front of the abscess of the spot and insert it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then pull that with a needle and insert it.
But if three days have passed and the abscess of the penis is still swollen, then you apply that which is swollen inside so that the abscess is drawn out by cautery, then scrape that with ease, and insert it as you are prepared.
And guard yourself from the head of the penis because it will not hurt him.
Then heal that with that which the plague consolidates from the powders of which we have spoken in the treatment of powders.
And if it is cut into the foreskin over measure, and it adheres to the parts above, that does not hurt him.
But heal that with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .LVIII.
Of the cure for urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by a stone, or by congealed blood, or by a tumor, or by hernia, and it is treated in the same way as we have described for the diseases of the stomach.
And if the cause has not been dissolved as we have said before, it is vehement, then you should administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It is made of silver and is slender like a cone, also with a reed of goose feather that is thin in the shape of a long needle about half a palm long, to which there is a slender tube at its tip.
And the way to inject urine through it is that you take the syringe folded and insert wool or cloth into its end by good binding; and insert the ends of the syringe into the part below the goose feather, and cut away any excess with scissors from the wool, but insert it into the tube with force And then fill the syringe with egg white and honey.
And have the patient lie on his back, and pierce the bladder with it, and lubricate the wound and the instrument with olive oil and egg yolk.
And then insert the syringe easily until it reaches the root of the wound; and then bend the instrument upwards at its tip; and then press the syringe in there until it reaches the bladder, and feel that the cause has been reached, but do not go too deep according to this order, but only as far as the meat where it turns.
And then extend the syringe with the wool little by little, for the urine sucks up the wool.
Then extract it and use the syringe to force out urine, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is empty and the patient feels relief.
Chapter .lix.
Of the quality of enema for the bladder with alder and similar instruments which are suitable for this.
When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or hernia of the urinary tract, and you want to distil water and medicine into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and its form is as follows:
But at its end it is closed, so it is sealed. And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like a key.
At its beginning is a hollow place, in which is what is inserted, and it should be according to the quantity that it blocks off that, without addition, so that when any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn up, and when it is expelled, with that it is drawn up, and when it is expelled far, according to how the clampcedra does it, which is smeared with naphtha in the battles of the sea.
So when you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture and draw up with it that which is pushed into the parts above, because the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the clapcedra.
And then insert the end of the clapcedra into the wound as we recommended with the syringe; and then press in the moisture with what you press it in with, because that moisture goes immediately to the bladder, and the patient feels it.
Form of a slender enema with which the bladder is enemaed, and its form is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or brass, and its tip should be like a small feather, and below there is a tube inside.
And then take hold of the bladder with force, and put into it the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double knot, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the enema into the wound.
And then squeeze your hand over the bladder with force and press down so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle of it; and pierce that all the way around; and then insert strong thread into those holes, as though they were wound, and then add the circle just as you add the sofabes, because when you pause in that you want to inject moisture, oil and water.
And then you tie that in the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx.
Of extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and the cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about the stone where there is cutting with a knife, and sectioning.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And they relate about it with manifest exposure and abridgment.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine which comes from the bladder is like water in thinness, and has sand in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and tries to pass it several times, and then the hole is seen.
And its cure is difficult in old people. But in young people it is easier because of their age.
And if the stone is large and its cure is more difficult, and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of that, then first cleanse the bladder with an enema which opens up all the wounds in its intestines, because sometimes that wound prohibits the expulsion of the stone through inquiry.
And then press the patient by his feet and make him cough or jump so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or sometimes it leaves from there.
And then do that while he is lying on his back with his legs stretched out, and let the patient's arms be below his buttocks, so that the bladder is all bent down.
And then pierce it all around.
So if you feel the stone in space, then you cut it immediately over it.
And if it does not come out of there at all, then you untie with oil the end of your left little finger, if the patient is a child, or the end of the middle finger if he is an adult, and insert that into his anus. And pierce the stone so that it comes out from below your finger. And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on the wound you made and expel that to the outside through the opening in the bladder.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with her hand; and instruct another assistant to extend the genitals upward with her right hand, and with her other hand massage the vagina which is below the genitals, at the site of the incision.
Then insert a spatulate instrument, the shape of which is as follows: and cut between the anus and genitals, not in the rectum itself but on the left side of the buttock; and the incision should be made across the stone and the wound in the anus, and it should be a wide external incision with a narrow internal opening depending on how much of the stone protrudes from the anus, and no more than that, for the wound around the stone inside the anus must be tightly closed once the stone is extracted.
And know that some stones are irregular in shape and have sharp edges, for which reason they can be difficult to extract.
And there are others that look like a nut, round in shape, and these are easy to extract.
So if the stone is of this latter kind with sharp edges, press it into the fissure.
And if it is not smooth, then you should either press on it with a finger or with a tool that has been wrapped in a suitable cloth, or insert below it a slender curved instrument.
But if you cannot press on it, then enlarge the opening a little, and if you see any bleeding, bind up that wound tightly with powdered vitriol.
But if there are more than one stone, then at the start you should press your hand against the mouth of the bladder and gradually insert it; and then gradually press in a little, and do likewise if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, then it is foolish to insert it with a large incision because this causes either death or continuous bleeding in the patient, since the tissue is not fully healed.
But one should extract it using instruments that can grab and pull the stone out in pieces.
So when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon blood, and bind it tightly. And place over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and water, to promote healing of the wound.
Then return the patient to bed and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when that has been loosened, wash the area with water and oil, and treat the wound with ointment of diaphenicon and ointment of diabaselicon until it is healed.
But if there is suppuration and corrosion in the wound, and it looks like blood has congealed in the bladder and causes retention of urine (and this is recognized by the flow of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water and salt, and apply ointment to it as often as necessary until it is healed.
And be sure during all the healing process to press both thighs and apply the remedies which are placed over the wound.
And if the stone is small and lodged in the shaft of the penis, and retention of urine ensues, then treat it as described below, for the troops who were treated in this way had incisions made by a punch with a cloth wrapped around it, the shape of which was as follows:
A wedge-shaped tip, pointed, placed in the shaft.
Then insert a needle and with it pull on the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the penis and with ease pierce through the stone with the punch. And turn the punch with your hand on the stone little by little, and when you have made the hole through it from one side to the other, so that urine can flow through.
Then press your hand over the opening made by the stone in the part of the penis where urine emerges, for that is constricted and blocked by the stone, and the patient will be cured.
But if this treatment is not possible for some reason that prohibits it, then hold a needle below the stone and another needle above it. Then press on the stone in the penis between the two ligatures. And then extract it. Then loosen the ligature and cleanse the clotted blood which has collected in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have the ligature below the stone, but only above it, for when the needle is loosened and the stone extracted, the urethra returns to its place and heals.
And for that reason when you tie the ligature above it, you should lift the urethra upward or hold it in place until the wound has healed as we have already said.
Chapter 161.
On extracting stones from women.
A stone in a woman is rarely found.
But if you do find a stone in one of them, then its treatment is difficult and prohibited by many remedies.
The first is when the woman is very young.
And the second is when you do not find a woman who is willing to tell if she is married or is a prostitute.
The third is when you do not find a woman skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision on a stone in a woman is distant from the location of the stone, because of a deep incision and in that fear ensues.
But if you are compelled to do so, then take a woman skilled in this art, and she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that one, then seek a woman with quick and slender fingers, or present a woman who is experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has practiced this art from youth.
So have that one present, and instruct her to do all that you command her to do, starting with the examination of the stone; for if the woman is a virgin, then place your finger in the vagina of it and touch the stone.
So if you find her, cover that part below your finger, and then instruct her to pierce through it.
But if she is not a virgin, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger in the anus of the patient and press on the stone, then place her left hand over the bladder and grip it tightly.
So if you find her, then gradually press that part of the urethra towards the openings below by the strength of the patient's hand until it reaches the stone at the root of the vagina.
Then pierce through it by pressing on the tip of the urethra beyond the root of the vagina from any part where it is stopped and constricting the stone below it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the amount by which the stone is expected to be expelled from it.
And you should know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have bumps on them.
So you should know the type of stone in the patient so that you can understand what they want to tell you about their condition.
And if you see bleeding, apply crushed vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And you should prepare all of the instruments that are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see bleeding and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then you should apply powder to the area and tighten a bandage around it, and not repeat this; leave the stone in place and do not extract it, for the patient will surely die quickly. Then tend to the wound.
And when the bleeding has stopped for several days and the wound is healed, then you may return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62.
On incision for inguinal hernia.
Inguinal hernia is nothing but a collection of moisture within the white membrane that lies beneath the muscles of the abdomen and is called the fascia.
And sometimes it occurs in the lower part of the abdominal membrane, where nature has prepared it for the separation of another abdomen; and it is the membrane between the white fascia which we have mentioned earlier, and it is not anything else but fat.
And the cause of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the muscles, because through them this material is poured out, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow made to the muscles.
And this moisture has many colors; the color of it inclines towards yellow or blood-red, or red, or is black and slimy, or is water white, and that is what happens most often.
And the signs by which one can tell where this collection of water occurs are these: for if it is in the white fascia which we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and declining a little towards length like the shape of an abdomen, and it appears on the muscle, because the moisture covers that entire part.
And if the moisture is in the lower membrane, then the swelling is round with a separation at the abdomen, and because of this one believes it to be another abdomen.
And if the moisture is between the membrane of the muscles and the white fascia, then it has a flat appearance.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you should probe the color of the moisture in the swelling by inserting a thread into which the shape of the swelling is preceded; and according to what comes out on the thread, judge what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it by iron, then we command the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and keep the body warm.
And then let him lie on his back for some time, and place under him several folded cloths.
And then sit on the patient's left side, and command the assistant to stand on his right, who shall extend his arm above the muscles of the abdomen and towards one side of the navel.
And then take a spatulate instrument and cut the membrane of the muscles at the lower part along its length near the navel.
And the incision should be made according to a straight line equally distant from the line that divides the hair of the muscles, so as to reach the white fascia which contains it.
Examine it, and be careful so that you do not pierce it; and your incision by which you examine it should be an inch-long cut that is suspended above the greater abdomen and scrutinize it subtly with your incision according to the amount possible for you.
And then pierce the lower fascia of water with a large opening, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the fascia above them; do not touch the membrane of the muscles that contains it, and pierce the fascia in whatever way is possible for you. And pierce it in its totality or in portions, and especially its lateral side subtly, for if you do not scrutinize the piercing of it rigorously, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
But if the abdomen protrudes from that separation of its membrane in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the fascia, return it inside, and then tie together tightly the two lips of the membrane of the muscles with a suture, and tend to it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the abdomen is rotten due to another disease, then command that you cut the vessels which are above the suspensory, and extract the abdomen, and then tend to it as we have said.
But if the water is collected in two places, then know that there are two hernias; therefore examine that place according to how you have done in the other similarly; and if it is a single operation, then do it.
And then you should wipe away the blood, and insert into the incisions wool which has been dipped in oil or rose oil; and place over it other wool which has been dipped in wine and oil, and spread that over both muscles and the navel; and place over it folded cloths and powder, and bind those with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then let two cloths be pressed and wrung out of wool which has been dipped in wine according to this resemblance; and let the ends be made with which it is bound by a ligature or of wet wool, and let them be attached by a bandage around the waist of the trousers, and one end be inserted into the hollow of the crotch, and the other end into the opening of the pants, and two ends over two thighs and two other ends over two ankles, and all the bandages should be tightened around the waist of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with cautery instead of an incision by iron; and it is that you take a slender cautery and pierce with it the membrane of the muscles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended so that the white fascia which contains the water be discovered, and then you take cautery according to this form: and is assembled in Greek letters.
And then pierce it with that fascia, and it is ignited so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the fascia with forceps, and cut it with cautery, and pierce it with cautery which is ignited subtly; and insert that according to what is possible for you so that you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the abdomen.
And know that this operation is more safe and longer in the flow of blood, and better than an operation with incision.
But if you meet with an obstacle during the incision or during cautery, or bleeding, then command that you cure it as it meets you according to what is said.
But if the patient is poor and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture as I have recommended here; and it is when you are certain, by what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is fluid-filled.
Then you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a lance, and make the puncture according to the length of the body.
And the opening should be large enough for all the fluid to flow out.
Then place a pad on the site and apply pressure there, letting it absorb the remaining fluid. Then dress the wound once the ulcer is healed.
But if there is resistance to the flow of fluid at that time when you pierce it: and this does not happen unless the white membrane in the ulcer's orifice causes resistance and prevents the fluid from flowing out, then you should insert into the ulcer a needle or instrument with which the fluid can be extracted, the shape of which is described earlier; or apply to the pressure of the ulcer a small plug.
And you should know that the fluid will return, and it is retained for about six months or so; and when it has returned, then it should be pierced according to that same method, for the patient will continue to live.
Chapter 63.
Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the incision of this hernia there is great fear of death due to the most dangerous dispositions; and I have seen its dismissal and being saved by this better way.
And I am remembering the operation on that one, and the properties of ulcers.
Therefore, I say that ulcers are born in the parts of which the genitals are made and it is caused by many causes: either by acute sharp excess, which is distributed to the genitals, or by concussion.
And the color of the ulcer is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious ulcer.
And when it is fresh, the ulcer is thin, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is caused by a knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those, just as when one has perceived the memory of it; or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the ulcer when you compress it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed at all due to compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that an incision can be made on this type and on the other meats; and you should insert the needle into the genitals, and then extend it to the parts above, and extract that from the white head, and loosen the suspension of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspension further than you loosen it from all parts of the head.
Therefore, if the head is already consolidated with those meats, then you should extract the head and insert that.
And if there is adhesion between the head or between what is between the vessels, then you should loosen all that adhesion and insert it through a round incision.
But if there is flesh growing in the place of the adhesion which is behind it, then you should insert all that is of it and extract the head as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is finished, then fill the ulcer with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then dress it with the other dressing until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the cure of a hernia that is from veins.
Veins are ulcers wrapped in some wrapper resembling swelling with softening of the testicles, and it causes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
And in the cure of this illness there is fear for what it is preceded by memory.
However, let us discuss operation on that one according to how they do the first ones.
And I say that you should have the patient lie on his back on a high bed; then tighten the suspension of the testicles to the parts below; and then insert the needle into the genitals with your fingers at the veins which have been tested with the twig; and hold those others in position as you extend them with violent extension.
And then insert it with a pointed lance through a cross-incision in the right of the vessels, as long as the vessels are exposed.
And then cut off all parts as we have said, in extraction of artery from the temples.
And then insert in those a needle in which there is a double thread, and apply it to the first of the places where veins occur, and apply another one afterwards to the last of them. And then insert those in the middle place by a cross-incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated of foul and corrupt humors.
And then dress the ulcer with dressing of other ulcers in which you want to generate pus for it to fall from the vessels which darken one of two genitals; for that is not bad.
But if veins occur in all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles due to the vessels are privated of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and are withered; or that it is cut off from them.
Chapter 65.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that ends in the head extended over the belly from parts of the anus of the navel, for that breaking the intestines towards some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the head or of incision on it, and these two properties occur for many causes: either concussion, or salt, or cry, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similars.
And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the head, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an ulcer as if the head compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is by incision on the head, for at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is a divers ulcer below, apparently near to the head, and this is due to effusion of the intestine, and the body towards its parts below the incision of the head.
And sometimes it is burst through the intestine by the intestine; and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by ventilation, and sometimes a fissure runs through the intestine, and here it is retained, and it causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and greater pain when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the properties of this illness with iron there is fear; for that you should avoid cauterization on it.
And the manner of operation on it is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at its parts inside the navel if he resists and then lies on his back between your hands, and then elevate his chest.
And then tighten the needle which touches the needle of the testicles to its parts below, and insert the needle of the testicles all the way through it; and then fix in two lips of the incision with hooks according as you open the incision with them.
And you shall make the incision according to the amount that you are able, so that from that space the humor may be expelled.
Then scrape away those membranes which are beneath the skin of the testicles, while the white hard membrane of each part is exposed.
Then you shall insert your finger into the opening of the testicle in that space between the white membrane and the next membrane, and remove with your finger the adhesions which are at the back of the testicle.
Then hold the skin of the testicles to the sides of its openings, and stretch out the white membrane with your left hand, and lift up the testicle by the membrane at the site of the incision; and order the assistant to stretch out the testicle and you dissolve the adhesions behind it with a complete solution.
And make sure that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped up in the white membrane. But if you find a cause, then you shall cut it from below into the belly.
Then pierce in the part below the skin of the testicles through an incision from which blood and pus flow, as we have recommended in what we have said.
Then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the stitch which we have recommended  (and in many times the white membrane is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of it they fear a flow of blood, because sometimes this happens) and leave the stitch so that by itself it falls.
But if the healing of it is delayed, then let it be anointed with oil and place that over it so that it falls according to what we have said.
Then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds, so that it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of a wind hernia.
In this hernia, I have not seen anyone who has been healed on the cure of it with iron.
And the first said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with wine; which is that you sew the vessels near the incision on it with ease of it; and then dry up in the middle place around the abscess with what opened it, so that the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said so that it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the rupture which is done in the testicles.
Sometimes a rupture in the testicles as we have said, and the site emerges.
And do not let any cause of intestines occur to the testes; and if it does occur, that is few; and return back in all hours.
But if the time with that is prolonged, then a fissure is adjusted in the membrane through which the intestine descends into the membrane; and that happens due to the extension of the membrane of the testicles as we have said, which cause is because the membrane is stretched, and then it becomes soft and the site is abscessed and emerges.
And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
And in some times it is cured with iron thus: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dry up the site of the rupture of the abscesses that emerge with an incision according to the width of three fingers.
Then strengthen the white membrane which is below the skin so that it is exposed.
Then take the rod and place it over the prominent site of the membrane, and press it against the bone of the belly.
Then press the two prominent sites on the end of the rod of the membrane and adjust with the suture one of those to the other.
Then pull out the end of the rod and do not pierce the membrane at all, nor extend the intestine, nor any other cause as you have come to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
Then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you pierce the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; because the membrane is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this site because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Many times the skin of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between that is softened, and it is attributed to the guard of it.
Therefore it is necessary for that one who is asked in the cure of it to make the patient lie on his back according to his back, and to put all the skin which is softened onto the natural skin; and then adjust two lips with a stitch.
And if you want, cut in the beginning the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four incisions and with a firm stitch.
Then pierce between the stitches; and then cure by the cure of the other wounds so that it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter 69.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for the cause it is allowed to me that I remind you of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remind it unless by two ways, of which one is so that it is in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he knows its cure if it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other beasts for our youths by them, as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar to beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: or by incising, or by piercing with an incision.
But in that which is done by incising, the path of the operation is to let the beast bleed in water so that its testes are softened and hang down. Then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear below the touch.
But in castration which is done by piercing and incision, keep the beast and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory, and pierce above each wound by an incision so that two wounds are made.
Then pierce those which you will have healed after they are healed. And do not apply anything over the head of those with a headache, but rather use a subtle compress on the temples.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by strangulation, for strong strangulation will leave no cause in the testes that the beast desires coitus.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70:
Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is where there appears a swelling in the space between the testes, in that which is between two testes, a figure like a woman's vulva.
And sometimes urine flows from it, located in the scrotum of the testes.
But in women it is of one kind, and that is that the clitoris on top of the vulva resembles two testes of a man, slightly swollen at the entrance like a foreskin, and has two testes.
And the cure is of three kinds: two from men and one from women. And it is that you should insert those tightly packed tissues until the moisture of that thing escapes, and then cure those with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind of men where urine flows from it and it is in the scrotum of the testes, there is no cure nor incision for it.
Chapter 21:
Of a hernia and prominent flesh due to causes in women.
A strong hernia is tightly packed over natural causes and is stressed, and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like men, and pervades into sexual intercourse.
So if you have the excess of hernia, hold it with your hand or a bandage and insert.
And do not finish the incision, especially in the vein of the artery, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
Then cure that with the cure for wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother and fills it up, and often it is protruded to the openings according to the appearance of a tail (and because of this some earlier writers called it "tailed malady"); therefore we should insert as we do with hernia, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 72:
Of the cure for anus pain.
Anus pain is when the clitoris of a woman is not pierced or has a small hole. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a malady that has preceded it, and that is caused either by tightly packed flesh or by a subtle swelling or thickness.
And it is caused either in the womb of the mother or her ribs or above them or below them, and it prohibits coitus and pregnancy and menstruation, and often prohibits childbirth as well.
And the knowledge of it is gained by examination by the midwife, if the swelling is apparent, then by prodding; but if it is not apparent, then you approach that with your fingers or with a rod.
But if the swelling is due to a subtle compress and it is protruded between the two labia, then you cut and burst that.
And you pause on both labia with your fingers, and then place your fingers indicating the two hands clenched.
And the woman be on her back with her thighs extended, and then extend both labia with force so that subtle compress is broken and the swelling opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over that spot, and keep it wet with a cloth every day so that the cut does not heal up again.
But if the swelling is large and thick, then you should insert that with a spatulum made of wood or a twig of myrrh.
But if the swelling is due to flesh, then suspend it with a bandage and insert that.
And let there be to you the medicines which stop the flow of blood without biting, like aha cataria, and dragon's blood, and onions, tightly bound with white of egg.
And then administer a large leaden cautery so that the wound is not healed superficially.
And keep that for several days and administer heat of lard.
Then it should be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the womb of mothers of others' children, and then you should insert according to this manner. But if it is due to phlegmatic humor, then let the phlegmatic humor not be counteracted by iron in any way.
Chapter 73:
Of the cure for hemorrhoids and of a tail and of red botch which happens in the clitoris of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appearance of orifices of many veins from which blood flows continually from them, and when hemorrhoids are old and they are prolapsed.
And I have already mentioned in the division of those and their signs, and described them as those which received cure and those who did not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear with the sense, then in those let there be no cure with iron.
But those which are in the orifices of the mother above all senses, then those should be cured.
And you shall place the woman in a warm bath and then extend it with the fingers or with a rough cloth, and insert those with the nails.
And then sprinkle over that one of the powders which cause blood flow without biting, like a cassia and its likes.
And then pluck her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then let it be cauterized with a caustic made of sumac and grains and thorns and their likes.
And then take bran of wheat and cook that with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with it over her back.
And if the blood is scanty, let it be; but if not, then let it adhere with two leeches, and to the nipples its excision.
And then take wool and soak it with juice of colandro or with juice of arnagloza or with juice of guara viler made with vinegar, and make it adhere to the spot; and then cure the spot with unguents until it is healed.
And then cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 74:
Of accidental piercing in the womb.
Many kinds of hemorrhoids happen in the womb, like phlegmatic humor and ulcerative apostema and suppurative and gangrenous and fistulas and hemorrhoids and others' apostemas. And I have already mentioned these diseases and their kinds and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And let him ask in this treatment of hemorrhoid cauterized which appears in the womb when it is of hemorrhoids that are prolapsed, and if you want to know in what manner its incision is made with iron.
When you consider that the pain of the pustule in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, then see if there is any swelling and feel it, then do not cut into it, but treat it with what aids in maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And then you make the woman lie on her side with two pillows; recline on her back and adjust her feet to the lowest part of the belly, let her thighs be spread out, and place her arms below her ears, and tie each one with a bandage as appropriate.
Then the midwife stands on the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the womb is made, the shape of which will come in those causes that will be made appropriate.
And when you want to administer this instrument, put the tip of the mother's womb, and what goes into the instrument from the womb should not be more than the width of the mother, and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the width of the womb, then you should put powder on the texture of the width of the womb so that the entry of any instrument into the womb is prohibited.
And you should put the thread that runs through the instrument from the top side, and let the minister have the instrument and turn the thread until the opening of the womb is open.
And when the growth appears and is touched with the hand and is soft and moist, then you should dry the head of it with a broad knife.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you should put in the wound a poultice soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and place the plaster on the section in the womb.
And place wool over the womb and on the pubic region clean wool soaked in water in which there are crushed mallows.
Then it should be treated for two days with a ointment which is appropriate for that until it is healed.
And sometimes the womb and the plaster are washed with water and honey, and then anointed with water in which there is crushed lily or long aristology, and then return to the ointment.
And if the plaster is inside the swollen womb, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, have that treated with what we have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach midwives how the living fetus should be treated when it is born according to an unnatural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman express at the lowest parts and desire to smell the air, and about it is above her on top, and hastens the birth of the fetus, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and is its ejection onto its head, and the second with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore when you see those signs, then the belly of it should be compressed so that the fetus descends gently as it descends over its head, and the second with it or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord, and is cleansed of those superfluities with a good cleansing.
But that which is other than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the fetus exits over its feet and its body exits before its head and its feet, and its hand or to the foot of it .I., or its head and hand exits or to the belly of it, and strongly turned onto its neck, and resembling the figures of it blameworthy.
It is therefore necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she keep from error and deception.
And I will show you all figures of these, and what craft is in those so that it may be signified by that and be established on that.
When the fetus exits over its head by natural exertion, and that is vigorous on the woman and is a difficult birth for it, and sees the strength of it already weakened, then do that , or let the women hold it, and evaporate the heat of it with fenugreek cooked in water and with moist oils.
Then the midwife inserts between its lips a small knife and splits with it the second with it or dries that with her finger within it until it runs that which is within it of moisture. And press the belly of the woman so that it descends the fetus.
But if it does not descend, then let the woman be anointed with mustard and mustard with chickpeas.
And then command it, the midwife, that she be compressed and make her vomit with spice; and stop the mouth of it and its nose for one hour, for the fetus will come out immediately.
And if both hands of the fetus are out at the beginning, then you should reduce those by little with ease. But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a pillow and lift its feet up, and then rock the pillow onto the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the rocking.
And if the hands are not bent back and the fetus is lifeless, then insert those and pull out the limb of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of it with a cloth and pull that equally, for it will come out immediately.
When the fetus exits over its feet, then you should push those up and then turn the fetus a little, and then grasp one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
But when it is inside the thighs, then you command it that it be expressed, and make it vomit with spice, for it will come out if God wills.
And if it is not come out with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little as you place that according to a natural figure, for it will come out immediately with gentle ejection.
And if it is prohibited by everything that we have recommended, then take mustard and dissolved gum, and beat them both in the mortar with a good beating, and apply them to the heat of the woman, to the lowest part of the belly of it. Then make her sweat in lukewarm water so that she acquires the phlegm.
And when you see that the lowest parts of it are softened, then do to it fumigation of myrrh and stop that on it. And when you have done the fumigation for one hour, then make it sweat on a pillow, and then let it vomit and open the mouth of it, and lift from that, and press the lowest part of its belly with gentle compression, for the fetus will come out immediately.
Examine the fester lengthwise with one of your fingers. Try to reduce it with your hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then have her lie on her side, and strike her thighs with a violent concussion, and administer remedies which you have and count from mucilages.
And if childbirth has occurred, then have her lie on her back, and study the reduction of the hand, and open the fester according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and instruct him to compress himself while it is forgotten.
Examine the fester on the neck with your fingers expanded and the fascia of the patient is towards the two of his mother. Have the midwife hold the hand of the fester and gradually roll it, and have that facilitate it.
And when it is open and how much it is, then pause over the navel of the patient what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
And then instruct him to close his hand gradually, and when you have done that, then have her lie on one side and instruct him to be inclined on the right side, and then instruct him to be compressed; and make her sneeze with an onion. Exit of the fetus prepared on the side.
When they are about to exit from the mother according to this manner, consider, and then you insert your second finger with your nail inside so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you insert that of the emblic, so that it is not retained and delayed.
And then press the fetus to the insides within while you pause that according to what it covers, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will exit forgotten with easy exit if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are born many times, and some give birth to three or four, but that is strange and rare; but their causes are nature, and not life.
And count those, whether they are multiples, a second one, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguish those between the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they exit forgotten like a single fetus with easy natural exit, and sometimes they exit with unforgettable exit as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult some of them should give birth and arrive at what we have said about the non-natural shapes, then you treat them as we have recorded.
And if the midwife does what she does with ease and skill, and delay, and is formed according to the whole shape as it is prepared for birth leading to health.
Reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Sometimes they are formed in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten; and I have seen that a woman aborted six, and another ten, all formed, which cause was made by the wise measurement of the glorious doctors.
And all that knowing that it should be in the science of the midwife how strong she is to that small childlike thing, and therefore pause her at that with what she covers.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not extracted, then know that you must use cauterization with fire, then consider if the woman is of sound nature and does not have any of the accidents by which there is feared loss over her.
Then know that the woman should be laid on her side on her back, and her head inclined downward and her thighs elevated.
And the minister should hold that of two parts or be laid on the bed so that the body of the patient does not extend due to the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oiled waters and with mucilage of alder and of fenugreek and of linseed.
And then the midwife holds her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand with ease in the mother, and then close with her hand the place where the nails are in the fetus.
And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over his head, and then you put the nails in the hollows of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the armpit, or in close places of the ribs, or below the hips.
But if the descent is over the feet of him, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
And know that he has the nail with his right hand, and pause the bending of him in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and insert your hand with ease and put the nail in some of those places which we have said, so that it arrives at the desired cause.
And then pause and put in the opposition of him another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that there is equal attraction, and not extension according to its straightness only.
And then it is closed at all parts, so that the exit of him is drawn back as it is done in tooth extraction.
And know in him that the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then know that the midwife anoint some of his fingers with oil and insert that wisdom and turn with those what is retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the nails are moved into place where it is pushed out; and do that so that all the fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is extracted in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then know that cloth be wrapped over that; and then extract that so that all is forgotten, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And know that you do likewise in the other hand and in both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or happens to him contraction in the exit, or there is water in his head tightly closed, then know that you insert between the fingers aspium spinosum and split the head and extract the water, or cut that with an instrument which is named "alundat", the shape of which comes with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And do likewise if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then know that insert that with alum, or take that with forceps as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
If the head is drawn back and pressed against the collarbone, then the moisture in the feet should be released.
But if it is not complicated and there is no obstruction, then you should turn the head immediately as soon as it is possible for you.
And if the bottom of the abdomen is swollen or fluid-filled, then pierce it so that the moisture inside can flow out.
But if the gout is in your feet, then the attraction of it is weaker and its direction towards the mouth of the mother is weaker.
But if it is pressed against the abdomen and the feet, then cover that area with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and pierce the abdomen and the feet so that what is inside them can flow out.
But if the other members are cut off and the head is turned, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert the hand into the air sac, and surround that area with her hand, and pull it towards the mouth of the mother using those fingers, and then insert a thumb or two thumbs into it and move it around with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is blocked by a swelling that occurs due to an ulcer, then it should not be pressed on; instead, administer the application of moist and fatty causes. And apply poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if it is on their side, then if possible, let it be tied down; and what we have said about the live foot should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into pieces, and extracted.
And so that no cause remains within the second part.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of ulcers that arise in the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and on that fire another pregnant one was placed, and the dead fire was the other fetus. It happened to her after a long time that there was an ulcer in her abdomen; and it inflated so that the fire opened up, and it began to spit out flames.
And I was called upon to heal it, and I treated it for a long time, but the ulcer did not heal.
Then I placed some poultices with strong attraction on it, and extracted a bone from it; and after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was very astonished that there were bones in the abdomen.
And then I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I opened up the ulcer and extracted many bones from her, and the woman remained in the same condition for a long time, recovering a little from the vomiting of flames.
And I did not think that this was strange, but rather that there is knowledge and aid in it for what the doctor does with his hand for healing.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of opening with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of a strainer in which the lips are curved, and to that curvature there are two virtues at both ends of the two edges. But this virtue should be made more subtle with a tight-fitting, and it should be made of ivory or wood.
And the thickness of each stalk is as wide as two fingers and the rim of each is as wide as one finger, and the length of each is about a hand and a half; and in the middle part of the two stalks there are two adjustment holes of those stalks which have been fastened, and their length is about a palm and a little more, and the thickness of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened by them when you rotate those two prescribed virtues.
Other form, resembling that one but more subtle and longer:
It is made of ivory or wood according to the resemblance of forceps. But at the end of it there are two additions like a comb, and the length of those additions is about a hand, and the thickness of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with them, then have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you do with tweezers according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth, in such a way that the midwife does what you want her to do.
The form of a strainer which the ancients described:
Form of a lever with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of a screw with which the large head is crushed:
And it is like forceps with which the teeth are placed in the end, just as you do with forceps according to this form; and some times there is a long one made just like forceps, just as you do with forceps, whose teeth are placed just like the teeth of pliers. Form of a screw with few turns:
Form of an awl having one point:
Form of an awl having two points:
Form of a chisel having two edges with which the head is split:
Form of two broad chisels:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more polished and prepared by the artisans, then they are easier to operate and better for men because of their quantity.
And you should not be without those instruments, for the need for them is inexcusable.
Of extraction of the afterbirth:
When the afterbirth is retained after childbirth, then command the woman to retain her urine, and then make her vomit with cold water, and if it is excreted in this way, it is good.
And if not, then take a towel and pierce the covering with a hole, and place on it herbs that open the mouth of the mother, just as you do with pepper, and rue, and anise, and camomile, and aromatic plants, and cassia wood, and saintwood. All these herbs or some of them are to be immersed in water in the towel, and place that on the fire.
And then place a funnel of reed in the mother's mouth, and hold it so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make her vomit just as we have said, and the afterbirth will come out forced with velocity.
But if this treatment is applied and it has not been effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in mustard water, and then place it in the birth canal and feel for the afterbirth, and when you have found it, extract it little by little according to the degree that the mother does not suffer a violent attraction. Before anything else, make sure the patient is moved to their right and left sides with ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended a cure with snuff and medication of the gum with herbs.
But if it is not cured by all the causes we have recommended, then beware that you do not tire yourself out with iteration of abstraction, but rather, whatever comes out of him to the mother' mouth, place it in the woman's lap; and then christen it with ointment and tetrapharmacon. For this will cause it to rot in a few days, and be dissolved and cured.
But when it rots, there is bad odour that rises to the head and stomach, and this hurts the patient; and then one must administer sub-fuming and convenient remedies for this.
But some of the Ancients have been experienced in sub-fuming with nithy-tort and dry figs.
Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumed, for the retention of menses and secondina:
It must be made of brass or bronze.
And its subtle end is placed in the vulva, and its wide end over the fire; and the sub-fuming is placed over the embers of the fire.
And have another one ready that is consumed by that sub-fuming, and iterate another.
Of cure of the child' anus not perforated:
Some infants are born and their anuses are not perforated; thus, one should gently open them up and lubricate them. And then, if the midwife perforates it with her finger, that is fine; but if not, perforate it with a sharp spatulum, and beware of touching the testicles.
And then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then place a cannula in there for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And it sometimes happens that the anus is obstructed by a clot or by pus; then one must split that clot and cure it as we have said before about the cure and the plomb.
Of cure of fistulas that occur from there below:
The fistulas that occur below in the lower part are a swollen and thick node, which occurs near the anus or in the space between one part.
And it is a fistula, or several of them.
And when that node becomes old and runs with the white or yellow pus, then sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the exit and through flatulence; and sometimes it uses the patient' exit, and often it is expelled from there as worms.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the bladder, and into the urethra; and sometimes they penetrate in between the junction of the hip and into the navel.
And what is known as a penetrating fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, is to put your finger in there, and insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not painful.
But if it is painful, then insert a subtle probe of lead or horsetail into there while you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel anything at all and there is no sign of defecation or worms or flatulence, then know that it is not penetrating; then go to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra, then its meaning is the excretion of urine from there and prohibition of it so that medicine does not consolidate there.
But if it is penetrating into the hip joint or into the bone and there is pain in the hip, then its sign is that the probe goes in there if in the bone it is not painful, and there is pain in the circuit of the part; and from there you see pus coming out; and when medicine does not help there, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure of those is hard work and skill of the experienced doctors on which one must rely.
But in that which is not penetrating and does not become old, healing with iron is expected according to what you recommend, and that which one has tried and proven.
And the patient lies on his back with his knees raised up under him, his hips bent towards his stomach, and then insert a probe of lead or brass into there if it is painful in the anus; and know the place where the probe goes through.
And if he feels that around his neck, then have him lie on his side with his neck bent.
And if you feel the probe already inserted there pushing to penetrate, or else that which one feels between his finger and it swells up or hardens, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not worry about it, for there is no cure for that, as we have said.
But nevertheless, some say that it is healed in some people.
And of the medicine by which it is hoped for in some people, it is that you light a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula; and insert that heated one into there when it comes around the neck; and then iterate that two or three times until you know that all those swollen and clotted fistulas that seem like reed pipe are completely healed.
And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool over there while you have healed all those clotted meats that are healed up; and then cure it with medicines that generate and consolidate meat, and if it is healed, well; but if not, it will not be healed at any time by any other cure.
And if the probe goes in there and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a swelling or hardening of meat or swelling, and sometimes the fistula on where it touches the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying by the probe; and the fistula is released and cut through.
And then cleanse those fistulas that are like reed pipe of goose feather and do not split from any cause.
But if blood flows out between you and the probe when you insert those meats, then the milk that is and of the pus the sharp instrument cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire is good for both habits: it is hardening of those clotted meats, and abscision of the blood from the drying of the moistness.
And then cure that with waters wrapped in wool over there while the place is heated with a brazen or iron rod; and then cure the wound with ointment of hard meats that generate and consolidate.
And then medicines in which there is contraction and drying; when it is restored, then it is healed and do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula already goes into the anus and is elongated from there on the surface of the body, then insert your finger in there and probe it.
And so if you examine and there is a membrane or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then there is no operation on him, but rather according to the way of trust and hope.
This condition can be treated in three ways: cauterize the wound as we have said; cut away the tissue around the cavity to make it easier for you to enter and clean the wound, but do not cut into the sac containing the testicle, and let the patient move freely so that the hernia slips back inside without his realizing it; then treat the wound with what we have described, and the patient will be quickly healed. Or lengthen the membrane and drain the pus from the cavity near the anus as we have said, either with a probe or some other sharp instrument; then clean the fistulous sores in the tissue around the anus, which you can reach by piercing through the flesh, and try to restore the entire wound with sutures. If the opening above is not healed and the fistula remains open at the base of the scrotum, and pus continues to flow from the patient, Sometimes the fistula is cured in this way: when you insert a probe into the fistula, if there is an abscess on the side of the buttock, near the surface of the body and on the edge of the buttock, take a probe with a perforated tip, like a needle used to pierce ears, as follows:
and insert it into the abscess wrapped in a piece of cloth or around that area; then insert the probe all the way into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if the probe goes through the edge of the buttock near the anus, then withdraw the probe from that wound and insert your finger into the anus; then pull out the probe's tip and hold its two ends together, and tie them tightly, leaving it in place for a day or two. When you reinsert the probe into the tissue, be sure to pierce the flesh between the two ends of the probe so that they are held firmly in place.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not pierced, then make it pierceable in some way, as long as you do not harm the testicle; then treat the wound until it is healed.
The shape of the spathum spine with which the fistula is split: one side is very sharp and the other side is not sharp, so that you do not pierce anything that should not be pierced, as we have said before.
Suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those.
There are two types of hemorrhoids: some are like warts around the anus, and others are like fat from bacon. They can be small or large; blood flows from them at times and they are one, and they are found outside the anus and on its edges.
However, those that are outside the anus are according to their degree of humidity; from them flows water or a little blood with continuous pus, and they are according to the color of the flesh.
The treatment for those inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and squeeze until the hernia slips out and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you grab and suspend them with your nails or what you have those with your fingernail, and then pierce them to their roots.
But if the nails are not held in those due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a sharp cloth or a strip of linen or woolen cloth, and pull them out with your fingers, and then pierce them and pour some powdered alumen over them near the incision, so that they may be as cauterized; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the ejection, then anoint the patient with ointment in which there is a little bit of bite, and let him be washed with that water which is in the anus, and let him squeeze himself so that he ejects it quickly when he squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is looseness, and it is that you grab them with your fingernail, or that you grab them with a nail, and pierce them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And whoever has an incision, be sure to administer sutures for them in this way: take a piece of cloth wrapped around the probe and insert that into the needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their upper parts; then pierce the other end of the cloth with the needle into the root on the other side, and wrap the two ends of the cloth around the needle, lengthwise; then squeeze the hemorrhoid tightly and pull out the needle.
And do this to all of them, and let one of them be empty and not clotted, so that the excess blood flows from it.
Then apply to the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerotum; and let him apply that to the anus and command him to rest. Then let it remain until it comes out; and when it is healed, treat those with ointment or with another treatment until they are healed.
And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then be sure to pierce them with the tip of a spathum or with your fingernail until they become moist and let the escoria fall from above, which prevents their healing; then treat them until they are healed.
Then you pierce them with a very strong razor so that they bleed and become excoriated; then treat them until they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids, it is a key, and it is not unless around the anus according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body and mainly in the lower parts under the feet and on the fingers, and from there you should feel pain.
And then be sure that what is in the circle of the nail is pierced and held with tweezers or nails, and pulled out from its root; then treat it.
And if you want, cauterize them according to what is preceded in your chapter.
But a wart is a small, round, sharp, fistulated eminence on the surface of the body; many times it comes to children's hands.
And its treatment is that you stretch and pierce it, or squeeze it with a needle or a hair until it comes out. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
But a furuncle is a small, hairy, and fistulated tumor on the surface of the body; it occurs in the groin, and when rubbed produces a pain similar to that bitten by an ant; and it is made around the body.
And its treatment is to take a needle of goose or vulture feather and pierce it strongly, and apply that to the furuncle so that it contains the circle of the needle; then turn your hand with the needle so that you pierce what is in the circuit of the furuncle, and let him hold his hand over the flesh, and pull out the furuncle from its root.
And if you want, do this with a tube of silver or iron in this way:
Let the tube's end be drawn out to thinness, not puncturing (so that it is not punctured), wrapped up so that over the said joint its appearance is smoothed and the revolution of that.
And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what was said above in the cauterization section of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries.
Of the form of the instruments which are administered to give relief.
Sometimes, relief is given with silver or brass or molten lead or hammered; and sometimes the instruments are made small and large according to those who administer them, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are sore or painful, the relief from those should be small.
The form of large relief and few:
The head of the tube in which the bag is tied, above it should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction to it where the bag is tied like that.
And the end of it further down, which is inserted into the buttock, should be closed  (so that it is not opened) very little, widening to thinness; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and thicker a small.
And let the bag in which there are placed medicines from the bladder of an animal or wool of a sheep, and its length be one palm.
And let it be perforated by many holes like that as it is turned around; and if the space between the holes, the thickness of the said.
And let it be inserted into those holes strong gall of strong bile which is from ten galls, or surround them with it; and adjust to it the bag; and when it is placed on him the bag, let it be tightened at the head of the relief between two distinct areas with strong constriction, and then relieve with it each hole: But the quality of relieving with it is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too cold nor too hot.
And let the patient be reclined on his back, and raise his legs up and place underneath him a bed on which there are already men or a bedpan; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or of similar things; and then insert that into the buttock with ease, and let the minister hold the bag and squeeze it with both hands and press with strength between them until everything that is in the relief is evacuated into the intestine; and then take out the relief and let the patient lift his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that out, let him hold it as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for an entire night, it is better to wait in healthiness.
But if you relieve that in the illnesses of soluation of belly and its outflow cuts it, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the buttocks are hemorrhoids or painful bumps, then let the relief be very thin and closed, of those reliefs by which children are relieved.
Of the cure of the ulcers.
I have already said in the division of the cure of ulcers what suited the liver, and so I say the cure of those with hand and medicines according to the completion.
Therefore I say that ulcers are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place on which the plaque has fallen.
And the causes for which many times ulcers are made are thus with stone's bruising or incision of a sword or spear, or blow with a staff or arrow, or similar things to those from many causes.
But the ulcers that are in places of the body are thus with plaque which falls on the head or neck or foot or belly or hip and similar things to those of the members.
And I am commanding the cure for some ulcers that you ponder that reflection and rule on the other ulcers.
And I will begin with simple ulcers of the head because the memory of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when it happens in the head simple plaque and there is not a fracture, then consider: if it is with bruising of stone or similar thing, and already the tendon has only been stretched and it is great plaque and you fear over that patient having hemorrhoid cauterization, then you cut and phlebolize the cephalalgia right away, and do not delay that; and draw from him blood according to the quantity of his strength if there is not any prohibitive cause of phlebotomy, especially if the blood which comes out of the plaque is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the part which is plastered; and let the patient abstain from repletion and wine and thick foods.
But if because of the minor cause any prohibition, then let him be diminished in food and not approach meat or wine.
And place on the plaque, if to him happens hemorrhoid cauterization, cut it in boiling oil only or in wine in which is dried.
But if he is sure of hemorrhoid cauterization, then place on the plaque if it is fresh with his blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend then smaller.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on it dry alkanet until it is healed.
But if the plaque is great or is with incision of a sword and similar things, and its lips are not closed by threads, then close those with suture according to what I recommend for the suture of them.
But if the plaque is uncovered of bone and tendon, and there is not retention of it except a small suspensory, then insert that and then cure the plaque with medicines and restore the meat by cutting in the place of tendon, and command to the patient that he abstain from foods in which there is thickness: heads and formen meat and similar things to them, until it is compounded.
And if you find in the tendon putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then you insert all that is rotted and cut that, and then cure it.
But if in these ulcers there is artery or vein from which flow of blood can come and it is not cut off by medicines, then you clamp on the artery and if it is uncut then you insert that with spatulas, or ligate that; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said not to bring about, then cauterize until the blood is cut.
And if these ulcers are simple and small, then the cause of them is chilliness; so that you pulverize over those this powder because when the air changes that.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of sesame seeds one part, dragon's blood two parts, and un-extinguished coagulant three parts; let all be very well pounded and sifted, and then the ulcer to be filled with that, and let it be bound with good constriction so that it adheres, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And then tighten that below with powder and let it be licked, and do not loosen it while this is thus because it is not cauterized, for the medicine does not pass through there until it is healed.
And sometimes it does this on its own, when you are not there to help and there is no dragon's blood.
And this dressing is also performed on large wounds when it is appropriate to place them on those and they are tight, and on recent wounds that have not been altered by air.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, it is not advisable to apply this powder, but instead heal them with what we have already said by placing on those wounds some healing ointments, or applying on these pulses of flour from a fennel plant mixed with water and honey, which creates a poultice; and also heal them with the other cure until they are healed.
But if there is a fracture in the bone along with the wound and it is small, then you should remove it with tweezers.
And I will discuss the cure for fractured skulls where there is poisoning.
Of wounds in the neck.
But if a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from wounds on the head when they are simple.
But if the nerve in the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve there should be no cauterization but rather healing with something that causes strong contraction such as vinegar and vitriolic substances similar to these because they do harm to nerves and counter the pain. And put nothing hot on the wound because the substance of the nerves is hot and its continuation goes to the brain which is the source of all members.
And if it is treated with light medicines such as causing washing with tepid water, or with some vegetable juice infused in rosin oil or not, and thucia when it is washed with tepid water and the other stones are reduced according to this manner, and ointments moistened.
But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or bring together its lips and heal it with powders until it is healed.
But if there is depth to the wound or pus occurs in it from a low boil, then pierce that area in the lowest part.
But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then stop it or dry it up, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity prompts you to do so.
But if the joints of the neck have been cut or all of it, and the veins in the neck are saved, then you should bring together the lips of the wound with suturing above the joint of the neck and not touch that; move it back into its natural position, and return it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with decent constriction, and let it heal for several days; and heal it with ointments in which there is contraction and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound is made in bone with depression, then pierce that area and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all those which you can; and let that which does not appear to be healed, heal within that area where the wound becomes pus-filled, and let the pus separate from it and its pain lessen.
And if the wound is fresh then powder it with that powder which was recommended to you. But if a fistula occurs in the wound then heal it with something whose memory will come shortly in this chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or arrow and you see the depth of it then consider that if the wound has swelling when the patient breathes then know that the wound is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its blood then you should put powder on it from the first hour and not constrict it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returned to the heart and harm the patient, but put an attracting ointment on it and loose it two times a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you then you should put on the wound's orifice a piece of old cloth so that it sucks what is inside from humidity; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that what is inside is expelled.
But if three days or more have passed and the patient does not experience spasms or tremors of the heart or constriction of the soul, and sees the other good dispositions of it then know that the wound is saved; and then heal it with hot water and with the other cure until it is healed.
But if its healing is delayed and all the time it remains open then know that a fistula has occurred; then heal it according to this chapter.
And if the wound is from a spear or arrow and it is simple on the surface of the foot or heel then heal it with that which comes before suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if there is depression in the bone and pieces of it are pushed in then you should twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated then let them heal within that area where the wound becomes pus-filled for their extraction is lessened.
And for other accidental wounds in other members the method of cure is the method which we have said.
Of wounds to the belly.
The disposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
And small disruption is made difficult in another manner and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not cut off the intrusion of them to their place at once because it opens and is swollen so that the insertion of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling because in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult as it is in the two aforementioned species.
And know that there are four methods of suturing the belly, but two sutures are common to other wounds in the body.
And two other sutures which are proper to others wounds, but nevertheless are proper only to suturing of the belly.
And I have told you everything with explanation and description.
Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is some cause from the intestine through it and it is made difficult to reduce it then it is in one of two ways: or by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the intestine is given inflammation by cold air.
And therefore when it is thus then you should warm that in such a way that you soak a sponge or cloth moistened with tepid water only by itself, or that you gather in squinant water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations on the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this with the quality that has contraction and is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
And therefore when you see inflammation resolved then you should moisten the intestine with water in which is mixed alder and mallows because by this it is eased the insertion of it with little cause.
But if it is necessary to withdraw his bowels for this treatment, then cut the rupture with a small instrument with which you can incise hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is not cutting, and there is no occupation in stopping the bleeding by necessity and deflation.
As for the instrument, look at its shape:
One side of it is bent and acute, and the other side not acute, and its end thin, and not with the thinness of a spatula, rather it should be blunt a little.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then its reduction should be according to its natural shape in its proper place, if it is possible on that, for it is better.
But when the rupture is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs above; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you put his head and chest above the parts below.
And likewise if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pay your intention and attention to that so that the part where the wound is is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this for large wounds and small wounds.
And for small wounds, put on what is prepared for you, and let the minister hold it between his fingers, who has the wound all in his hand and hold the lips of it, and appropriately uncover from that to that which sews the suture any cause or other.
And this is the manner of common suture: one which you take the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and let go from the end of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, another that you do not put thread in both ends of the cord, with two ends of the tape that is under the cord of the parts inside, as you make her penetrate from that part; and you have already added two ends of the cord and two ends of the tape, and so are made four orders.
And let go with double thread around the needle, and some times of two parts together, and let us add both lips and the wound by decent addition; and let go the thickness of the little finger and take another needle in that, and tie that with thread thus as it is with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And let the needles be smaller between thickness and thinness, for the thin needles enter the flesh lightly; and the thick ones are of difficult use in the cord, and therefore let them be smaller in thinness and thickness.
And let the needle not be put in two ends of the cord next to it, for fear that the flesh is lightly inscribed and that the wound opens before its consolidation.
And let them not be prolonged in suture so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
And let the ends of the needles be inscribed so that they do not irritate the patient during his sleep; and put over the suture powdered expandants from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and take them away when you know that the wound is consolidated.
And this kind of suture with needles in what way is more convenient for small wounds, for it reaches in the suture of them one needle or two or around them.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four ends, of the cord and two ends of the tape, in one go, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped both in thinness and thickness.
And let when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that meted part of which you began, so that the thread drawn box the more superficial part to the wound, so that the suture is according to a cloth stitch by which the cloths are tightened.
And put between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture know men.
And with this suture I healed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, for he had been stabbed with an arrow, and it was a rupture of two fingers width, and it had exited the intestines around two inches from the intestine of the middle place, and it was a rupture in the middle of the leg; and then I reduced it after the intestine had exited the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I healed him, and he stayed for a long time, and is conversed in his dispositions.
And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle he was cured, for I did not heal him with ointment, but put on the wound cotton wool two times a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
But I will say two kinds of proper suture according to the narrative of Word.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the cord, and interlace the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates in the cord and in that you have made holes according to rectitude and length of all the body, and let go the end of the tape in which you have put the needle; and make it penetrate from the other end the needle from the inner part to the outer part in the other end of the mihat.
And so when you have made it penetrate, then let us make it penetrate another time in that meted end of the mihat from the outer part to the inner part; and let go the end of the tape which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the inner part to the outer part.
And make it penetrate with that your penetration with which you make it penetrate in the tape in the end of the mihat, which is in the party of him, so that everything penetrates.
And let us begin from this meted side, and draw that with the end which is of the tape on the other side, and take out the needle from the cord which penetrates, and let us reduce it in that cord and press the end of the tape which is on the other side with this end of the mihat; and draw that from the cord which is of the part of him.
And do this one and another, and do one again and then another until you sew all that is out according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with the suture of skin with which you sew the skin, indeed that you sew the tape one time from the end of the cord, and let us take that other time so that you finish it.
But the second kind of proper suture which I say is called Gualia, and it is of the bowels of him and by him wound, is that you sew that according to similitude with which I have mentioned medicine sews that, indeed that you add all parts to their proper comparison to him conveniently by nature; and apply one end of him to another end of the mihat and that is done according to that I have to you.
Place the needle at the end of your sight, near the edge of the wound, and make it penetrate inside to the depth of that sun, and touch the two ends of the cicatrix; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside on both ends of the cicatrix.
Then turn those scars, and make some of them penetrate from the inside to the outside on both ends of the wound that is in the opposite side.
And this way of suturing is better than common suturing, and it is the suturing from which I derive my memory.
This is the speech of Gallia
And some say that stomach suturing is done with two needles; you should insert a needle in each of these and start with the needle nearest to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who cut up bodies along the middle.
And know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, then its suturing is more difficult than that of other parts of the belly.
But the judgment of medicine for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
And its cause is that when you find the plague new with its blood before the air alters it, and you return the intestine and cook it and prepare it decently, then place upon it a carnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place upon it some unguents which are at your disposal inside so that they make a hard stone and enclose the puss, and are consolidated cicatrix and wound; then heal it just as is the healing of the other plagues until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place upon it immediately, as soon as it begins to suppurate blood and pus, change it twice a day, morning and evening, according as you are taught, until it is healed; for you should not use other medicine in different dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the principal members, then take lamb's wool and soak it in oiled quality or in oiled rosewater, and place it around the places which are between the angles and under the heels.
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, how many times this happens, then anoint that with black styptic wine of Tebes, and especially if the putrefaction is produced in the intestine and there is an exit opening into its cavity.
And know that that which is of the gross intestine is easier to heal than that which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing when the intestine which is called "gut" does not receive healing of plague that boxes in it from all sides; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that are in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of proximity of that to nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the tissue, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the intestines similarly.
But if it has passed into space and is already made black or dark, then you should constrict that with puss on the place that is blackened by it, so that there comes a flow of blood from the tissue in which there are veins and arteries.
Then insert that which is another that, and place the two ends of the puss pendent from the edge below the plague opening it, so that upon you is alleviated the attraction of it because of the descent of the tissue and emission of blood of the plague.
Memory of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some people; therefore, because he had the plague in his belly with a lance-wound and the plague was on the right part of the stomach, and the plague was old and made fistula, and he passed gas and ventosity from it.
Then he followed the healing of it even though he was not confident in its healing, but he continued to sutilize that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
And he put that which he saw the place already consolidated, he waited on the patient in whose belly he had received harm because of an accident of evil; and he did not receive any harm from that evil accident, and remained in his many dispositions eating and drinking, and he went into bath and was exercised in his limbs.
And some experienced people have said that when plague happens in the intestine and it is small, then it should be bound according to this way: and it is that you take herbs of great heads; then tie the two lips of the plague and place one of those herbs which has an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; then when he takes on those and tightens his mouth, cut off the head of it, for it will adhere and not be dissolved.
Then place another worm near the first one, and do not cease doing this with worms one after another according to the quantity of all the plague.
Then return that and cook the plague; and let those heads attach in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and no harm will happen to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be bound with a subtle puss which is made from the intestine of beast added to it, because it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of those intestines of intestine and make much of it naked, and then bind the end of it with puss of it, wrapped, and then insert that needle and cook with that the intestine, and reduce that into the disruption.
And this way of suturing with worms is nothing but according to way of confidence and hope.
But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then it is nothing but subtilization, and not healing of it completely.
Of healing of ulcer and fistula.
Know that any plague and apostema when it becomes soft and old, and is made ulcer, and not consolidated and suppurates, then, in whatever member it is, universally is named fistula and we call that as "sucker."
And fistula according to truth is knotted phlegm, hard, white with which there is no pain and to which is cavity just as is cavity of bone of donkey; and because of that it is named  "rizat", that is bone.
And it is in some people moist, which suppurates blood; and strongly its moisture is discharged in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is gross, and it is subtle.
Now I have shown all of those causes, their signs, and their cure by medicine in the division.
And now so that you know the cure for a fistula which is caused through an operation with the hand.
And know that fistulas occur in all the body's parts; some of those are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or brain, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the compound joints consisting of bone and skin. And there are others that occur near the main body part they resemble.
And therefore those of these fistulas that follow this manner are illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places I have mentioned, and you expect and believe in its cure, and wish to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, then probe it with this.
But if the fistula is winding, then investigate it with a probe made of thin lead, for lead, by virtue of its light body, is drawn and bent according to the windings.
And if the fistula has horrific movements, then it is not for you to give a sign of it with a probe.
Therefore, christen the opening for its openings, for the moisture by which you cleanse that will go through the other openings and flow out of them.
And then inquire closely according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know whether here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula' s cavity is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula whose openings are all at one end, and it is according to your entire strength that you probe the patient, and the discovery of pain according to your compression with your hand over the area, and similar to the signs and the accidental causes of the apostema.
And when you have stood over all these causes with true standing, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is apparently near or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of those places which I have told you about.
Then you dry up the fistula according to what has been said before about its narrative, and stop up that which is in that filtration and of rotten flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh, or of thinness and of similar, and cure that within which is healed.
But if the fistula is of distant depth and is straight, then know that you must insert that into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron, as far as it is possible for you to go, and then cleanse that of all its rotten flesh; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula.
And do that with it several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
Then restore that with ointments which bring about healthy flesh within that is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize that according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and that is certified by you, then you probe and dry up that according to what we have recommended, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or main body part as we have said.
But if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then you remove that all the way until the corruption is entirely stopped up; and then cure that with what causes flesh within to be healed.
And if it is not healed and the arm hangs as before, then know that you have not attained to the total eradication of the corruption; then uncover it again and do the reason for it and cleanse it with your greatest strength, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, then that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and then you have nothing to do with that but to leave it alone.
And if the rotten bone is small, or it is possible for you to pull it out, then you pull it out with thin forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then you make the extraction of all those with your greatest strength and do not leave any cause behind.
But if you encounter any counteraction by the moisture, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then insert those with laments or flesh if they are here, and loosen the bones.
But if you are not prepared to stop up the bones at that time, then pause over the wound what will poultice it, and leave that until the pulp is at the environment of those bones of flesh and of laments, and guard the wound so it is not consolidated but restricted by the incision which you have made in your operation.
Have you, if you fear, pause over it a cloth drenched in oil or a cloth drenched in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments; for when those laments will rot and the bones are separated from that ablation and that attraction is eased.
But if it is a great bone like the bone of the arm or of the thigh or similar to those, and that which is rotten in it is its fascia only, then remove that with resin only behind so that the blackness and corruption are stopped up, and then restore the wound.
But if that which is rotten in it is a great part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then the necessary cause is to close that and to cut that all the way into the area where the corruption has been reached, and then cure that within so that it is consolidated.
And I have told you that you should ask from one man in his thigh so that he will offer aid and assistance to your operation.
A young man about thirty years of age to whom joint pain occurred in his head and the mucous membrane inside is swollen into the matter within the head where the matter has reached the head, and it is matter of apostema with great apostema and there was not to him an extrinsic cause.
And then the time was prolonged by that because of the mistake of the doctors until the apostema was opened, and there occurred in him many openings through which all the humors of the body flowed out, and his cure was then stopped up so that the thigh was fistulated, and there were in him horrific openings through which all the fluids of the body flowed out.
And then he was treated by many doctors for about two years, and there was not in those the wisdom of the bone within the joint where he had been called.
And they saw his thigh and the matters flowing out of it from those openings because of the great body; and indeed that man' s body was entirely swollen and his color was yellowish.
And then they inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone.
And then they probed all the openings and found that they came from all parts of the thigh.
And then they cut and inserted into one of those openings where I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten, and indeed it was earthy and rotten and blackened; and there was already a part of the thigh rotted where it had penetrated within the membrane.
And then I tied what was uncovered and prepared of the exposed bones.
And I saw that it was not in the bone, but that corruption which had separated and I tied off, and which I had already cut away.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
And then I tied and uncovered the bone again upon the first uncovering, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I tied that which appeared to me of that corruption, and then I saw it was fitting to do the cure and restoration of him, and he was not restored.
And then I uncovered him another way and did not cease to pierce the small bone little by little particularly and perfumed his restoration, and he was not restored until I had pierced around one palm of him, and that which I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate the operation upon him or his sectioning except by the disposition of his sickness and by the lack of his tolerance and fear of death, for he became lethargic at all hours due to excess evacuation.
And therefore he is healed by whole healing, and nothing is in the place of bone or hard flesh; and his disposition in his body has returned to its virtue, and his dispositions are converted and no contrariness was made to him in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in the place of the body having been pulled out, then know that you should section it secondly in this manner: and take linen and tie that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that in his hand; and pause that linen of woolen thread over the flesh which is below the bone, and extend its extremity so as to pull the flesh back to the parts below, and you uncover the flesh over the place where you wish to cut so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And pause a post or table below the bone properly, for when you do that it is not prohibited that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And know that the sawing is upon the corrupted place little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone and corruption does not appear in its appearance to the sense, then force its cutting another way.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, before it is one party continued with another, and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; and then pause a post below, and saw that from the first party where the corruption is while the sawing continues through the other party.
And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, enter that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not reason in him but foolishness.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, know that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open that, and cut it according to any disposition which is possible for you, and with whatever foolishness is rectified for you, when it does not make a contrariness vein or nerve.
And know that the saws and the saws for cutting these bones are very according to the situation of those bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that when you prepare for any kind of operation, convenient instrument for that operation.
And know that that operation signifies for you on the kind of instrument of which you are in need; when with you is great study and length and knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of illnesses, for then you have by your parents that which is convenient to him of the instruments to every illness.
And I shall tell you at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use with simples by which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Form of saw:
Form of other saw:
Form of another great saw:
Form of file: Let the head of this file be according to the form of a key star, and its points according to the form of the points of the saw.
And it does not behoove that with that are rubbed the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the great mouth wide.
Form of smaller razor:
Form of broad razor:
Form of another saw properly made: let it be made bow-shaped on the upper part and the acuity of it of iron, and its member of a boy's dagger properly made. Its form:
Form of razor in which it has a concavity:
Form of other subtle razor:
Form of other razor with a curved extremity:
Form of small razor resembling a tent:
Form of other smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembling a file, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the reason of bones:
Form of file which befits the piercing of bones:
And its extremity is triangular and of acute extremity.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly know that all the causes that we have said of saws and of incisers and of saws.
Of incising extremities and of the sawing of bones.
The extremities become pus or by an intrinsic cause or by an external cause, or when you have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not correspond, or sometimes the corruption goes down from the member where there was no cutting cause, then know that you incise that member where the corruption is located, for that the patient escapes by death or by malice which is the greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that·the member is made black as if it were burned by fire, or it becomes pus properly the blackness within as the swelling, and therefore cut off from that.
And similarly if it is a cause of the corruption by shock of some poisonous causes as of scorpion sea or of adder or of centipede or of scorpions, then cut off from that.
And if the corruption or the shock is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption for that it goes into the hand.
And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the knuckle of the fire-bone, and do not give space to the corruption for that it goes into the arm.
And if instead you incise the arm within at the elbow in the joint.
And if another goes through and turns around the elbow, then in that is the death of the patient; and another cause another cure quantity of virtue.
And similarly do the foot when corruption comes through the finger of the foot, then you incise that within at one of the toes.
And if it affects the shoulder, then cut into the entire shoulder. But if it can be seen in the groin, then cut into the groin up to the joint of the hip.
And if the corruption has already reached the hip, then in this case there is no cure but to release the patient and let him die.
And the way of cutting or binding the joint is to tighten the ligament at the part lowest down, which you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over it; and extend a ligament to the parts below, and extend the other one above; and separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that all the flesh might be exposed, and then let it be cut or bound.
And whatever is placed on top of the wound must not touch the wound itself but be applied with a dressing and bandage tightly so that there might come to the patient a wound healed and clean.
But if there is bleeding from the wound, then cauterize it or place some powders upon it which stop the flow of blood; and return to your medicine until it is complete.
And bind the wounded member with a ligature in whatever way you consider appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
And I remind you to do what happened to a man on his foot, this accident which I and you recorded; the man got blackness in his foot from burning which was like fire.
And that corruption began in his toe so that it affected his whole foot.
And then that man prepared for himself remedies before the cure went to the member in its intensity of pain and burning; he cauterized that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
That man had been suffering from that disease in his hand's toe for a long time.
And then he came to me, and so I made him remove that excess by what I applied to his hand with remedies; and the cleansing of his body was not successful, and the excess did not cease but began to go into the other toe as it had begun in the hand.
And he implored me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping for the removal of that excess, but fearing the cutting of his hand because the strength of the patient was over his body.
And when he despaired of me, he returned to his own land and got there that man who prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except so that it might be an helper for those who suffer from this disease and a sign by which it might be recognized and understood.
Of the cure of wounds and the quality of blistering with medicines.
When there is an abscess on some fleshy part and the space of the abscess is prolonged so that it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and opened up, and the pus is discharged, and the wound is left hollow as if it were a vessel, and the membrane which is above it like a thin membrane, and there has not been any subsequent corruption and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged so that corruption inflicts upon some part, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that you cut away that membrane entirely as it is turned over, and especially when it is thinned out and made with a dressing, and cauteries so that they do not adhere to the wound by their corruption.
But if you hope that the membrane adheres and that the corruption has not achieved through subsequent consequence, and when there is swelling in the face, then you cure it with blistering.
And it is to be considered a sinus; and if it is great, and the arm which you hold is of fetid odour, then blister that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and rosemary received in equal parts, and let them be boiled in a vessel over the fire until they are reduced to the consistency of honey.
And then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and blister with that the sinus and tighten up its opening, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
And then take that out with caution; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the swelling reduced.
And sometimes it is blistered with ash water when that medicine is not present to you; and take ashes of wood and put over them water, and then strain those ashes and blister that with the liquid so that you believe that the sinus is now healed.
And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then blister that with water and honey and crushed rosemary which is mixed together, and blister it with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey to cleanse and wash away; and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and you believe that the sinus is reduced, then blister that with what makes the flesh grow in it.
And take some thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, or blister that with some other medicines and ointments which have the properties which I have written about in the treatment of ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the tube of the blister does not go into it, then widen that opening with a small iron tool little by little, and put in it cotton wool wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment so that it is widened.
And likewise if the opening is wide, then you join together its lips with a stitch and leave in it as much as will go into that opening when you insert the blister.
And if the opening through which the arm runs is raised above the parts below, then dry that in the hollow place where the arm runs into it from below, because when the arm is contracted in the depth of a sinus the flesh is generated in it there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the hollow of the bone according to what you want, then you will be forced to prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs through it more freely and there is not retained in it any cause of the arm.
But that which is on the opening of the sinus, which is reduced in all hour because it drains what is restrained in the arm. And so that you may know whether what runs from the arm is pus or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And also you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And when your treatment is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that exudes through the orifice of the sinus already adherent, or if it is not adherent, then on the third day, you remove the poultice, and when you remove the wound, change the dressing with another one and renew the ointment.
But if a subtle humor flows from the sinus for a long space of time, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing occurs on its own, because there are some people in whom generation of flesh occurs on their poultices, and of others in which the opposite happens to them.
And if a bad humor flows from the sinus for several days, then know that the sinus is not adherent; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you adjust to the dried-out medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with ointment of thin honey, when excess is added to it.
And the best remedy for which is used is to take ointment of thin honey and dissolve it in rose oil, and use it on that, and apply it to that.
And in that action, when there is no heat, take ointment of thin honey, and when it is within, gross it up, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe, and pound both together and pulverize them over the honey which is over the fire, and line that over a poultice and tighten that over the sinus; and line that with the honey which you have thickened within, and pulverize it over a poultice and tighten that.
And some times you administer with it long pepper and roots of celestial lily (and is the celestial lily) and bran of oats and centaury, and use of those simples or adjust, pound those and sift them and pulverize them over the honey which I have recommended; and use that.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in its depth, and it already makes inquiry into the bones or into the other hard members or to the tendons; then you treat it with a fistular treatment, as above it is said.
Of the treatment of panaric and nail worn away and addition of incision of finger and section.
Panaric is an abscess which occurs below the nail of the toe of the hand or foot, and rarely in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its healing is less valued, or it is an abscess from cauterization, or it is corrupted, and a bad humor flows within that corrodes the roots of the nail, and it very much corrupts that entirely, and its corruption very much permeates to the bone within which has a fetid odor, and the extremity of the finger is made lame, and its color is made dusky.
And therefore when you will have that with which we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then know that you pierce with iron all the superfluity which is rotted from the nail and properly cauterize the wound, because cautery is beneficial in that.
But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail already compress the flesh at the partitions of the fingers, and begin to sting it and hurt that, then know that you stop with a sharp needle under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive that up and insert that flesh with ease, and apply to that which flows from the flesh of the corrosive medicines within that is all cleansed; and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption already penetrates into the bone, then know that you pierce that bone and extract it, because at no time will it be healed when the bone is corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the finger, then you insert that in one of the nuts according to how it is premised by its remembrance, and treat that until it is healed.
But if there is concussion or attrition to the nail, and therefore in that there is violent pain, then know that you at first flebotomize the patient, and properly dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse section above it, and beware that the section does not permeate into the flesh which is below the nail, because you will cause violent pain to the patient, and a cause of generation of superfluous flesh in the location; and treat that location with that which allays pain.
But a finger jointed, which is born in the hands of some men, very rarely has bones, or very rarely is it in the nail.
And some are born in the root of the joint, or its generation is in some nuts of the fingers. But that which is born in some nuts of the finger does not harm, and that which is born in the joints is very much harmed.
And of those which are born fleshy, its section is easier, and it is that you insert that behind its root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult; and therefore beware of its incision.
But in that which is born in the finger behind the nuts, know that you pierce at first the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and properly saw with one of those convenient saws for that, and treat that until it is healed.
But consolidation which happens to the fingers between their joints many times or by generation of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of a poultice or by burning of fire, or by similars, then know that you dry that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then apply between their poultices ointment of rose oil so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate those, or apply between them a thin sheet of lead within that is consolidated according to how it is proper.
And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and befitting to the figure of the member.
Of incision of veins, thus are varicose.
Veins are varicose, and so are thick wrapped veins full of melancholy humors which flow in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence in the feet, and most of all in the feet of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Then know that you administer purgation of the body from black cholera some times by strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But their treatment by iron is according to two manners: one is that it be pierced and the black blood is drawn, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
Its section is according to this manner: moisten at first the foot with warm water so that the gross blood is dissolved, which is feculent from the foot, and then tighten the foot of the patient at the part above the toe by a bandage, and then dry the vein in one location, or in two, or in three by broad section, and then raise the black blood by its natural strength of the part below the sole into itself, and above that into the foot so that the quantity which you wish to draw and which the strength of the patient will endure.
And then ligature it, and command that he abstains from foods generating black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are filled up and this is noticed in the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are movements in him, and then put him into bath and embrocate his leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins are dilated; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not at hand, until the limb be heated.
And then cut off the cord in the right side of the vein by incision at its top or at the bottom of it near the toe.
And then open up the cord with claws and excise the vein from all sides until it appears in feeling, and this is due to the perception that you see that color declining towards blackness.
And then when you draw out the cord, you will see that white which was cord.
And then you place below it the thread until it is elevated and drained of the cord, and suspend that with silk thread around a needle.
And then cut another section just after that section by three fingers, and excise the cord from above the vein until it appears.
And then elevate that and insert it in the next section below the toe, and then extract it and elevate it until it is drawn out by the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all the sections, so that all is drawn out; and then insert it.
And if it does not obey you in being extracted and elevated, then insert a strong needle with a double thread and ligature it and extract it, or insert below the toe and roll your hand to all sides until it is drawn out. And beware that it not be cut; for if it is broken, it is made difficult to elevate that vein and it has come over the patient by that harm.
And when all of it is entirely drawn out, then place over the site of the ulcer wool saturated with wine and rose oil, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity with which there is involution at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should split that at all parts of its tortuosity and its involution sites, and then suspend that with claws until you elevate all of it.
And beware that you not cut the vein and plague it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in it.
Form of the incision with which the vein is dried:
It is not made acute with claws nor of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness just as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg:
This vein is engendered in the legs in warm lands just as in Al-Ategi in the arid land of Arabia and in the warm and arid lands of India with little moisture, and in which there is neither grass nor water.
And it is engendered strongly in other parts of the body other than the legs.
And its gestation is of putrefaction that comes beneath the cord just as venom within the body of serpents and worms and shrews and worms engendered between the cord and the flesh.
And sign of the occurrence of its advent is that the vein happens in inflammation of the leg with vehemence; and then the site is blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blister which resembles a plant root.
And then when you see the extremity of it come out, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachm and a half, and hold it there and let the lead hang from the leg.
And as many times as you see it, for some cause, at the parts outside, wrap that in lead and let go of it. And if it is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which is rooted until it is fully drawn out, for if you cut it, it is contracted and goes inside the flesh and causes swelling and pain in the site and ulceration ill.
Because it should be drawn out little by little until it is fully extracted and does not turn back into the body for any cause.
And this vein emerges in some men who are in their length of 5 to 10 palms and I have seen one that was 20 palms.
And if it is cut in the hour of its medication, then insert the toe into the hole of it and bore that with a long hole into the body until all that which is in the matter is evacuated, and then administer putrefaction of the site for several days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has swelling bumps, and especially when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg, and comes to the feet with orifices, and is drawn out from each orifice.
And then cure it as we have said before in its division.
Of section for worms engendered under the skin and is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some land by bovine illness because it often afflicts oxen, and is a worm few at each site which is engendered between the cord and flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and sinking, and is shown to feeling by its movement from part of member into member until it breaks the cord and emerges out.
And its engendering is by putrefaction of some humors just as it happens to worms and serpents and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
And it is dreaded for its malice because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, then it pierces the brain and sinks in and destroys the brain, and then it goes many times.
And then when you want to cure it and draw it out, it is not done unless by the movement of its limb and appearance of it to feeling, and then you should bind that which is above it and that which is below it with ligature and strong constriction, and then cut on it and extract it.
And if it is sunken in the flesh and you do not pierce it, then you place cautery with fire over the site where it dwells, and the greatest cause that is dreaded is corruption of it by which it corrupts the site just as we have said.
And if you see it having come to the head near the brain, then bind over the skull with strong ligature, and then cut on it and extract it; and let the patient use purgation of his body by medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of engendering putrefaction.
Of section for the illness of children.
This illness is named in our land child, and it is pain which comes in some limbs, and then it is transferred from limb to limb.
And you already see that according to what you are told. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after she was bled for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away just like worms were pushing against it, but gently, not violently, just as if it were living silver when it moved from place to place.
And then she went into pain in that location and felt it in the muscle, and soon she stood there for an hour.
And then she ran through the rest of the body until she reached the other arm.
And it seemed to me that she was turning herself inside out, as I could see; and I was greatly astonished at her transformation and the speed with which she moved from one member to another. And I had seen before in my own experience that pain can be transferred from one member to another. But I have not seen this with my own eyes as it happened to the woman.
And I did not think that this was the case, but rather that it is because the woman was very old, and had dry skin and exposed veins, and in this she manifested to my senses that moving windiness.
And it is necessary for this to not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
And when you wish to cure her and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear before him as we have said, but rather stretch out over him gently and slightly and press over that area where that windiness has been cut off, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see her with your own eyes, then cure her through the expulsion of wind from the body and with that which expels windiness, and those are pills of myrrh and pills of serapis and their like.
Of drawing out arrows.
Arrows are various depending on the species and depending on the locations of the body where they hit, for their variety is that some have great points and small ones and concave ones and blunt ones, and solid ones; and some have three angles and some have tongues and some have stars.
And the signs of the slave are when an arrow hits him and pierces the bone and is lodged in the sphenoid bone which is above the brain, for then occur violent headache, and scotomata, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind and vomiting of bile, and a strong fever is induced and the speech is disturbed and the voice destroyed, and there is moisture coming out of the wound site like white powder, and his eyes are like water.
And therefore if you see these signs, then refrain from curing and drawing out the arrow unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left mammilla, and you feel that it is stuck in a hard cause, and it is not a hollow cause; and very quickly the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it draws black blood from the wound, and then coldness of the extremities, and shivering, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends upon him from all sides.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lungs are effusion of frothy blood from the wound and swelling of the vessels that are near the neck and the colour of the patient changes and he breathes out a great spirit with force and asks for fresh air.
And if the arrow hits the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain is near the small ribs and a great wound is made with violent pain and with sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
And if the arrow hits the stomach then very quickly you will see from the wound some undigested food.
And if the arrow hits the belly and is lodged in it, then you will see some rent in the wound or the fabric or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for a cure by drawing out the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine flows out from it, and some cause proceeds from it to the parts outside, then very quickly there is pain over the patient, then know that this is fatal.
But the other members such as the face, the neck and throat, and shoulders, and the back and ribs, and furcula, and hip, and thigh and their like of the members, are saved according to the majority of cases when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and it is not a venomous arrow.
And I will account for this to you that I have seen of the nature of these arrows so that you may take note of it regarding your own cure.
The cause of this is because once an arrow hit a man in the tear gland at the root of his nose and I extracted it from him from the other side leaving the bones of his eyebrow intact, and he was healed and did not suffer harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had hit him in the bones of his eye, leaving the eyelid beneath, and the arrow was already hidden and he had not achieved it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his staff, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks with lion-head tip and there were no eyebrows.
And the Jew was healed and did not suffer harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had hit him in the throat and it was an Arabic arrow and it was that to which eyebrows adhere; and then I inserted it between two fingers and it was already submerged in his throat and I pulled it out gently and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had hit him in the belly and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore when thirty days had passed and there was not any change to his condition, I inserted my finger into the wound and probed around inside it, and it was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had hit his back and the wound was closed over him, and after hot fire had passed over it for seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had hit her belly and the wound was closed over her and she did not suffer any change to her natural functions, and the woman did not receive harm in any of them.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit his face and the wound was closed over him and he did not feel any pain from it, and similar things happened to these.
And I extracted the arrow of the king's prince who had hit him in the middle of his nose and he had already turned slightly to the right, and all the arrow was hidden.
And I was called to heal him shortly after the arrow entered.
And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I inquired into it with a subtle probe, and did not feel that; but he felt a point below the right ear, and then I perceived that that point was by the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the area with an ointment in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, confident that the place would become apparent to me through which it pierced.
And I did not discover in the place any accident that the arrow had achieved; and I continued with the ointment on him for several days and no accidents occurred; and the wound consolidated in the meantime, and he was released from his illness after a space of several days within which one day I felt the arrow within his nose and recognized this to me.
And then I placed upon the wound acute corrosive medicine for several days until pus opened up, and with a probe I probed that, and found the extremity of the arrow subtle, which adhered to the wood.
And then I applied in the appearance of the wound that medicine acute until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and I spent time with that over a period of four months.
And then since the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert the tongs in it, and remove that, and he did not object to this, I did not cease subtilizing and ingeniously working on that with many ways of skill, until one day about that by means of skills taking him by forceps downward made, according to which will come the form of those in the end of the chapter, I extracted that; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that and the wound consolidated, and the patient was healed by perfect health, and did not ache in him in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows for which you pause this rule and significance about which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration nor do those understand the book.
And the wise artisans compare a few things about one; and about that which is present about that which is absent, and they find new operation and a new instrument due to the descent of strange causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not driven out of the members in which they are stuck but according to two ways, or by attraction of the place into which it entered, or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is driven out through the place through which it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is thrown and driven out.
And if it does not obey the time of the hour in which it fell, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes putrid and there is repulsion from it and its exit.
And likewise if it is stuck in bone and does not obey you when it falls, then leave that for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it is driven out.
And if it does not obey you after several days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone of all parts with a subtle probe until the place is enlarged by the arrow and then extract that.
But if the arrow is hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from feeling, then you probe that with a probe, and if you feel that, then throw that with some tools which are convenient to attract it.
And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow, and there is not bone or nerve or vein, then you work on the wound so that it becomes enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is held by the ears with which it is held, then you loosen the flesh in which it is stuck in every part with all the skill you can; and work on that, if you cannot on the exit of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting those so that it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use with twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides so that it obeys; and subtilize with great subtlety that the arrow not be broken and that it be difficult for you to attract it and that extraction.
And if you cannot on that from your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts which are around it become putrid, and then repeat that because by that time it is repelled. But if you make contrary bleeding of blood, then you administer what we have said of the cure in its chapter.
And guard your skill in cutting of vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer skill in every possible way to the exit of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness just as I and you have recommended.
And therefore that you contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which it was driven into him, for it is more helpful. But if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows which are driven out through the contrary of the other part, or if from it some part proceeds to outward parts, or causes twitching in the extremity of the arrow by feeling the part above the tendon and feels that prominent; then you probe that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then throw that, for it is easier to obey.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the needle according to the contrary so that the arrow presses on the bone, and enlarge it by itself, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for several days and then repeat that until it is driven out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you push that with him.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulsion, then you insert that with him, if it is broken, tool concaved by itself into the hollow of the arrow and then push that with him.
But if the arrow is concaved, then you push that with a strong tool inserted into that, for the arrow is repelled by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around the wound, if you can, and treat the wound with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow pierces the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, then cut into it, if you are able to do so without damaging any vein or nerve; remove the arrow and sew up the wound, if necessary.
Here is a description of forceps used for removing arrows:
The ends of these forceps are shaped like bird beaks and serrated so that they can grip the arrow tightly without slipping.
And from these are made many different kinds of forceps, large, small, and medium-sized, depending on the size of the arrow, its depth, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the flesh around it.
It can be used to drive out the arrow by striking it with the concave side, and pushing it out with the flat side.
Here is a description of phlebotomy, or the cutting of veins:
The veins from which blood is usually bled are: Those in the head number sixteen, two pulsating veins that are near the ears, two green veins that appear on the temples, two veins in the lacrimal glands of the eyes that are called 'aspicents', one vein at the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the tip of the nose; two veins at the neck; two veins at the upper lip; two veins at the lower lip; and — these are called 'algelic' —; and two veins below the tongue. The veins in the arms that should be bled number five: One of these is the cephalica vein, which resembles a wild leek and is called by the people “the head vein”, it is a superficial and small vein composed of one branch of the basilica and another of the cephalica; and the people call it “the vein of all the body”, the basilica is the vein that lies on the domestic side and is called “citellar” and the commoners call it “vein of the belly”; and the funis of the arm, which lies over the elbow and is where phlebotomy is performed; and salvatella, which is the vein between the ear and the little finger, and has two branches.
There are three veins in the leg: one is below the jaw of the wild side, the second is sophena, and lies below the leg on the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, which lies below the leg on the wild side; and there are other veins in the leg similar to these.
Bleed the veins near the ears for old and chronic migraines, and for ancient and malarial ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: if you notice that the head of the patient is hot, then wash the head with warm water and massage it in the occipital area where both veins are; then tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that the two veins near the ears appear at two depressed places on the head; and feel those with your finger, here use your finger.
Then you take the cutting instrument and pierce it at an angle so that it enters below the vein in the bone where the blood comes from. And then lift your hand up and down the vein and pierce it with an oblique incision. And let the length of the incision be the amount of two fingers or so, and let as much blood come out as you want.
Then tighten it with a bandage and let it heal.
And now I have described in the beginning of this book the incision of these veins and their cauterization.
But the bleeding of the two arterial veins in the temples is for ancient migraines, and bad blood, and constant eye pain, and sharp pains throughout the body.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what you see: tighten the neck of the patient so that the two veins appear, and feel their pulse with your finger; then use your finger.
And then you lift the bone above the vein and pierce it below, and lift the vein up; and pierce it as you have done in the other two veins; and let as much blood come out as you need.
Then loosen the neck of the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place a bandage and tightening it above it, let it heal.
And now I have described their memory, and the incision of them, and their attraction in the beginning of this book.
And therefore the bleeding of the vein on the forehead is for ancient illnesses of the face, and migraines, and heat, and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of bleeding it is according to what you see: tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument called  'fossor', of which this is the shape:
Place the prominent point of which is at the tip of the fossor on the vein and pierce it with a needle or other instrument in the manner described, and let as much blood come out as you want; then loosen the piercing of the patient and tighten it so that it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a lateral incision, however, it should not be opened with an oblique incision, but with a transverse one, for the bone is close to it and would break it if it were subtle.
But the bleeding of the two veins in the lacrimal glands of the eyes is for eye pain and heat, and illnesses of the face.
And the quality of bleeding it is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and then you bleed those veins while standing over him.
And let the incision be made according to the transverse at a length of one finger with few incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is subtle, then the extremity of it is broken.
Then let as much blood come out as you need, and place a bandage over them, and tighten it for a new day, then loosen it.
But the bleeding of the vein on the nose is for acute heat and violent blood, and illnesses of the face, and migraines, especially when it is ancient.
And the quality of bleeding it is that the patient tightens his neck and then touch his nose with your left hand, and take the incision obliquely and pierce it in the middle of the tip of the nose according to a straight line, for the vein does not appear here, and let the blood flow as soon as you begin.
And when you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and tie it for a night, because that is restored quickly.
However, the advantage of phlebotomy of the two veins is constriction of the bile and beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers like herpes.
And the quality of phlebotomy of these is that the patient stretches down each in his armpit and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then phlebotomize the vein along with little by little wide phlebotomies; and extract blood according to a temperate quantity or according to what you see is needed, because it is at that; and then make it like the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and constrict the two veins with a mild constriction so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and leave it into the mat so that the plague is healed.
And the advantage of phlebotomy of the veins algerich, brings small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of phlebotomy of these is that you make the patient lower his head to you and constrict his neck with a bandage, and then roll back his lips and look for two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of them, and this more because in the circuit of these are small black veins.
But if doubt is under you, and you don't know which is it, then you understand the incision of the largest of these, and of the most manifest pus of them.
And make like the two veins that are on the lips above.
But of two veins that are below the tongue, the advantage is appropriately phlebotomy of the cephalic one at infections that are in the gullet, at illnesses of the uvula, and at illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy of them is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and lift his tongue, and look below the tongue, from one side of him vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; and keep that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomy of them, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those in which usually runs in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either put with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive at subtlety declining; or secsar with phlebotomy cutellar, and it calls if alnessil, and this is its form:
Be the side of him thus with looking, and agree to open the veins concave full proceeding apparent thick, and to those that contain thick twisted blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and agrees to phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
But the advantage of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: because extracted the blood from the illnesses that are below the gullet and neck, and from what affects the feet and belly.
And it agrees to the phlebotomist, when phlebotomy that one, that he guard well and be on top of it, because below him is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, incise that artery and access flow of blood, so that he should not phlebotomize that with puncturing phlebotomy, before being cut off with alnessil.
And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then let you leave that and move to the other one or seek some branch of it; or phlebotomize in the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut off that with phlebotomy alnessil as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of it meteyssa, then let in front of the constriction of the arm that you touch the place between which you know the location of the pulse, and then press on it with a thong; and let go of the arm and cut off the vein with secsar concave with phlebotomy alnessil as we have said; and keep that the percussion box for some space of the location of the artery.
And when you see, with constricting the ligature, swelling in the location that you have pressed with a thong, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore loose that one.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy thus with shining of child's milk, and the blood is subtil red, then know that it is of the blood of the artery; and then you press and pause your thumb over that for long space; and prop your thumb, and if the blood is cut off, because many times it is cut off, then you constrict the arm and leave that one.
And keep the patient of the phlebotomy for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off and you see that medicine to it does not help at all, then you incise the artery if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a piece of fistic, and fen it, and take the one end and constrict that over the location of the vein with constriction descending am ligature and am powder within on another day.
And then if the blood is cut off, well; and not, then heal that one by what from which it preceded to the remembrance of the location of the powders cut off flow of blood.
And the incision of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions by the small location of the plague and the possibility of the constriction of the arm.
But of the dark vein phlebotomy is advantage that extracted the blood from the superior part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of cephalic, as we have said.
And let the phlebotomist that one be on top in the phlebotomy of it, because below that is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, stupor will happen to him, and it is difficult for him to heal, and strong he is not healed at all; and this nerve many times appears to the sense; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, then let you pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with secsar of alnessil, and avoid the nerve by your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you fen the vein in length.
The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and gives to illnesses of the eyes.
And in this place specifically, if you want to let the phlebotomies bleed with olive phlebotomes or with myrtle phlebotomes; because it is the safest for all veins, since there are no arteries or nerves here.
But very seldom is an abscess formed in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but they do not press on that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in preservation of health and for hope of it and precaution against onsets of illnesses, and that phlebotomy be made at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when there appear signs of fullness.
And phlebotomy be made on the third day or on the first more than three hours after dawn.
But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity for it, either at night or day, in every hour and at all times.
And an infant should not be phlebotomized until he is fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized when they have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some reason, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion’s-womb enema, if in these there are retained fissures, so that the veins do not throw off the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and so that they do not harm the principal members.
And let those who are phlebotomized not be nauseous and drunk, nor recovering from illness or drunkenness until this is eliminated from them, nor sick of hydropsy, but let phlebotomy be feared when there is colic pain and vomiting, and after abdominal discomfort, and after multiplication of cough and fever and exertion from breakfasts or vigils and from all causes that dissolve strength, either corporeal or animal.
And also consider the subtlety of humors before that if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for that.
And also go into a bath if no cause prohibits it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is made subtle.
And make phlebotomy at about the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And for that the feet of that one be guarded on that day from all accidents of animals, as they are anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as they are exertion and excessive pain and cough and their likenesses.
And let the causes be present in the use of which the blood is used by men with aromatics and incense and balms and their likenesses according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist follow on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who must be phlebotomized.
And also stretch out his arm, and wipe that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and also tighten the bandage with a strap and wrap it two times.
And let the compression be moderate, because compression when it is equal or the compression is of superfluity, then flow of blood is prohibited; or it is of softening, and then blood of the body flows out.
And also let that one who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together in between them until the veins are swollen and declared by feeling.
And let the phlebotomist anoint his phlebotomes with a little old oil properly; and also pause his finger of the left hand over that vein from which he wants to phlebotomize so that the vein escapes a little, and the compression is relaxed because from those veins through which the blood flows out is the one through which the phlebotomy should be made, and when he pauses the phlebotomes over it are contracted by the phlebotomes, and the phlebotomist is discharged; and if the phlebotomes open the vein, that one is contracted.
And thus, for this reason let the phlebotomist be careful and persistent in all these causes.
And also pause the phlebotomes, but if the vein is opened in one go, then it is; and if not, you iterate that again another time over that location a little, or on it with compression, if the location is not inflamed.
And if the location is inflamed or the patient becomes frightened, then let him be laid for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because it will soon draw out the abscess cauterizing, nor enter into a bath.
And also iterate the phlebotomy if he desires it.
And if the impression is small and the blood flows subtly and he fears that there does not flow blood in the quantity which he wants, then iterate the phlebotomes on that wound according to rectitude and adjust it a little in the impression, and do this with compression before the location is inflamed, because the location is inflamed in many men through little impression.
But if he has already been inflamed, then do not iterate on it because it does not excuse you for any cause; and pause over that any part of the wound with oil, because it soothes the blood of the body. And is better in this location than other oils.
And likewise administer oil in every phlebotomy when the phlebotomes are stopped by the prohibition of flow of blood of the body, and make tyriaca with alfredoc and sagzenea when it is paused over that one of those on the location, because the blood is made subtle and is drawn out when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is engendered at the location of the phlebotomy because many times it has happened and more to that one which was not phlebotomized except for that go, or in the impression of the vein little, then let him be cauterized and pause over the location sponge moistened with water and salt, a little heated, and tighten that for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And let him make that also the flow of blood from that vein with completion of it or from another vein.
And if there appears in the location for some days blackness or greeness, do not press on it; and if you wish, pause over that any cause of aloe and dissolved myrrh, or any cause of juice of wormwood or of powder or its likeness.
And many times it has happened that abscesses and protuberances are engendered by phlebotomy of the basilica.
And thus pause your hand over that and if you then tighten the softness with your compression over that, then that protuberance is evil and bad; and therefore beware that you pause over that any cause of what we have said, because it will soon flow from the artery blood.
And make a plaster with that in which it is tight, so that the location be hardened, and also cure that with the other cure when it has healed.
And anyone who extracts blood from every person according to the amount of his virtue and according to the color appearing on the blood, according to what appears.
Because if the blood is black, then let it be left until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it be left until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let its acuteness be stopped.
And to whom it is full and strong and has the need of bloodletting in one sitting, then let the phlebotomy be amplified and the phlebotomies be wide.
And for one who is pale, let the opposite of that be done to him; and whoever extracts that in several sittings, then let the incision be tight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be a cross-section, not a puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and incision of the nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to whom it is accustomed to have a fainting after the phlebotomy, then treat that person before the phlebotomy with a little bread infused in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel warmed; and extract from him some blood in three or four sittings.
And if it is weakness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or scented syrup and very aromatic.
And if a fainting occurs due to the phlebotomy, and it is caused by losing too much blood, then take before drinking water with meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use of aromatics with aloes wood, and let him apply that to his feet.
And use the other causes which we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting by evacuation.
And whoever wants to vent his arms and dissolve his blood in the second sitting, then let him who has phlebotomy as much evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, evacuate the blood little by little according to the amount of his virtue in continuous days.
But whoever wants to vent his arms and withdraw his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do that about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to withdraw blood from his body in the opposite direction to which he is declining, then let him be vented on the second or third day.
But the body in which much blood has already been withdrawn and it is acute and causes fever, then let him have his blood withdrawn in one sitting and have a large quantity withdrawn from him and have the incision amplified so that fainting does not occur; and when the doctor's hand on the pulse of the patient so that death does not occur in place of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not press when you want to withdraw blood and evacuate blood a second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to draw blood, because if you press strongly on that and it is extended slightly, then that is very bad.
Let it not remain so that it is phlebotomized again; or if there is a clot of blood in the orifice of the vein, pause on that with alfarach or with saguine, and compress that gently until the blood comes out.
And if the vein is swollen, then leave it and do not touch it until the swelling goes down.
And if the need arises to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then you will bleed that person on that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called “veins of the arm” is phlebotomized instead of the basilic or the cephalic when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein becomes dilated and appears apparently.
Then let it be tightened on that with a ligature with mild tightness, and let the phlebotomy be done according to the small cross, not longitudinally nor according to length.
And let the incision be wide and let your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that person be on the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you see your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from immersing the hand in warm water; and let the body of the blood be paused in cold water during winter.
And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all the other veins, because there is no pulsating vein or nerve in it.
And phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is related to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or your hand, because you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein is swollen and is demonstrated obviously to the eye; and let the incision be made transversely on it; and if the incision is made anywhere else, then it will not benefit at all.
And take care that you do not cut your hand with the phlebotomy, because underneath there are nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in that, because if you do not immerse it in the warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when the blood is withdrawn according to the amount of need, then let you pause on the vein olive oil and salt, so that it does not clot firmly; and similarly, let you do in every branch tightly.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is related to diseases of the brain.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of it as you have done in the other one.
And the benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to diseases that are below the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the knees and ulcers of the legs, and their likes in diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and rubs on that so that the veins appear; and press on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein let it be seen from the toe pushing, and from there it branches into the fascia of the foot many branches.
And therefore phlebotomize the wider ram or below the leg from where the toe comes, because it is better and more safe.
And if phlebotomize that in the fascia of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are below that on the fascia of the foot; and let your phlebotomy be made according to the cross, just as if you wanted to make an incision.
And let the phlebotomies be mild.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse his foot in warm water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy on a few more occasions, for the site is salty; and do not fear ill will from him, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, treat the other foot in the same way.
And for the sciatic vein, the site as we have said is below the ankle of the wild part.
And the cause of pain in the hip when phlebotomy is performed is because of clotted blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters into a bath, and hastens and tightens his thigh from the side of the buttock up to above the ankle in four places with one long, thin bandage, for it does not appear except through this.
And therefore, when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each plan that is possible for you and according to the cross, and it is better; or pierce that through incision or cut that through section, for the site of it is salty.
And it is in most men hidden; and if you pierce that and it does not appear to the senses at all, then phlebotomize a branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the little finger and the ring finger.
And beware of the nerves, and let blood flow in the quantity that you want.
Then loosen the tightness and place a bandage over the site of the phlebotomy tightly, for quickly it will be healed.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozes are of horn, or of ram, or of bone.
And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification is according to two manners, for it is either with fire or without fire.
And to the ventozes that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations in the body, of which one in which ventozes are placed is the alnocrati, and it is the posterior part of the head; and the middle location of them of two parts of the neck together; and ventozes of the mentum below the mandible further down from the mouth; and ventozes of two spatulas; and ventozes of the aloetaster, and it is above the end of the tail; and ventozes of two focils, and they are of two breasts; and ventozes of two cavilhas; and ventozes of two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not possess the virtue of those as cauterization through phlebotomy; nor do I believe that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by fullness when the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity prompts ventilation for disease or for continuous, we administer that throughout the entire hour at the beginning of the month and in its end, and in the middle location of it and in any time it is.
And therefore when you see in any cause of those, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed of the day.
And advantage of ventilation of the nape is that when it conferes to heaviness in the head and to that which is sunken into the eyes; but beware that this be proper evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not proper to use that which is of complex friction, or in which there is catarrh, for it gives great harm to him.
And for this reason it is not proper that use of that by the elderly, and in heads in which there are cool diseases.
But to him for whom that is continually over him is done forgetfulness; and for this reason you command the ventozador to pause his hand a little with the ventosa at the sites below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But ventilation of alkehel is in the site of phlebotomy of the fusca vein and of the basilica: and for this reason it confers to asthma, and to constriction of throat and to splitting of voice of throat, and to cough, and to fullness.
And it is proper that the ventosa of alkehel be bound a little, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And ventilation of alhagdahan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and to emigration, and to pre-fever, and to pains in the roots of teeth; and it is in the site of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And you command the ventozador not to press his hand with scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and cause flow of blood.
And ventilation below the mentum confers to alcola in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to appearance similar to them of diseases which are in the mouth, and they stand in the site of phlebotomy of aligeric which is on the two lips.
But the ventilation which is done over the two spatulas confers to caphatan, which is done through fullness of heat.
And the ventilation of the two sites within the breasts confers advantage of phlebotomy of three veins, that is, of the basilica, fusca and cephalic, for it attracts blood from all those veins more delicate than the other veins more coarse within that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventozador that he does not proceed with scarification, for the site is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is one ventilation with which is ventilated over the buttocks and confers to hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers further down.
And you command the ventozador that it be large ventilation, and that it is of horn, for the site indigests from strong section; and it is done with strong piercings strong and ventilation be bound subtle piercings and is scarified with scarification.
But ventozes of the thighs be done through mild mildness, for they will draw blood from all the body, and confer to ancient pains of the knees and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the site of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and under the armpits, and of two cavilhas.
However they weaken all the body and cause syncope in some men.
And of the ventozes under the armpits, the advantage is similar to the advantage to the ventozes of two thighs.
The quality of the cupping position is that you place the cup at the beginning, let it suck with moderate suction, and do not prolong the position of the cups, but place them lightly, and leave them tightly, so that the humors come to the site evenly. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the site already reddened and swollen and the heat of the blood appearing.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Because a man who has tender flesh in few places, you should scarify him once and not pus, so that the site is not ulcerated.
And command the cupper to enlarge the scarification and take a few, and temper the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you should scarify twice, because in the first cupping, the pathway of subtlety to the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second, it acquires penetration through the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then let the third cupping be done so that the residue is achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, it is enough for us with one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with a deep scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then let us scarify with a gentle scarification.
And the term of scarification in which the depth of the skin is only as much.
And if the person whose skin is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are tight, then let the sites of the cups be anointed gently, widely, and resolutely; in summer time, likewise with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of almond shells, or oil of cedar wood; and in winter time, then with oil of nut, or oil of larch, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those like them.
And if the superfluity is thick, tough, then let the oil be of myrrh, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and to those like them.
But if the cupper has ample pores of tender flesh, then let oil be prohibited from him, and let the sites of the cups be washed with vinegar or with hot water of solanum, or with water of cedar wood, or with water of borderwaters, and to those like them.
And if the person whose blood is of great moisture, wash their cups with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similarly to those.
And if the superfluities are thick, wash their cups with old wine, or with water of sanser, which is marjoram, or with decoction of anise, or of camomile, and to those like them.
And let the cupping be kept away from bathing; while having it administered after bathing for one or two hours, and let him sleep after the cupping.
What should one do who needs to be bled by cupping before venesection?
Let him consider first: if the cupper or he who is to be bled is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation over him, then let him take causes of frigidity, likewise with acetic milfoils, and endive in sour wine and leeks, and squill, and julep, and to those like them.
And let him stop eating thus with pullets, and meats of fat fowls, and seasoned foods with vinegar, and to those like them.
And if the person whose complexion is hot, let him take in drinking esserop of honey, or esserop of squill seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between spring and summer; and let it be commanded to him that he use little of drinking and eating, and let his foods be pullets and canabis, and peas, and pigeons, and doves.
And let him drink more in the day of cupping and phlebotomy than he eats.
And let him be given in drinking at certain times to some men myrrh of alpha-arack, or medicines of musk, so that it is muscaded, or alcelita before cupping or phlebotomy or afterwards, so that the principal members are made comfortable and the blood be subtle; and let them not take those scaldings.
But the cups that are after scarification be cups that are paused over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilical, in the sites of the joints, and the pubis of the hip, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not wanted by those except for attraction of blood of member, likewise with pause the cup over the breast in malady of flow of blood of the blood of the nose; and use that so that subtle thick heat of the member is dissolved, likewise with pause over the belly and umbilical; because that rarefies the member and burns it and removes the pain that resolves the heat of the member.
And it is also paused over the testes when they become in their swelling or pain, because through virtue of strong attraction their swelling and pain is eradicated from its site.
And similarly it does when it is paused over the liver and melsa, because of cupping in those in confinement.
And these cups are administered thus with suction only; and some are administered with fire.
And some are administered full of tepid water in the maladies of the liver.
And for that the cup is filled and pus comes out great, it is water with which are cuited herbs according to what is convenient.
Form of cup administered with fire: let the aperture of the orifice be two digits, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the fire be the measure of a palm; and let its length in the site where it is in the circuit, the measure of it be the measure of itself, the pierce be small according to the quantity that enters into it an awl.
Let it be made of wood of wild rose or citron tree, of thick margins, lion, inwal nut and horse-chestnut so that it does not lead the member according to its position upon it.
And let it be over the middle of it a transverse band of wood or iron, where is paused candle with the fire.
And it is also this cup great much more than that which we have described; and the little less of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses that.
And the cups of children and exhausted ones are smaller than those of young people and large bodies.
And the quality of pausing this cup with fire upon the member is that it extends the mace with decent fire before a little candle of wax, and pause that over the middle of the transverse band in the middle site of the cup, so that the fire be lit around the lower part so that the body of the sick person is not burned.
And then it is paused over the member of the sick person, and the finger is over the pierce that we have said, while we hold the cups and do not move the finger and let the steam go over that pierce, the cup is so dissolved immediately.
And then light the candle according to its use, and relight it if it goes out.
But the cupping glass that is administered for pleurisy, with water in which there is neither a transverse membrane nor a hole, and it is not administered unless it has been filled with water, and is placed over the affected part alone.
And this is its shape: And this cupping glass when it is largest, that is the best, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Leeches are not applied to small parts of the body unless it is impossible to apply cupping glasses there because of their small size, as with the eye and gum and similar parts, or to exposed flesh, as with the finger and nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using leeches that you have found in the double-wallered, clean, blood-red waters.
And let them be left in the water for a day and night until they become hungry, and let no cause remain in their bellies; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and by cupping glasses; and let the affected parts of the patient be rubbed until they turn red; and let them be placed on him.
And when they are full, then...
And if it is possible to draw out the poison from that spot by cupping glasses, it is better done by suction.
And if not, then wash the affected spot with mild wine and then with tepid water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged due to the application of leeches and it oozes out, then you should soak a cloth in cold water and place it over the affected area so that the oozing stops.
And if the blood is profuse, then powder vitriol, or gall nuts and similar astringent substances of the causes, should be sprinkled over the affected area until the bleeding stops; or cooked split peas should be placed on it and left until the peas adhere to the spot, and the blood stops.
And if necessary, the leeches can be reapplied when they have been changed.
And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then the affected area should be rubbed with fresh blood or an needle should be pricked into the spots so that blood comes out; and let them be placed there, for when they sense some blood it will come out right away.
And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little crushed aloe, or salt, or ash over them, and right away they will.
Thus begins the discussion of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is a restoration from fracture and from accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh son, wise one, know that the foolish doctors and the common people and those who have never read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter from them speak foolishly about this chapter.
And for this reason, this way of the wise in our land is prohibited; and I have not committed it at any time; and I have not practiced that which teaches, unless through length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying on the understanding of those, so that I extracted the science from them.
And I also added experience and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science and experience teach me about this subject; for I have abbreviated it for you and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and I have shortened it at the end of the declaration, and illustrated it with many forms of the instruments which are administered in it, as has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractured bones, from which their premise is necessary before we begin the remembrance of the members of fractures and of various ones if one by one. Therefore let us begin the summary of this chapter, and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artisans are forced, and to the truth of those: it is you and those who are adept in this noble art that you learn from others.
And therefore I say that when accidents happen to any fracture or dislocation or twisting or herniation, then let you be concerned at the beginning with phlebotomy or bleeding him, or with some poultice, if no contrary cause prohibits it, as for weakness of strength, or he is an infant, or old in decrepitude, or there is violent heat, or violent rubbing.
And let him be fed on a diet of green vegetables and meat of birds and crabs; and let him abstain from fatty meats and from filling foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you guard against pus in the affected member, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter.
And let him then return to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed on nutritive foods of light and coarse and heavy foods in which there is viscosity, as well as on cooked foods made from wheat with water, rice, and peas, and fish, and fresh meat, and groats, and similar to these, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is made more slowly and better.
And know that the fractured bones when they are in old people and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature because of the drying up of the members of them.
Nature however adjusts and connects the broken bone of every part any cause similar to a clot in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it together so that it comes to its end of strength and firmness, as well as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits that from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you stop the patient's diet, a diet in which there is heaviness and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
And I win by remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in my distinct chapter from another.
The diversity of fracture within itself. And the species of fractures of the bone are diverse within themselves; for there is made an arcuate fracture another that occurs in them in stars; and some times the fracture is according to the length of the bone: and they are fractures of the satagia and angles and additional ones, as well as when it is prepared for writing, and a fracture is a fissure in the head, and a fracture is a little crack.
And there is a specific pain or torture unique to the restoration of him according to what will come to his memory distinctly in his places.
Here is another sentence: And because of this, a fracture of the bone is known: it is its tortuousness and that eminence and its appearance to the senses, and from it when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is not in the place a tortuousness apparent or from it not made because of your touching when you touch the bone with motion and the patient finds no great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that there is tortuosity or a small crack, then it does not behoove you to wince when you touch it with your hand and with compression of all; rather pause over it medicines of which come memory fittingly to the place; and then be tight by subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it satagie, as all is completely split from its comparison, then behoove you to commence from your hour to rectification of it before what happens in it apostema cautery.
And if in it happens apostema cautery, then let it be for several days until the apostema ceases; and then heal that according to any manner that you can of elevation and of healing.
And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is more difficult than of the bone in which happens satagie.
And then strengthen it according to what will come the memory of it.
But if in the bone so satagies, then is necessary extension of that broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And be your position with which you pause the member place healing according to its natural figure, while the parts so extend from the broken member, then you perforate that returning those adductions with healing and according to any manner that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that does not happen over the patient through your operation of pain or harm; and perforate you according to your power that you apply one bone to another companion according to their best forms.
And behoove you in that hour advantageously you touch with your hand that, and if you see here any diverse cause, rectify that and heal that through the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent extension and compression, likewise as many foolish doctors who many times cause apostema cautery through their operation, or cause contraction in the member likewise as we have seen that through the operation of them many times.
And the quality of the constriction of the broken member is that which you consider; for you know that the broken members are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of them.
And of those which are small likewise as the arm and the finger and the wrist and similar to them, then let the wrapper be of very fine cloth.
But those which are large likewise as the thigh or the leg, then let the wrapping be firm and hard, for the firm binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all parts with equal constriction, so that in it does not enter a crack.
And then commence, then your evacuation of equilibrium, pause convenient ligament to that, over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
And then go to that to the most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen mind so that you do not focus your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself with wrapper of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, while you take from it a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken place with wrapper, and then go to the wrappings at the most inferior part of the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the wrapper and in softening of that likewise as we have said in the primary wrapper above.
And then pause between the wrappings of wool or cloth with which is healed the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
And then pause over it another bandage, and then heal over these wrappings decently made liniments at once, if in the place is not inflammation or apostema cautery, and then pause over it that which seats the apostema cautery and which heals the inflammation; and let that be for several days; and then strengthen over it the bandages.
And the liniments be of the thickness of a cane shaft, and be formed wisely; or be of wood of pine; or of reeds of palm; and be the width of each bandage according to this form and this figure:
However, let the bandage that is paused over that fracture be thicker and harder a little than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to how it is measured to the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the bandages with another bandage according to your primary constriction; and then bind over it with faithful wire decently according to what we have said of constriction, and be your constriction according to the place of the fracture less, and how less is elongated from the fracture.
And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of wire; and if the threads are thick, likewise as we have seen through the operation of some foolish pausing their threads of cords of wire, and it is great error when constricts the equality away.
And equally thick threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve through constriction with them what you want, and let there be space between bandage and bandage of one finger.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the bandages then strengthen in the places his wool or cotton between that does not harm him.
Sometimes fracture is with swelling, and happens disruption in the tendon, and I come to memory in that in the head according to particularity.
And know that not all broken member is tightened with bandages on the first day; the cause of which is that the member, when it is great, let you pause over it bandages but after several days or a week or more, according to your security of occurrence of apostema cautery.
And this is the manner of the bandages with which the Ancients restored, which were paused over fracture and dislocation and wrenching.
Manner of bandage as well wetted with restoration of fracture, convenient to many complexities and mostly to women and children, for it is that which takes from powder of ground, and is the core of the flour that comes from motion of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And season it thus, but add a little white pepper to the broth and use this not thick nor thin; and then use it.
Another way of making a plaster that heals fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, enula camphor, and mace, which is ground from wild peppercorns, all in equal drachms; myrrh and aloe each in five drachms; aloes in twenty drachms; let them all be ground and sieved and mixed with honey water or with white egg yolk if the patient' skin is injured; then use this plaster which has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confers to many people.
Another way of making a plaster that heals fractures and twists: Take mace and ground white alder in ten drachms each; myrrh and aloe in five drachms each; acacia in six drachms, and Armenian bole in twenty.
All are ground in a mortar with rose water, and sifted, and made into a paste with vinegar or white wine and then applied.
Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and pain occurs in them, and to fissures and fractures: take some clean wool and soak it in sweet wine and oil and place it on the affected area.
Perhaps this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but it will soothe and draw out pains quite well.
Another method of a plaster that restores broken bones: take the bark of wild fig and the bark of wild poppies; grind both into a powder and make them into a plaster.
Method of a plaster that promotes the healing of broken bones and when you want resolution of the residue of an abscess: take powdered white poplar bark, camomile flowers, violet flowers, and bran, of all these in equal parts .i.; all are ground and made into a paste with wine if the wound is not raw.
But if it is raw, then season that with warm water of celery or vinegar and use it.
Another method of a very strong plaster for resolution that this first one, when pustules appear on the healing of the member: take powdered white poplar bark and linseed, and black thistle, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, of all these in equal parts i and grind them, then make into a paste with vinegar or warm water or wine, according to the quality of the wound and the color of it.
But ipocras does not dry in the open air, so it should be placed over the broken bone to promote healing of it unless a poultice is made of wax and oil and nothing else, and wrapped so that it lies between thickness and thinness.
But Gualia is seen to be placed over the broken bone for its healing and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat are also like those of the causes we have recounted.
Method of a plaster that provides relief to injuries and pain: take myrrh, cedar wood, human hair or horse tail, and white poplar bark, and salt, all in equal parts; grind and sift them, then make into a paste and make the plaster.
But the quantity according to the wound that is bound up, and then loosen it, and consider if there is no pain nor swelling, nor is the bone broken and not displaced from its socket, then do not remove it for several days. And if pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in the area, then cut or remove it in that moment and stop using the plaster.
And take a piece of linen and sponge the wound with warm water, and wash the area with mild vinegar until the swelling and pain are relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; and then place clean wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or rose-colored oil over it overnight to prevent an abscess from forming on the wound, and let the inflammation of the member be eased.
And then repeat this gentle compression and small plaster again and not tighten it with your first compression, and use that until the wound is healed.
And if the abscess and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are now relieved, and you have stopped using the plaster and compression as you did at first equally, then repeat that in the same way as before.
And if no accident occurs to the member of any of those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it but after three or four or five or seven days; and some times it is left for twenty days according to what appears through the loosening of the wound, as we have said, until the fracture has healed and the flesh draws close over it.
And then tighten the compression little by little but not as much as your first compression, and adjust the thickness of the padding according to how the wound is preceded in its memory.
But if you see the area of the fracture dried and weakened but not closed, then know that food is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore moisten that with warm water after total washing of the wound; and let it be for three days; and loosen the compression a little, and through this operation feed the member, and it will heal quickly.
But that which the unskilled restorers of the broken member do another washing when it is not healed at the beginning according to how it covers and is healed according to crookedness, is error according to their operation of them, and great fear, and if they would enlarge the ancient wounds in their sockets and were opened by them.
And I have not seen any of them do this, because it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur on the head.
The kinds of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for any fracture is not caused by the impact of a staff, and the impact pierces all the bone into the brain, which is below the skull, as it does in the trunk, and through that this kind of fracture is named ascia; or the staff pierces one part of the bone, and pierces the flesh around it, and the incision does not pass through the bottom of it; and this kind of fracture is named absolute elevation.
And the crack of these two fractures is large or small, and of the fracture that is compression or traction; and the cause of it is impact with a club or stone on stone, and to them alike.
And this fracture is penetrating that it approaches the membrane that is below the bone; or it is in the membrane of the bone, and the crack of these two fractures is large or small.
And of fracture that is worn away in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and through that it is named this species fracture capillary.
And is fracture that is caused by stone or by impact of stone and to them alike, that makes any lamina of the bone enter into the fingernails, and it is made in the concave place thus as occurs on the fingers when impact and is broken from them.
And this mostly happens in bodies of moist people, as well as children's heads.
And all these kinds of fractures are set, like separated stars. And then you will have a memory of all this in your place.
And recognize all these kinds of fractures by examination and by inquiry to those who have them, and by the appearance of decayed flesh that lies upon them.
And hair is known because it is uncovered on the bone, and washed away, and when it is probed, the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures consider at first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by these accidents what is significant through manifest indication, such as vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from orifices and redness in those, and likenesses to them in the greater dispositions, it is not healed.
And if you see accidents that do not run their course, then you expect health, then you begin the treatment of him.
The reason for this is that if the afflicted has come to you in the beginning as he was afflicted and that is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the appearance of the bone before the day fourteen according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you wait to splint the bone before the seventh day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the bandage, and that the accidents we have counted occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the brain membrane and is in minute pieces and shattered, then consider that you insert the minute piece and shattered according to what I have told you.
And it is that you wash the head of the afflicted and uncover on the bone according to habit and manner to you possible according to the appearance of the plague, and that it be lighter upon the afflicted.
And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, bleeding or pustule cautery, then you oppose to it with what is appropriate, and it is that you apply the place with clothes infused in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest until the pustule is sedated, and you be secure from the flow of blood; and then begin at the circuit of the bone and in its ablation.
And that shall be according to one of two manners of operation.
And the first manner is that you insert the bone with an incision of strict suchness, and this is its form: And then administer another incision-maker this, a little wider than that; and this is its form:
And then administer more the incision-maker wider than the second.
And consider that there ought to be due to you number of incision-makers diverse, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are in the thickness of their extremities, and are of iron or bronze.
And use them with facility in percussion upon the incision-maker so that it does not penetrate the head and lead to that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then consider that you pierce in the circuit of it before you administer the incision-makers with awls, which are named non-deepening awls.
And they are not named thus but because those do not pause the end of the bone at what is proper to it, so that to the awl there is rounded extremity or margin on that which is beneath the head of it acute resembling margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take from these awls great number of which each convenes to the thickness of each bone, while being present in all tests of the brain whose extremity be acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of awls: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the awl over the bone and rotate it with your fingers while knowing that the bone is penetrated; and then change the awl to another place, and pause what is between all crack the quantity of the thickness of the thread or environment that.
And then insert with incision-makers what is between each crack of the bone, and make that more subtle than you can over what in end of levity, as we have said, while erradicating the bone, or by your hand, or by any other cause by some tools which you will have prepared to that, as with tongs and forceps subtle.
And consider that you keep with total caution so that the incision-maker does not touch any cause of the brain.
And then when you have pierced the bone and it is separated from the brain if it is continued with it, and you have that extracted, consider that you wash and gnaw it in its asperity of that which is in the bone with another tool resembling incision-maker, but indeed so that it be more thin and subtle than the other incision-makers.
And if a part of the small bones and broken stars, then take that with facility with what is due to you of the tools; and then cure the plague with ointments and bandages which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is gentler, farther from fear, which Gualia and the lauzec praise for great gain; and this is its speech: it is necessary to you in the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most violent and most manifest, while when you have uncovered that part and have paused beneath it the extremity of this incision-maker slow and gentle of which this is the form:
And the lenticular part is lion and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as you see; that the lenticular part be pressed to the brain with the membrane of it inserting acute into the bone.
And then pierce upon the incision-maker of one part with a small hammer while you insert all the bone with facility as it is revolved, and you be secure of the bandage that no accident occur to it in any manner which you fear in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Then if there is some cause attached to the bone of the bandage in any place of bone, insert that with its extremity of the incision-maker lenticular, and deliver that from it with facility, for it is delivered from it harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the bandage, and what is severed or is left of the bone is the membrane of it, and you have in it asperity and minute stars, then consider that you wash that asperity and erradicating those stars with subtle razors by which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that there be to you possible to administer of them in all places most convenient for them and most right of them according to what in which you are lost your operation that broken bone and the form of it.
And consider that you administer in your reason with which you are cutting the bone at the beginning the most wide of those razors, and then use next to it of the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing that according to continuity while you come to administer the most thin and the most subtle of all those.
But in any other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what is lost to restore him.
And it is caused by not being healed above all those who have studied that art. And this is about what we wrote to show in great fractures.
And if the skin is stretched when you extract the bone, then take a cloth according to the amount of wound, and dip that in rose oil, and place it over the hole of the wound; and take another folded or doubled cloth, and dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth, and do this to the pus as gently as you can so that it does not hurt the head; and then apply lamb's wool over it, and do not tighten it except for the amount that the wound is.
And let him stay with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the cauterized wound; and then loosen it, and administer medicines that cause superficial dryness, such as linen rags and wheat flour, and powder of fennel and of aristology, and similar to these.
And it is that you make of these medicines a powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer in him all medicine of the property of which is that cleanses and does not bite.
And keep yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there be no filth of ointment or other in it; nor let you add virulence in him; for when it is applied on the skin of the brain, it corrupts him and causes him harm, and happens on the patient an evil malice.
And it happens in the head, as they are cleansed of the bone and most when the cure is lessened, and blackness in its surface; and therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient that we have said, know that it is poisonous without doubt.
And if blackness does not happen except from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take honey a part, and rose oil parts iii., and with these line the cloth, and then place it over the head; and then cure that with the spices of cure that you consider until it is healed.
Chapter iii.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except into two parts above all, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, because the part below is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and nothing happens to it except compression and crookedness and sinusitis.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must put your little finger into his nose, and close that fracture inside with your index finger, and with your thumb push outward, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do this by you with facility, and keep yourself that it does not hurt because of your operation on the patient.
And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then let it be applied with the extremity of the rod in which there is a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do that.
And cauterize it for restoration in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you must let him rest the cauterized wound for seven days.
And then put into the extremity of the nose a plug of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two pegs if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be thickness in the peg of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers said that the pegs be immersed in vinegar, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; they say that the plug be immersed in honeycombed vinegar with powdered mill; and then let the peg stay until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes it is inserted in the nose, instead of peg, a peacock feather that is wrapped in linen lion cloth; and let there be the fracture of the nose more violent and that the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, make pegs.
And if another cauterized wound happens, plaster the nose with cerote or with a poultice soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
But if there is no cauterized wound, then plaster that outward with sesame flour and fennel powder cooked in honey; and then place a lion's tongue over it, and do not put the nose to any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then split those, and extract them with instruments that are appropriate for them; and then sew the split, and cure that with what encapsulates and consolidates it, and with plasters that are appropriate.
And if a wound happens inside the nose, then cure that with pegs and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter iv.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture of it does not have wound, consider then if the fracture is outward only, and is not broken in two and bent at its parts within, then its diagnosis is easy.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right part, put your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and likewise if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then put in the mouth with the index finger of the right hand; and push by that the flexibility of the fracture within with facility to its parts outward, with the other hand from the part of the bone; and by that it is equalized that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then administer the extension of both parts according to its rightness so that it is possible to equalize them.
And if there is a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those with wires that will break with thread of gold or silver, or with thread of silk; and then place over the broken jaw cerote, and then place over it doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a great star decently made, or a bandage single lengthwise of the jaw; and then tie that over so that you have the fastening of it prepared and that it is appropriate to its application, until it is not ruined.
And command the patient to have rest and tranquillity, and feed him with wine and soft foods.
And if you see that the figure is altered in any way, then take it off and loose that on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it, and plaster that with sesame flour, with honeycombed vinegar, or with flour of cress, after you have removed the cerote from it, and place over the plaster linen cloth.
And then after that and the adjustment of that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that it does not loosen until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for many times this fracture is tight in three weeks.
And if another vesicle occurs with pus, then administer what we have said about many vesicles in the sedation of him so that he may heal and the pus be expelled.
And if the fracture is a wound, then consider whether it is a heavy bone separated or shattered, then you subtlety that hold those shards with what is convenient to that in the removal of those with instruments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you enlarge it with phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
Then, when you have held those shards, and some do not bleed out, then you close the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, place one of the ointments that are convenient to that and bandage that up, so that it may be healed.
Chapter 5.
Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Many times the collarbone in front of the chest is broken by a blow, and that fracture is done in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than that do not occur vesicles; and it is easier to restore it; or it is so that vesicles occur in it, and it is difficult to restore; or the fracture is a wound.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is a wound, is that you have two assistants, so that one has the assistant and follows the collarbone broken, and the other stretches out the neck while that part is broken.
Then splint the fracture with your fingers until it is made in its form according to how it covers, and there be no slight eminence or concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then have a cotton or woolen cloth placed beneath the neck of the patient, and let the size of it be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and constrict the cloth with your hand so that you may splint the fracture as it covers.
And if you cannot bring the extremity of the collarbone to the parts forward, because it is come to the breast bone, then have the patient reclined on his neck, and place a cushion half in size over the muscle of him.
And the assistant press the muscle of him to the parts below so that the bone of the collarbone be elevated which is in the breast bone above it, and then you correct the fracture and splint it with your fingers.
But if you feel vesicles of the collarbone and they are not healed, then have you split that open and drawn out those vesicles with facility.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision of it with one of the knives which you have apparelled for that, after you had placed beneath the collarbone the instrument that serves the head; and the instrument is of wood or iron, of which this is the form of it:
And it is like a chisel of which this is the concavity; and let its breadth be according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the fragility of it.
But let its length be according to that it is possible for you in the operation; that it have two extremities thus with points, and one extremity be ample and the other narrow.
And if the opening of the wound which you have split when you have drawn out the pus of the bone is ample, and it seems sure of pus, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the opening is slight, or you fear pus, then you fill the wound with clothes and powders according to the quantity of the opening of the wound.
And if pus occurs, then moisten a cloth in wine and rose oil and vinegar, and place it over that.
And all that the plaster be not healed over the broken bone; and so have you look at the patient every day, for when the bandage is softened or you see the plaster already healed, then you correct that and tighten the bandage.
And then place the pillow of him over his neck, and place beneath the neck of him due to the pillow of him in the night a little cushion; so that with that be elevated the support of him from the side of that, and thus is elevated the fracture of the collarbone at elevation of the muscle; or let his arm be bound to his neck.
And do not loosen the bandage if pus does not occur in the place or very much, until twelve days have passed.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen his face to that, and adjust in constriction and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
And it is tightened and comforted according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula is broken in the broad place of it and not broken of it but its margins.
And then when it is broken in the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not congealed except by touch, then according to that the figure of the fracture is bent have you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of engine which it is possible for you.
And then place over the place powder of wheat flour with white egg and stopa lion; and then place doubled cloth of wool; and then place over it a table-stick of wood subtle according to the quantity of the spatula whole or but little.
But if beneath the stick is concavity in any of the places of the spatula, then you splint that concavity with stopa lion, and then set the stick according to equality.
And then tighten above with a long humamate with decent constriction and with firmness of the stick so that it is not healed in its place.
And consider the bandage every day; and all times that it is softened, loosen another time and tighten it and adjust the stick if it is healed in its place.
And support him on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or less than that.
And then when it is completed that number, then you dissolve the bandage, and so you know it to be assured that that of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor its dissolution.
And if you process the area of the foot and place a chain underneath it, then you split it, and bind it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of an aposteme if it occurs here.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider that if you see their feet already softened and stupified and dead and cannot move them or stretch them or strengthen them, and when you pinch or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then know that they are not healed and in the most part this is deadly.
And if they feel a constriction in them when you pinch or prick, then know that the joint of the bone is saved and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
And if you see something similar in the spine of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already softened, approach the one who is affected in his hands, and when he lies on his back, he has flatulence and involuntary defecation, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is deadly, and so you should not treat him.
But if you see no cause for these things, the cause is better and soon removed.
And the treatment for him is that you pierce the swelling of the joint with a cautery needle, either by rubbing it with rose oil or with the seeds of hellebore; place it over the joint several times a day while the swelling is settling.
And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters on it, and strengthen the area with a bandage; and command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that causes pain until he is healed.
And if you see that the bone is separated from it due to some cause, then cover the wound with a bandage and bind that bone; and if it is large, sew the two lips of the wound closed; and then treat it with some healing ointment until it is healed.
But if the back end of the bone is broken and it is the end of the tailbone, then insert your left thumb into the anus, and bite the broken bone with your other hand as hard as you can by applying a second force; and then place a plaster on it, if necessary, and splint it.
And if you feel broken bones in him, then open it up, and immobilize that part, and heal the wound with the treatment that is described until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the restoration of the jaw.
The bones of the jaw are very fragile, and if they break, then their fracture is usually in their extremities and they bend towards the inner parts; and when this happens, the patient feels pain in the area and a constriction, and the jaw is stunned when it is fractured.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, whatever its shape is.
And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then bite it according to how it appears to you through another bite that is aligned with its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in its length or declining towards the jaw, then make the patient lie on his stomach so that you are prepared to restore that fracture. And when you have bitten it, place a plaster on it, and then place a splint made of wood or sinew over it, and bind it tightly; do not be afraid of the fracture piercing through or the removal of the splint.
And bite the cavity with what fills it so that the jaw takes on the binding equally; and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if you see swelling, then cease from extending it and restoring it until the swelling is settled, and place on it what was described earlier; and then return to its restoration, and bind it thus with what covers it.
And if you see them in the bones or they are crushed, then treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the elbow.
The elbow is what is between the arm and the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, and the first is that you take a piece of wood from an elm tree that is as thick as your thumb, shaped like this:
And let there be ligatures on both ends of two lengths, and let it be suspended from the elevated position.
And let the patient lie on his back; and then bend his broken arm over the wood so that it comes to rest at the tip of it in the middle part from which the curve of the wood is attached.
And then suspend some heavy weight over it, or let the servant extend that to the sides below; and let the doctor then press the fracture with his hands, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient lies on his neck and suspends the arm of his elbow by a bandage; and then command two servants, one of whom holds what is over the fracture with his hands, and the other the heel of him; and each of them extends to his side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind the fracture with a bandage and also with another bandage over it, and each of the two servants extend to their two sides.
And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then let half of the bandage be over the tip and the other below the fracture towards the arm.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the bone, then you must place a ligament over that spot and on that bone.
Gargle it with ease and without trouble, and then once the wound is sewed up according to how it should be and is applied properly, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the bandage on the sixth day, and place soft wool soaked in warm wine and rose oil over the abscess so that it drains, and then strengthen the wound afterward.
And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture and then a new drape over the plaster, and then lean your arm on that support and hold your open hand over the muscle.
And place the drape and strengthen it over the support of the arm so that the arm is in place of the splint if no other cause from the broken bone prohibits it.
Then use a splint.
And you must place over the fracture the splint that is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers all divided.
And then strengthen over the splints the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And you must make your bandage over the site of the fracture tighter. And when the fracture is longer, then make the bandage smaller.
And therefore if you see the placement of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you are restoring the member to its position then do so.
And if you fear an abscess will occur, then loosen the bandage and the splints on the sixth day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all directions for three days so that no inflammation or swelling occurs in the area, and thus food is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of bandage; and then rectify all of this according to what we have said.
But if you are sure that no such cause will occur, then do not loosen the bandage but rather for three days or more.
And let the patient's bed be on his back, and his hands over his stomach.
And place over the support a pillow filled with wool soaked, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not distorted or dissolved nor the ligament softened; therefore rectify all this with your skill.
And let the patient's food be according to the order we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is started strengthening; and then you must thicken the food for him.
Because it is customary for the support and the bed to be made tighter for forty days, then loosen them and give a bath and medicine to soothe the area which rectify it.
And if the fracture is loose, then you must not loosen that ligament and splints until ten days or two months have passed.
Chapter 12.
Of restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones which are called the two bones of the forearm; one of which is small and is that which the thumb pushes, and the other is large and is that which is placed below the small one in the part further down.
And often only the larger bone is broken, or the smaller one, and often both are broken at once.
And when the smaller bone is broken on top, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when it is broken below, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at once.
Therefore if the bone that is broken is the smaller one on top, then it is convenient for the doctor, when restoring it, to make a small extension with ease so that it is soaked.
But if the larger bone is what is broken, then you must make an even more forceful extension.
And if both bones are broken at once, then you must make the extension with the most force.
And you must make the position of the hand for its restoration and extension extended over one pillow, and let the wrist of the hand be above the parts on top, more out than all the other fingers, and let the thumb be more down than the other fingers, and let the patient lie on his back with a pillow under him.
And let one pillow be in front of him in the height or bent toward him so that he does not strain himself too much.
And then the assistant extends the arm of the part further down with his hand or with a ligament, and another assistant extends it above similarly.
And then the doctor soaks the bone so that he reduces it according to the best figure that he can.
And if there is swelling in the bone, then you pierce through it with your skill to reduce all pressure in its place.
And if there appears a separate swelling that presses against the tendon and you do not hope in its restoration, then cut it off and treat it according to the way we have said above.
But if the fracture is with pus, I have already made that particular chapter and therefore take its cure.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration then you cut a cloth with a kerchief made from warm oil and white wax, and let it be moderate between thickness and subtlety, and strengthen the bandage over that with a gentle tightness so that the abscess drains; then remove the kerchief and place a plaster prepared from powder of millers' flour and honey, and then place splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of an arm's splints are seen in the most dispositions, or let the fracture be in one bone or both bones at once.
And then strengthen your bandage over the site of the fracture with great force and violence, and when you loosen the extension at the parts on top of the fracture or at the lower parts of him, loosen the bandage a little softer according to how it is preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the bandages which are wrapped around the fracture be soft, moistened cloths and not hard or rough, and let the thread by which it is tightened be of linen thread and not hemp thread, as we have recommended.
And consider the member after a few days. And if any cause occurs which requires rectification, then you immerse the member in warm water so that it stops that swelling.
And let the member not be bent while it rests, and then tighten the bandage again.
And if the extension is already softened and the bone is healed and similar to those, then rectify all that with your skill.
And consider also if food is prohibited from coming to the member due to excess of bandage, then soften it a little and let it stay for several days so that food comes to it, then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not experience any of the causes that we have said, then do not loosen it for about 20 days or from those times on.
And then let the patient's hand be suspended by its skill of movement, and let him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or at the very least it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of nature.
Here is the next sentence:
Here is the translation:
Know that in the tips of the hands and the knuckles of the fingers there can be fractures, and they do not occur often but many times.
And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, then have the patient lie on his back and denant, and place your hand over that which is extended.
Then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor applies an ointment to those places where there are wounds, with good conjunction.
And then have him apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess, cauterize it; and then place a poultice over that according to the quantity of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
But if the cut is on the edges within the palm of the hand, then make a bandage out of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with his palm cut; then let it be held with long cloth.
And let the poultice of skin be with cloth in which is raised, so that the skin is applied to the palm; and hold that according to how it is needed.
But if the fracture is on the outer edges, then place over that poultice and another poultice from the edge below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, as well as how the hand is rolled between the fingers with ligaments.
And if a fracture occurs on one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be anointed according to how it is needed and then let it be bandaged with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
But if the fracture is on one of the other fingers, as well as in that of the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then let it be anointed and bound with the finger with which it is attached; or they are all bound according to continuation, and that is better; or place a small splint over that, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and especially that, the disposition of abscess cauterization — with your operation — with what it is needed when any cause of those occurs, according to how it is narrated about him.
Here is the next sentence:
Of the restoration of a fracture of the tip of the toe and of the toes.
The bones of the thigh many times are broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the front and to the upper pus.
And its restoration is done so that the ligament is bandaged over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and on his face.
Then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to quality when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then let the ligament be towards the inside at the part of the armpit, so that the extension boxes in it, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the cut is near the armpit, then let the ligament be towards the inside and let the extension be at the parts below.
And then the doctor anoints the bone with both of his hands inside so that he reduces it according to the natural semblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then have him apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess on the member. But if there occurs on him an abscess, then let him leave that for several days until the abscess cauterization is completed, and then return to your cure.
The bandage of him is done thus: have a hard bandage wrapped over the fracture, and fold that two or three times, and remove from him superfluous moisture; and then wrap the leg so that it comes to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
And insert long felt between the thigh and the leg near to the armpit at the parts below, and let the ends of the felt come from the uppermost part of the two parts, and then roll over the leg and the thigh that which is superfluous of the bandage.
And then place splints on the thigh at the site of that fracture and place one of those splints over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the vacancies between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths so that the bandage is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong bandage over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as many as you lengthen with ligament of the site of the fracture, your bandage be lesser and looser and moister.
And then extend the two ends of the felt to the parts below so that it comes to the ankle of the foot, and band both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not loosened from its place.
And then let him lie on that, where there is no occurrence of corrosion or abscess cauterization or swelling and similar to those; and if any cause of those occurs, then treat him with dismemberment of it, and correct what has occurred altogether, according to how we have said many times.
But if there is pus of the bone which is poured out, then have you anoint that according to what is possible for you; and if not, fain over it and remove it, and cure with that from which preceded the remembrance by which it is healed.
And some times this fracture of the thigh is bandaged with another one that are attached to him, as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
But in its restoration in such a manner made, there does not occur to the patient claudication; and if it is restored alone, then let the other leg be applied to which the other thigh is attached, then it is necessary that he limp that one from which it occurs temporarily.
And know that the thigh is bandaged for 40 days or one month or one month and a few days, and all of this is according to the variety of the complexities and the other dispositions.
Here is the next sentence:
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the armpit.
Know that fracture of the armpit occurs many times, but there also occurs to it many times sprain.
But if there occurs to it fracture, then it is not except crack or break in its parts, and that is with pain or numbness, and over that all is as it is felt.
And its restoration is thus that it is anointed that which is broken of the parts of it with the fingers so that it is attached and conjoined according to what is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
And then have him apply a plaster and place over that a round splint if it is needed from that; and band over that with a bandage as is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, as well as how there is abscess cauterization and similar to those in which there occurs to all accident with that which is convenient to him so that he is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a broken leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named after the name of the leg; and the other is thin, and is called the tibia.
And it happens to both types of fracture that happen in the leg what happens to the two bones of the arm, and therefore the restoration of it is the same as the restoration of the arm in every way; and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is turned into many pieces.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is turned to the back.
And if the thicker bone is broken, bend that one downward, and it is of those causes that are not to you known.
And then administer extension and position and strapping of the splints according to that same way.
But however, if the fracture of the leg is loose having many little bones, then the extension should be less and closer, and you should move with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation over the arms, and it is when you align the splints and complete all your operation; then you will take weights of wood which is placed beneath the causes which are placed in soles, and they are made equally of white of palm; ligate those of which are small thickness, and not be of the fingers, and let the length of those according to the length of the leg, and of the toe into the most bottom.
And then wrap around each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it; and pause one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let them be from within to the most bottom place of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places of two extremes and in the middle place, for with this tightness the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right and left part, and stands in good position.
And then is administered a staff of wood according to the length of the leg; and let it be paused on it the leg so that it conserve that from movement.
And especially you do that in fracture, and when it has been properly healed.
And then consider each day the leg and study with that by last study, and you keep it from pustule and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those happens, then pause yourself to it with what is necessary for it to be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of fractures of the talus and bones of the foot and toes.
The talus does not often sustain a fracture; but fractures of the bones of the foot occur frequently; and fractures of the toes are uncommon, and do not occur unless there is some defect in the structure.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and these bones are displaced, so that they project beyond one another, then let the patient place his foot on the ground prepared as before.
Then let him put his weight upon that foot which is raised by the displaced bones; then let him press and crush and draw these back into their sockets.
And let an ointment be applied to this, and let the swelling below the foot be bound with a bandage which has two small pieces of wood attached to it at one end.
And then strengthen that foot with a splint, because you have bound it up in bandages and other remedies.
After three or four days have passed, then take off the ligature; for you will find the bones displaced, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in such cases is the same as that already described.
But if some toes are broken, then restore these; draw them together and bind them as before in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And for the broken toe, apply a splint according to its length; and let it be bound so that there is a little space between each toe; then below the foot, apply this bandage as before, and strengthen the toe with a ligature.
But if there are two or three or more broken bones, then apply to each toe a splint of its own size wrapped in linen; and strengthen the bandage at the lowest part of the foot so that it stands upon one end of the splint, allowing room for the foot to move freely.
And you should not forget that in all cases you should observe the causes which have been stated before concerning the other fractures, and apply remedies according to the case.
Chapter XVIII.
Of fractures of the pubic bone, the shin-bone and the staff of man.
When there is a fracture of the pubic bone, let her lie on her side with a pillow between her legs; then let her lean forward slightly, and let her be supported from behind.
And let the midwife fill up the pubic bone with her finger, and let it be done in the same way as in the case of a woman who has not yet given birth; then let the woman be pressed, and lifted up little by little so that everything may return to its natural position, and the broken bone may come back into its socket.
And let powder be applied to her back; and when she wants to urinate, let the pubic bone be pressed gently so that she may pass water easily; then reduce it and bring it back again according to the method by which you found it at first; then bring it back to its former position.
And do this for seven days or about that time, for then it will be restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of an ox and strengthen it with a tube of reed; then insert the whole bladder into her pubic bone, and when the bladder is inflated inside her pubic bone, the fracture will return.
And let it be filled up, and let it stay for a few days according to our recommendation, until she is healed.
And when there is a fracture of the shin-bone in man or woman, then administer remedies and punctures as we have recommended for a fracture of the hip-bone.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these fractures, and there is no need of any special study or understanding to read this book; for it explains clearly the remedies for such fractures, and therefore one can understand them well.
But when there is a fracture of the staff in man, take a piece of white poplar-wood and put it in the staff; then apply a bandage of linen over it, and let it be wrapped up and left for three days or about that time, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of fractured bones when they are swollen.
It is convenient for one who has a fracture and swelling that the bone should be large like the bone of the thigh or arm, or similar to it, so that you may be careful and apply bloodletting as we have stated before.
And if the swelling flows away from the fracture, then beware that you make the bloodletting at the point of retention as we have said before, unless some other cause is present.
And let the fracture be restored on that same day; do not prolong it, unless suppuration occurs.
But if suppuration occurs, let the restoration of the fracture be delayed until the tenth day, or even later, for then the suppuration will cease; and do not apply remedies on the third and fourth days, for otherwise you will cause bad accidents.
But if the fractured bone projects beyond the skin which covers it, then beware that you draw it back and bring it together with your hands gently and with little extension.
But if extension is not prepared and the position of the bone by your hands, then reduce it with your hands gently and with little extension; there is a tool made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight, and the breadth according to the amount of swelling; this is necessary for the surgeon to take from those three or four, according to the quantity needed in all kinds of fractures.
And let it be round and not bent, so that it may not be doubled by the pressure upon it in the hour of operation.
And let its end be pointed and the edge bent inwards so that it tends towards the middle of the bone.
And this is the form of it:
And in Greek it is named "labrys vulturis", and it is a little palette.
So beware that the pointed end of the instrument be elevated above the projecting bone.
And push it into a wound until the bone returns, and let it be brought together in some position.
And therefore press the ends of the fracture together, and if the end of the broken bone is thin and the instrument cannot be inserted easily, then beware that you do not push the end of the bone in so as to injure it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone at all as we have recommended, then insert it into that which is suitable to it of the incisions which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that it is possible for you.
And let it be rubbed with something which has been ground on the bone which is rough and covered with minute scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and as soon as the reduction causes violent pain in cutting, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this so that you confer great benefit to him.
When you have completed your restoration of the bone, then immerse the linen in wine which is black and sharp; and properly if it is summer, do not apply oil nor any other cause to it above the swelling, so that no putrefaction or corruption may occur in it.
And then administer stars at the time of your Compliment of the restoration of the bone, and let the wound remain uncovered so that you may apply the traction with tweezers and bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to tighten the wound with the fracture, because many times the foolish doctors have done this and caused death or harm to their patients, which is unsanitary. And if the tightness is lighter, softer, and different from the tightness of other fractures, then:
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear any of those bad incidents that we have listed, and there is pain in the area, then do not place stars on it, but instead make a bandage of tough cloth over the area and tighten it with those.
And when a day or two has passed and the wound has started to heal and there is some inflammation, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it and apply hot poultices, according to our custom of treating wounds, as well as tetrafarmacon and similar things.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the parts below with ease.
If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated or the inflammation does not go away, then know that there are small holes here for which you should open the wound with a tent. And of those holes that are separated and remain open, if the member does not heal and causes pain, then pierce them according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound turns black or green, or there is another type of decay or corruption, then do what is appropriate for each one according to the cure that is preceded by a description in its chapter.
And from this point on, you should take care with your own words and present your argument: when the bone is broken, it protrudes over the limb like the bone of the thigh and the helper, and similarly for those of the large limbs, and do not assume attraction or extraction of it, for many times death occurs because of this; let there be no incisions for it to pus out, for it will fall on its own after about 20 or 30 days. And then heal the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave it.
Chapter .XX.
Of the cure of a knot that occurs in the path of any fracture.
Many times this knot occurs in the path of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and it is visible as a shape on the limb; and very often it prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore, consider if the knot is recent and administer to it medicines that have dried, like aloes, and myrrh, and mirra, and seseli, and similar things; take some or all of them and mix with wine vinegar, or egg white, or vinegar, and apply that on the knot in a piece of cloth, and tie it around tightly.
Let the tightness remain for several days, and then loosen it and repeat this, while the knot is being soaked; or tighten a piece of lead over it inclined downward, because lead has the property of soaking up anything that is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the knot has already turned to stone and is tight, and it necessitates being cut open painfully, then split it from its highest pus-filled part, and cut out the surplus and prominent part, or pierce it with some resoring agent so that it may be soaked; and heal what was healed.
Chapter .XXI.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb becomes weak and frail, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes weak and frail, this does not happen for no reason: one cause is excess of inflammation of the ligament and of its binding made not according to how it should be; or due to excess tightness of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from running to the limb; or due to excess of superfluous heat; or due to superfluous movement at an improper time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and debility of it.
And the cure for this is to make the patient eat and soften his heart so that blood multiplies in him; and administer a bath; and apply fomentation and lettuce over it.
And then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts much nourishment to it, or continue fomentation of it with warm water, until the nourishment runs and it returns to its natural shape.
Chapter .XXII.
Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibit their operation from what they should do.
When it happens to the limb already restored that there is healing of crookedness and prominence in the broken bone and knot, and it is fed by the form of the limb, but yet the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not believe the word of one who examines that limb as though it were newly broken.
But many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy and presents great danger, the sign of which is deadly.
But if claudication and knot are recent, then let them be fomented with warm water in which soft herbs are boiled, like leaves of poplar tree and roots of it, and mallow, and similar things; or let there be a plaster made with emollient ointment like white lead well made; or let there be a mucilage of root of poplar tree and let it be rubbed with grease of linseed oil, or let there be a plaster made with that; or let them be bound with fat figures and bound with cotton threads, and similar things to those medicines which are named as brothers' consolations.
And sometimes it is dissolved by constant gentle friction that is made with moist hands, and let the limb be moved to all parts at all hours.
But if crookedness has gone before and is made strong and turned to stone and necessitates cure by iron, then let the pus be above dried up and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what superfluity of knot from that doctors with subtle tools, and let ease be administered to it with solicitude and study.
Chapter .XXIII.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is separation of one of the joints of its place, by which it is prohibited from motion, and the figure of the limb is disturbed, and it brings great pains and injuries to the patient.
Therefore when dislocation occurs, then let it be reduced as soon as possible, and do not delay reducing it, because if it is delayed, the place is pustularized and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for that reason, let it not be soaked or stretched in the time of pustulation because many times it brings spasms and pains.
But when that happens, then let you examine the flabosity of the patient, and then let it be left so that pus is discharged from the pustule; and then let the limb be fomented with warm water and oil, and then let it be reduced with ease.
And all parts should be treated with water from which memory will return to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are dislocated if it does not bite; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: they are either slightly loosened from their joints and slightly softened, or they are fully dislocated and completed, provided that they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it closed, and his tongue is wrapped in a cloth.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in most cases it will return on its own for some slight cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it must be reduced quickly without delay at all.
And it is that the minister hold the patient' head, and let the doctor insert his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and let the others hands be outside holding him; and command the patient to cease clenching his jaws and release them in any way; and the doctor should grip the jaw and press it in until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are fully dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both is made easier and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And when they are returned and bound, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place over them a poultice of linen with cerot, made of wax and oil heated; and let it be bound easily with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows, so that he does not clench his jaws to the right or left; and do not force him to chew anything for any reason; let his food be soft meat, so that when the pains are lessened and the jaws are numbed, then he may chew whatever he wants.
And let this be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth after eating and drinking and speaking, until the jaw is numbed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated at any time is difficult and not returned to their places, then many times there occur fever and continuous sweating, and very soon the belly of the patient is swollen, and very soon he vomits pure phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times he who has this dies within ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated on the inside due to its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and this is declared by feeling.
And its restoration is that the patient chews on his back and extends his arms. Then grip the joint tightly with your palm, for it will return.
And let a plaster and powder be placed over it and strengthen that.
But the extremity of that which connects to the head and is continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and bound according as we have said and as you are equipped.
And let a plaster, powder, and bandage be placed over it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which the first is that it be dislocated at the joint of the shoulder to the lower part.
And the second is that it be dislocated above the muscle, and this is done tightly; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and out from the lower parts behind the shoulder, and most often in those of whom the flesh is thin, it is dislocated easily; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it is forced out with difficulty.
And very often it happens to some men by impact or blow, and the muscle of him is swollen with a hard swelling, and it is bitten by that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore let you do this so that you may be experienced in it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower parts behind the shoulder; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, for you see a clear difference in them; and you see in the head of the muscle concavity and above the shoulder behind the touch of the head of the muscle as though by an egg, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear on that side, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated behind or above the shoulder, and you see a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is reduced easily when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And its reduction is that the minister lifts the hand of him to the upper parts; and let the assistant place his fingers below the shoulder of him, and lift the joint with strength to its place, and let the minister lift the hand of him, and extend it above; and let a bandage be placed over it so that it returns easily.
But if by what we have said it does not return, and the dislocation occurred long ago, let the patient be bathed in hot water and be administered embrocation that softens and lines it as though its joints were cut with a sharp razor, and let fenugreek, and melilot be administered in water.
And let the patient be laid on his back and let his arm be placed below the shoulder of him, and let the bandage be tightened around it between elevation and compression, and let the doctor hold the top of the muscle with strength, and lift the hand of the patient so that it is not clenched to the lower parts, and let the assistant hold the head of the patient so that he does not clench his jaws to the lower parts, for then it returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce him according to this manner: and let there be present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on that side of him, and insert his arm below the shoulder of the patient and lift the shoulder of him above while the patient is suspended in air, and let the assistant pull the hand of the patient from the lower parts of his belly. But if the patient is young, then let him be suspended for some other cause, so that he is heavy, for then the dislocation returns at once.
And it is reduced in the same way: a long pole is placed on the ground with a round head, as if it were a mortar, which is neither thick nor thin, and then the patient is laid down; since being placed on the head of the post are lion's cloth, and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and then his hand is extended from the parts below to the other side; and the rest of his body is stretched with strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the patient for all of these reasons that we have mentioned, then use this treatment. Take a pole whose length is two cubits and width four digits; let its thickness be removed in the shape of a hammer according to this form:
And then on the round head, lions' cloth is tied so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
And then the hammer is placed below the patient's buttock; his hand or arm is extended over the pole towards the parts below; and the pole is tied around the helper's hip, arm, and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a step of the ladder according to its width; and the hand is extended to the parts below; and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters immediately.
And when the instrument is completed according to any method that is possible for you; then wait until you place a pad made of wool equal in quantity below his buttock; and then spread ointment prepared from flour with rosewater on all the muscle, as if it were turned over above, and then tightly press down on the buttock with a decent pressure; let the bandage be turned around the ointment, and his hand be attached to his neck, and left, and may not be harmed for six days.
And wait that the food of the patient be little, until his member is comforted, because it is easier for him to heal.
And then the food be given more, seven or eight times, and an exercise be performed; and if it is堅固 and not softened, then he is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to him or due to another cause, then in that one must be administered cautery with three punctures, according as it was said before in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not closed, and the ointment and pressure are applied to him several times, and it is not closed and he cannot raise that arm to the parts above, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from the feet and breast or the parts behind, the reduction is done with pushing and extending with hands, while it returns in.
And the other pressure must be administered to that one as it is healed.
And if it happens that healing weighs on the member and delays its movement, then the patient should take baths many times so that that weight is removed and he returns to his first nature.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of healing of dislocation of the jaw.
Know that the jaw joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all sides, especially to the front from the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you press down on it or touch it according to any figure it is dislocated, it is manifested to you clearly that the joint is hollowed out and cannot bend the arm or touch with that his own muscle.
And wait that your hands reduce the dislocation immediately before it comes to him pustules cauterized, because if it comes to him pustules cauterized, it is difficult for him to be reduced, and strongly he will not heal at all; especially when it is on the back, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and causes greater pain, and many times ends in death.
And the restoration of it, when that which is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands; and let his arm be expanded, and the doctor's hands be on the jaw and under him, pushing the joint with the tips of his fingers, or with the edge of his palm so that it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is to the front parties, then it returns as he bends his hand with his own hand, while he pushes down on the jaw with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a vehement extension and a very strong motion.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold that joint two ministers so that it is not harmed by the extension.
And then let the arm be turned over all parts, because it is wrapped around the hand with folded cloth or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that it helps by facilitating lubrication of the joint; and then push down on the joint with violent impulse so that it returns.
And then the reduction of it must be that ointment is applied on which is stiffened and dried with rosewater; let it be tightened with a decent pressure, and his arm be suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
And then let it be removed; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you remove the bandage from him.
And if you see that the joint is not tighter, then iterate the ointment and bandage, and leave that for several days until it is tightened; and then remove that.
But if it happens to him that the weight of the reduction of the joint is heavy and its disposition is in movement, then administer wetting in a bath and subtle friction, while it is cooled down; or apply on the joint aloe, so that there is fat of motion; and then let it be bandaged and left for the day and night. And then remove that and put him in a bath; and when he is sweat, then you rub the joint with mild friction, and then iterate on it aloe, so that it is ointment of motion, one day, and the second, and the third, The corruption has already arrived at the brain' lining of the bath, so that it is limited.
And if you wish, apply on that the udder of a cow wet and heated with a bandage, and tightly press on that; and do that several times, because it is moist and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of healing of dislocation of malacet, so is the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malacet of the hand some times is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and it is contrary to other joints; but however let there be swiftness in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, before that place comes to pustules cauterized or that happens to him cautery.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you stop the joint of the hand on a table and let the minister extend his hand, and the doctor put his hand or the palm of his hand on the edge of the joint, pushing it so that it returns to its place.
However, one must consider whether the palm is already turned towards the belly of the hand; then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table below the extension and reduction. And if the dislocation precedes from the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be intrinsecally on the table so that the doctor's hand can grasp that imminence of the joint.
And if he returns at once, that is good; but if not, then press on the pustule with your finger until it gives way and let it go, and do not repeat this, or else he will not endure nor be able to bear the reduction after so many days have passed.
But the bone will return to its position according to its tortuosity; and if you observe no cause in the patient, except that his hand is relaxed and cannot grasp anything, then know that the nerves are torn or cut, and there is nothing inside him except that it should be tightened with a cautery near its dislocation, and strengthen it there firmly.
Then when the patient is returned to his former state, apply to him the plaster which we have recommended, and let it remain and be tightened for three days; and then let it be loosened and left off, and the hand exercised.
But if his movement is impeded and some heaviness occurs in him, then loosen that with warm water and with friction several times, while he is being eased.
Chapter 29.
Of the cure for dislocation of the teeth.
The teeth are sometimes completely dislocated.
And when any tooth is dislocated to the back of the hand or to its belly, then press on the tooth and drive out the dislocation of it with your fingernails, while it returns to place.
Then support the head of the tooth and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
And then suspend and extend that until it is straightened out in its place on the following day.
And when morning comes, loosen that according to the narrative, and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and do so at night as well; and do this for several days until it is tightened.
And feign that it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and loosen that to that part, and do with it your first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do with it if it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter 30.
Of the cure for dislocation of the vertebrae in the back.
When complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae in the back or neck, and several vertebrae are displaced from their places, then in that there is no cure, for death awaits the patient.
And a sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is outside his control, and he cannot retain it; and often several members of his body or both legs or both arms, or one of those are relaxed; or one vertebra is displaced from its place, for often it is displaced and often the removal of those to four parts occurs.
Then when that is displaced to the back parts, it is called dislocation of the spine.
But its cure is that you should consider if the dislocation occurred in childhood, for then there is no cure for that, and there is no healing of it at all.
But of that which occurs due to impact or concussion or similarly, the Ancients have spoken of methods of cure with prolix speech, of which the best returns with profit; but I have abridged that which the few excuse from its excess due to my proximity to the intention and its exposition, and in which I have expounded and formed it from diverse instruments, by which I will demonstrate and explain.
And of those, only that which occurs in the back properly is healed by me.
And let the patient be extended on his face over a soft bed, and let him be extended below by an instrument moistened in order that his feet not be bound.
And then a straight staff should be placed, fixed in the earth at the end of the bed around his head, and another staff in air holding up his feet at the other end of the bed.
And one minister should hold the staff and not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and let them lift up with their hands the end of the staff which is beneath his head, and extend the other end of the staff to the other staff which is beneath his feet; and then tighten all the cords and do this to the other staff which is beneath his feet.
And then the ministers each extend the cords to the end of the staff, and let the staffs not be displaced from their places where they are fixed, but rather let them be tightened as I have said.
And the doctor should place his palms over the vertebra with strength until it returns to its position, or he should place it on a table and then tighten his feet over the table until it returns.
But if it does not return by this means, then take a table whose breadth or length is in air about three arms, and hollow out in the wall of which we have said that it is near the patient a place into which the end of the table falls. And then place the middle of the table over the vertebra, and the doctor should place his feet over the other end, and tighten well until the vertebra is tightened and returns to its position.
And if you wish, open with a pulley which is turned by hand; and fix in the earth behind the head of the patient two staffs, the length of which are an arm each, and fix the head of him in the end of the pulley two staffs, and let the length be between each staff one palm, and each be fixed in the earth so that it is not displaced.
And there should be a round staff in which is the pulley, and it should be turned in the two holes of the two staffs.
And at its end is a hole in which the staff is formed, the length of which is one palm by that which is turned; and likewise in the two other staffs is similarly.
And then tighten the cords which you have tightened around the feet of the patient in the pulley which is beneath his head, and the cords which you have tightened around his thighs in the turn which is beneath his feet.
And then each pulley should have a minister who turns the pulley with his hand, and the doctor should warm the vertebra as we have said.
And when the vertebra is returned and the place warmed, then consider that you pause on the dislocation a plaster dried with oil of roses, and then pitch; and then pause over the plaster a table whose breadth is three digits or more, and its length should take up the distance of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
And then let him be tied with a bandage as we have said before, and feed the patient with subtle food until he is healed.
And if there is any swelling in the affected area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that soften and loosen should be administered through oral intake over a long period of time, as we have described; and a lead plate has already been applied to that area.
And sometimes swelling occurs at the base of the spine, and it is caused by that displacement; and there is a bone in that area which should not be subjected to this medicine, because if it is, it will likely cause death.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle are not designed to be dislocated, but only to move slightly with a small cavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated on the inside or outside, or forward or backward.
Most often, it is dislocated to the inside, and less often to the front or back.
And the sign of dislocation to the inside is that when you straighten the leg of the patient, it is longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backward, and there is a swelling on top of the hip joint, because the head of the femur has shifted here.
And the sign of dislocation to the outside is that its features are opposite to the previous description.
And the sign of dislocation forward is that they can only extend their leg, but not bend it at the knee due to pain; if they try to walk on the ball of their foot, they cannot; and their urine is retained, and there is swelling in the groin area, and they walk on their heels.
And the sign of dislocation backward is that they cannot extend or bend their leg at the knee; the leg is shorter than the other, and the groin area is softened, and the head of the femur has shifted backward.
However, the reduction of this dislocation is that you must consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic: if it has been like that for a long time and you administer reduction according to its condition, then it will not be cured completely; and in that case, there should be no prosomecio.
But with the patient who has a recent dislocation, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must try to return the joint to its proper position and extend it toward the inside and outside, and move it to the right and left, for it will quickly return to its place and will not require any other treatment.
But if it does not return to its proper position in this way, then you must prepare a strong bandage and extend the leg of the patient from the lowest part, or with their own hands, or with a bandage tied around the leg above the knee; and another person should hold the end of the bandage while someone else pulls it down below the patient's fingers; then tightly bind the lion's tongue around the head of the femur.
And the extension should be from the inside to the groin, or from the back to the shoulder blade.
And they should all be extended at the same time while the patient is raised from the ground and their leg hangs down.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
So if the dislocation returns according to what we have said, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to use any method that one knows of their own cure.
In the proper reduction of it, when it is dislocated to the inside, the patient should lie on their side; then place the bandages over the head of the femur in that area between the head of the femur and the groin; and extend the bandage from above the groin toward the highest part of the collarbone.
And another assistant should hold the patient' leg firmly, press on the large part of the hip joint and extend toward the outside with strong extension, for it will return to its place.
And this is the quickest cure by which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
But if it is resisted and does not obey the treatment with this method of cure for both feet at the same time, then both feet should be bound together tightly, on the soles and over the instep.
And the length of each band should be the amount of four fingers, and the leg of the patient should be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
And the patient should be suspended over the head of the pillar, and it should be in the middle; and its length from the ground should be the amount of two yards.
And order a strong young man to push down on the head of the femur, and another strong young man should suspend the patient, and the other young man should push up on the hip with strength, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outside, the patient should lie on their back according to what we have recommended regarding frozen gel; and the bandage should be tightly bound around the leg of the patient and over the foot.
And two pillars should be placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other under their head; and the pillar placed under the buttocks should be wrapped with wet cloths, so that the patient is not damaged by the pillar being between their thighs, so that the extension toward the lowest part is not hindered.
And each assistant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand should guide the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is forward, then the leg should be extended more than usual, and according to this measurement, the palm of the doctor's right hand should be placed over the groin, and another assistant should pull that up with their other hand, and with that pulling, extend it toward the lowest part at the knee.
And if the dislocation is backward, then the patient' leg should not be extended toward the lowest part, and it should be elevated above the ground; but it should be placed on a hard surface, just as the leg joint is dislocated to the outside, according to what we have said about its placement on two surfaces; and it should lie on its side and the bandages should be extended, according to what we have said, without pain.
And there should be administration of compression with a table over the area where the joint is located.
So when the reduction is complete according to what we have said — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two legs, and when you see those angles and the patient stretches their leg and expands it without excuse, then you know that the member according to which it has returned — and then you adjust two thighs and pause with plaster and expand it with a bandage so that the joint is not bent in any of the parts; and bind the leg to rest for three days or four.
Then, cut the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see these wounds in reality, then know that the dislocation is already healed and the patient can walk.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that one, and stretch the other according to your first stretching, and leave it for three days.
Then loosen that one, and make that one delay in walking for some days, until he is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the outward parts, and at the inward parts, and at the lower parts more than at the upper parts; and it is not dislocated at the frontward parts.
And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his jaw to his thigh; then know that the jaw is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that he extend his leg, if he can, on that; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; and then make adhere your jaw to his palm, and retain those between your teeth over his jaw with strength, and another extends his leg while the jaw returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that his thigh adheres to the cushion with light non-labouring.
Then plaster that one and make adhere the leg to the cushion, and then bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen those.
And do not use the patient of walking for some days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hip preceding narrative.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle some times is sprained by small removal, and some times it is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made either at the inward parts or at the outward parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the sprain of it is by slight reduction, and it is that he be extended with facility with hands and be bound while he returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to complement, you should make the patient lie down straight, and have one strong and valiant minister of the part behind the jaw of that in the middle place of it.
And then you with your right hand draw the foot of the highest part, and with your left hand of the lowest part of the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, and then extend with the left; and press the foot of the leg with the right beneath the thigh.
And do that two times according as we have counted.
And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return.
But if to you is prohibited the reduction of it by that which we have recommended, then make the patient lie down on his back on earth, and stretch a stake in firm earth, and that box between his thighs, and you already have wrapped a cloth around him so that he does not slide.
And then the minister of it have his thighs, and then another minister extend the leg with their hands or with ligament that lies over the neck of the leg; and then each minister extend against extension of his fellow, and the stake be extended between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of him is not pulled to the lowest parts beyond his extension.
And then the doctor softens the dislocation with their hands, and another minister have the healthy thigh to the lowest parts, for the dislocation returns with facility.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause plaster and stretch that with ligaments firmly, and bind the leg to the ankle.
And you should fear or keep from the nerves which are behind on the ankle, lest the ligament over that be violent and lead it strongly.
And then leave that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch that.
And then loosen that on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for 40 days. But if he is forced to walk before that space, it is not done with security that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if there happens to him an abscess with pus, then you minister in the ceding of it that in which our narrative preceded, in another place of cure and of fomentation, while it is suppurative.
Chapter 34.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
That which is dislocated be swollen with little extension without difficulty; and that which is difficult, beforehand is lighter.
But if the dislocation is in some part of the jaw of the leg, then you make the patient lie down his leg on even ground or on a table, and be standing thus as if he were walking.
And then you stand on your feet, and place your leg over that which protrudes from the joints, and then press that with your leg with strength while it returns, and see that which is swollen and does not appear in the place prominent.
And then pause under the belly of the leg of him a table that takes all the leg, to which are two ends, and then stretch that with decent and firm extension for three days; and then loosen that and make that rest from walking for some days, while it is stretched out and of reduction is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the species of dislocation that are made by plague or by fracture, or by any other impingement.
When there happens any cause of those, and you are expert in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many times you succeed after death.
And therefore do not presume upon the cure of it, but that which is expert in the art, long-suffering, compassionate and pitiful, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and use in the beginning of medicines that produce suppurative abscesses justly, and let the patient be subject to divine judgement, unless you hope for salvation from perdition, from the wickedness alleviation, and in which appears some hope. And then try as much as you can of it the reduction in the beginning of the cause, before that he receives suppurative abscess.
And then if the member returns according as you wish, then minister regimen which yields suppurative abscess and cures the plague with that which suits him of the gummed parts dried.
And if dislocation is by fracture and impingement happens in the separated bones, then you be expert of that, and do in that what we have said in the simple wickedness of those.
And observe and avoid according to your ability the instrument of fear as I have described it in my sermon; for by doing so you will better serve your Creator, more firmly uphold your glory, and bring greater health to your true body in this life. Thus ends the text of Albucasis, may God bless it. Amen.
