Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I will accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is strange from top to bottom, the science is perverted and decaying, and nothing remains of the fathers except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
It seems to me that I will vivify it altogether with the ordination of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the remedies of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is neglected. And it behooves him who takes it upon himself to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving veins and of resting, and from there issues.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, beware lest he fall into error and harm men; thus I have seen many times more of those who take upon themselves this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Because I see a foolish doctor who treated an abscess on the neck or throat of a woman, and treated the arteries of the neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of an old man, and the stone was large; so he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the old man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they had left it in, he would have died.
And I saw another doctor who took in hand the care of the duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors, out of ignorance, held the break against the wound by strong ligature, and did not leave the wound to heal, and they left it thus, and ordered that he should not move it; and thus it remained until the leg became entirely swollen and putrid, and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to dislocate the leg; and when I saw it dislocated, it was in peace and felt no pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire member was almost lost.
And I saw another mirror that burst into an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its sovereignty.
For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely cut out what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: it is to know where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish people may not speak evil of you.
Take your arms in crosswise, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and leave the grievous maladies of bitter sickness; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolish people."
I have divided this treatise according to twelve chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medical cauterization, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the ironware of cauterization, and all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and has the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and has the shapes of instruments.
Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid and the harm are the longest words and subtle science and secret responses; and from this spoke the wisest men, and agreed to this; and I suffer few of their words, for I reduce the length.
I say that fire cauterizes universally for every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
In the hot and dry complexions together with matter, some thought that fire cauterizes is great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cauterization is not useful for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured by hot disease through heat, nor by drying; and he who says the opposite, that cautery does great help to hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times through experience.
And in no way should one interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of ten years; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than medicine burning with ardor.
For fire is simple, and does not come otherwise than to the member which is cooked, and does not harm another member at all.
Here is the translation:
The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make this, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I reveal the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree at the time when the cauterizations are to be done, and they select promptly.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries that occur are immediately cured by the aid of cauterization; and likewise, since cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasty ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think anything, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for a disease that is healthy through cautery has no return; and he says so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery.
And it is possible that the disease comes again according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, as fire cautery for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return again; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works. Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The old ones said that cauteries of gold instruments are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say it was because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not cause putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they told us.
And however when you heat up an instrument of gold, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is quickly cooled down; and if one heats it too much; they make it into fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And because of this, we do not use cauteries of iron that we have made appear in our work.
Here I have ordered this chapter of the eyes just below, because it was easier to find for those who are seeking.
for the olive fire cautery
These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and meanwhile against all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solvent modifying the head, three or four times, according to whether the strength and age and the habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make a remedy for the head of the patient.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then burn the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is this:
And place the sign on the level of the ink, and make a slight impression and stretching with your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand gently, and re-examine the level if you see the opening of the bone; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk, and put in soft and thick cotton inside, and place on the level, and let it stay three days; afterwards put on a moist cloth in a wrapping; and leave on until the scab falls off; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And they said that the more one delays opening the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason, it hinders healing.
And they said that one should not leave the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they said that one should leave the cautery so much on top, and press so hard that one takes out as much of the bone as a vertoil that women put in their fusez because the humors issue forth badly; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is made foolish by continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salutary and mild for me, and thus I have observed in some assemblies a healthy salvation.
of the old pain of the head
When the whole head aches chronically and lasts for a long time, one should use the remedies of yreis and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of applying poultices; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not effective.
Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that which was cautioned about above.
After making the cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make the cautery in the place which is called "vasselz"; and it is placed where one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those on which one makes the cautery of the middle of the head, and this is the form:
for fire cauterization of the head When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but nothing profits: then you make cauteries according to eight methods, that is to know medical ague and fiery.
The cauteries of medical ague are that you take a dose of oil, and remove the scab and the crust; then make the temple where the pain holds in some manner so you can replace the dose of oil under the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then remove it and treat with a dose of oil, and leave the wound thus for eight or nine days; then put on a poultice made from honey in a cloth so that it can absorb into the skin.
After the treatment of anointing, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that it makes use of certain burning medicines that I have written or treated in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is thus according to this manner. Heat the cautery of where it is in the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and appears small; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the thickness of the skin be cauterized; and lift your hand so that the artery does not get burned, which is deformed, and decorates abundant blood.
After putting cotton in the wound, and placing it on the spot for two days; then put moist cotton in a poultice, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauteries mentioned before in medicine and the iron does not suit them, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and mark a line half a finger long on the aching eye, and remove your hand once, and hold still so you do not touch the artery and do not reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one yawns, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disorder of blood in the artery when it is touched, which causes great fear and dismay to the one who does not know it, and who is not a student and has not experienced it; but I will tell you how to restore blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. Coutelz; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
from the pain in the ears caused by cold.
When pain comes from cold, and one has tried medicines solutives and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is its form.
After cautery all around the ailing ear, or around the eyes if the pain holds in both, and slightly incline below the root of the ear then you have signed the place of the bite; and apply ten points around each ear; after healing the place so it is healthy.
from the torment of the mouth
Torment that must be cured by cautery is not outside of those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cautery to similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture that moves with fluxes and evacuations of the head and gagging, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third in the setting of the lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part, and make the cautery above the head of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery so long as the moisture of the blood is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the likeness of the cupping that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cup should be a little larger; after curing the place as I said before, so long as it is healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the horns of the head, and one in the head, and one at the place which is called "vasselz" as we have mentioned before, and put the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured thus as we have said before.
of sluggishness
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large and round mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, take the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput a plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
If he is thus sane; it is good; and if he is not, do three cauteries on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cautery of two fingers width; and cure as the others, and if you see them join, and the patient is suffering, do a cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, do others on the horns, and cure until he is sane; and let the cauteries be called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be purged of years and of what we have said before; afterwards, raise the head of the patient, then apply fire cautery to the head and on each horn, and behind and in front of the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is fierce, apply three fire cauteries to the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is felt, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure until it is healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first purge the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is greatly suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, apply gargarism and mastication purging the brain frequently with good meat; afterwards, raise the head in the middle, and apply fire cautery as we have said before, and fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is fierce and suffering, apply fire cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and may the olivier fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is infantile, make them a subtle fire cautery in this manner:
When the cause is melancholy from superfluous or corrupt and gross humors, then one should apply fire cautery in such a way as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is the superfluous humors declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will purify their brain, according to what was said earlier in the division.
Afterwards, take the patient's head; afterwards make a well-made torteil of linen, like a circle, and place it on their head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly on all sides; afterwards apply the liniment, and anoint with old berry balm; and heat it with tempered fire, so that they do not suffer from the poultice; afterwards remove the circle from inside their head, and let it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with another good regimen, until they are healthy.
Where you see that the fire cautery is done, making more points throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then put cotton wool in a burrow and in grease of geese.
of the pride of the eyes When pride comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give a drink to the patient, cleansing the head, and warding off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times a day.
After commanding to rear the head, and making a fire cautery in the head, and making two cauteries on the temples if the pride of the eyes is assembled there, or if it descends into one eye; and cover all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the decorrement of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stain with a little powder as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision with caution how you will proceed; and no time is it done by cautery or burning beneath the two eyes at the back of the head.
of the course of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear as flaws in the head; and one sees that they are superfluous, cold, and phlegmatic, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the treatment descending from the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or burning beneath the .ij. bones; and if it needs more, if you cauterize strongly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
of the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three hot medicines; after that raise the head, and apply fire cautery or mild olive oil cautery; and apply three fire cauteries of the cautery called "clavulis" on the three ulcers, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it. And it is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavulis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive". For it is its shape:
And if you see that it makes three cauteries on the three ulcers as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are turned into pustules, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as much like the foil of a mirror, and be the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk oil from a pearl on the eye, then heat the cautery in the form of:
After cautery on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the heart be at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the vein are that you see the skin retreated, and the hairs lifted to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a bundle so that the scaling is removed; after the treatment of ointment so that it be healthy.
And if the hairs grow afterwards, and the skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same place, as you did previously; and if the hairs are sparse, cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The cauterizers of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and living coals, one .З. each, and mix well; and do it hastily, so it does not cool down, then spread on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and apply to the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, one must operate on one, and if in both alike; and put under the eye a soft, wet cotton pad; and let the head of the patient be in good health and show your finger, applying the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, for they feel burning as if from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger. And when the burning sensation has passed, lift up the skin of the eye, and look to see if the skin is lifted as if it had been lifted by the constraining force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then apply the medicine again on the spot where the medicine did not take hold, until your operations are even, and your eyes are in balance; then put on a soft, wet cotton pad in a wrapping, as long as the bitter roots are extracted, after curing the eye of the ailment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary that you take great care of your work through great caution so that no point of the medicine fails in your eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, start the medicine again on the one who is softened by the proper paper, just as you have done beforehand; after the treatment until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of dou mirte:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constraints accordingly; and do not miss the right path for one who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Here is the translation:
After pressing the fistula is uncovered, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, then operate, and extract further the bone; after placing the hot cautery in the form of a burn, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail following the eye, so your hands do not play tricks; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupts.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, then recommence the cautery once again, and another time if you have mastery of it, and let it stay two days; after I place on cotton wool in a blister, and cure the ointment of the desiccation until it is healthy, and if ten days pass and it is not healthy, then place on corrosive medicine as long as the bone is uncovered; and reapply according to what comes into its chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients spoke of. Then take the fistula, and split it open; after place in the opening a subtle camel-hair brush, because this is its form: and they make a quantity of a pound; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient at all points, so that the flowing pus does not run to its eye; and it is fitting to place on the eye a patient cotton wool in a bath of egg whites or in water: the pound if it is the levelling of the fistula, and it is healthy through marvelous sanity.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have spoken of, it's good. If not, then one must administer pertus to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body according to what is suitable for its own location.
of cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat it. i. a small cautery tool according to this form:
And apply the fire cautery to those cracked places until it reaches just to the fontanel; afterwards heal the cerebral cortex until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the gullet
When an abscess forms at the root of the gullet or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes putrid matter and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit: then it is necessary to have fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron rod reaches the fontanel, and where the rear of the limb; and do thus one time or two, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the root and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery that will come hereafter in such a way that you place a cane over the tooth; and put the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and keep it there for an hour and a half.
And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
from the pain of the teeth
When pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the treatments with medicines do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: and cautery of blistering and cautery of fire.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the scabs are of a flow and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn the cautery that comes after this form, and have two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as the master is, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on a cotton cloth moistened in borax so that the discharge is removed; after healing the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
When the moistures overcome the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by medicines that dissolve; after make fire cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn with fierce heat but rather a little. After make another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and heal the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
of the thumb When all the diseases of the chest are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the ribcage in their place; and another cautery between the breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
And if you see, make a cautery by pricking all the cautery that is called "poins" because the form is thus before in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just up to ..., or thereabouts. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three joints according to this form:
And because they are more gentle, you make three of them together in one application.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, soothe the patient on their back and on their side; after lift the heart which is within the inflamed area with two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, apply the cautery which has .ij. ners douqueil, that is the form:
and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and there will come the figure of the cautery with .iiij. cauteries; and for this reason, cautery is made with the cautery that has .iij. ners, because the figure of cauterization is six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tenth, and it is the form of the cautery that has .iij. ners:
And often it is applied to this same nerve because it has seven cauterizations.
After applying the fire cauterization with a rod; then make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens soon, then cauterize on the thick part of the cauterization, or many cauterizations in pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the full cauterization of the lung
Here is the translation:
And certain ancients said that a man using fire cautery similarly to a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and soon the pain ceased, as we have stated in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is no fear where the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the spleen
When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they add three manners of fire cautery that are good.
One of these manners is that you make three or four cauteries, in a line according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand at all on the cautery, and let the patient be aware of it on his back;
and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery iron which has .ij. nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is in the right place, or where the stitches of the patient come from the left, and be the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery iron be according to the width of the body.
After that, burn the .ij. nerves so much that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then draw back the cautery iron, and thus there will be .iiij.. And if you see, if you cauterize the whole cautery at .iij. nerves. After the cure when it has been obtained by long tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned before.
of hydropsy
Cautery is not suitable for hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure according to the methods we have stated in divisions, and your cure does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauteries around the belly, and .i. above the stomach, and one above the liver, and .i. above the spleen, and .ij. behind the back above the spine, and .i. near the thigh; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the heart.
After letting the cautery open for a long time, do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like a key that we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is presented here.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of bitter citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not insert too deeply, lest you stir up the bitter citrine, and let the cauteries be according to this form:
After doing so on the legs, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauteries be of the length, one beneath the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauteries there for a long time without curing, that the ailment may issue; after curing the other cures that we have said.
of the massage
When a stomach problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vertigo, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel with one subtle cautery claw, and two cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the puncture, and one cautery on each island, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or many, and are old and of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you do cauteries: .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is entirely deflected downwards a little and a little in triangles, and .i. cautery below the navel. ij. two.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflate, then one makes .i. a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the spleen with all the clave cauteries; and leave the cautery open long enough. After curing the limb so that it is healthy.
of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
When you cope with thelul, heat the cautery that seems .i. red-hot, and then place it all wrapped on that coped thelul; and leave until your hand feels the cauteries coming to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows freely; do this one time or .ij., and if there is much of thelul, cauterialize each one as we have said; after curing the useful limbs so that they are healthy; and if you cautelize with a great cautery on the Achilles', it will have more aid.
of a wound poorly healed
When the patient cannot suffer the touch of a scalpel, that we will recount in its place, if such illness comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula comes, and is enveloped and produces putrid and corrupt matter, then you must probe with a subtle instrument, and take care to know how deep the instrument has entered. Afterwards, heat the cautery which seems suitable, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the instrument has entered, and repeat the cautery until the corrupted and putrid matter is burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to the quantity of one's need; and beware of the nerves that are involved, and of the large veins. If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, then beware of these places, and do not make false passages in the flesh, and think it is not a permanent cure; afterwards, cure the place until it is healthy, and if the place is healed, and the matter is eliminated slowly, then know that the place is entirely healthy; and if the matter is not eliminated, know that the place is troubled, and corrupts the bone at the bottom; and thus as one of those things that we will recount in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes with shivers, and great windiness, and does not take such a hold on a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the shins on one side and the other to the clavear cautery which we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cautery, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is troubled and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply cautery to the affected area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as our finger; and make a cautery above the back, or three if you need it; and the clavear cautery should be according to the previously mentioned form.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, if they feel great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said about fire cautery, and three cauteries below the back; and let the cauteries be clavicular, as we have said.
of the thigh
When the viscous moistures descend to the thigh bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the joints of the department are twisted, so it is necessary to cautery the patient on the thigh bone with one cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint around the thigh as it turns, so that the thigh is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of the large olives, and let the cauteries be as deeply perforated as all the veins; and heal until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the region of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure is not working, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary to purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After doing cautery; and the manner of doing cautery is in several ways: it is to know that there are assembled medicines burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you apply three triangular cauteries on the region of the hip in this form, and make a good profundity and greatness, and leave between each cautery the width of a finger, and so they are olive-shaped; sometimes one does cautery in the middle above the head of the hip, because there are three according to this form:
And if you see, you should apply the cautery to the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire hip, and all the spaces of the circle are burned.
And that's the method of treating sciatica, when the pain is in the thigh, and doesn't reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and leg, then make two fire cauteries there where the patient says the pain is, and one fire cautery above the ankle three fingers wide, on the left side a little; and let the fire cautery be gentle, and let the burning of the skin be slight; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or near the ankle, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the fire cautery which is called "points".
And if the pain is more, then make them more; and if it seems that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a fire cautery at the circular or gentle fire cautery, and take good care in all your fire cauteries not to leave so much of the fire cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made fire cautery above the ankle of two toes, and left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and was pierced and corrupted to all the foot. After a vomiting solution they had death.
And if the pain is in two adjacent parts, do cautery on one and the other, in this manner. And the wise men say that for the cautery of the ankle, since it is in this way, make a bar of iron as thick as a small nail of a thumb, or slightly less, and place it between the spaces, and let the spaces be of two fingers, and also like our nail, and it has a well-made iron handle; and that's the form:
And let it be heated until it is thoroughly red-hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the affected ankle, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery stroke, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is fully healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery little for fear of its harshness, and few see those who use it; and nonetheless it is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is beneficial.
from the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar signs of frozen and expanded matter, none of these signs is worth fire cautery, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient is freed from fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five or more fire cauteries according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the fire cautery be done according to the fire cautery which is called "points"; and if you see fit, make two or three fire cauteries at the gentle fire cautery of the shoulder blade, following this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted arm when they get up, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize with the fire cautery of that place according to this form.
Here is the translation:
of the pain of the joints
When pain of joints is caused by moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, if it is cured by cauteries in such a manner: make much of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, make a cautery at every point that they call "point". And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, which often happens, make a cautery on each knee .iij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, with an olive-shaped cautery; and if you have mastery over more, do more, but do not hold your hand further than necessary, so long as the skin of the body is burned.
And if the pains descend near the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come near the sides or near the ribs, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge the flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
about the treatment of swelling
When swelling comes from anger, and the bubbles descend to the stomach and it is newly formed, if it happens that when you want to cure, do not disturb that one day; and use things that loosen the belly, so that the threads descend from their belly; afterwards make them sit on their back between your hands, and instruct them to hold their arm as long as the bubble is repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and mark a sign below the swelling on the bone of the thumb, and altogether a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then apply the fire cautery in this form:
until it is white and it throws out scents. Then reset the bubbles to their place; and the minister holds his hand so they do not return again; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and a sergeant on the thighs, and another on the foot that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again until you come just to the bone; and beware subtly that the bubble does not burst when you apply the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for great people also great according to their measure; afterwards, cure the place of the cautery with butter so that the inflammation is removed; afterwards cure other wounds so that they are healthy, and anoint the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their nourishments be relaxed for a long time, so that the bubbles do not burst when they prepare to go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made crutch, and for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and is wary of too great repletion of drink and food, and of too high pride; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will discuss the treatment of surgical wounds in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are conjoined, and you see that they do not grow more, make him .j. cauteries of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third day of the treatment; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at .iij. angles according to this form:
But first mark the level of the inch and make a line according to the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized spots with a claw-like instrument. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more flexible.
of old pain in no member When pain comes in no member, or from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness and virtue and location of torsions and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it should move to the member that is next to it, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
of messelry
The messels are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care that the illness is at its beginning, and it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and do not delay or linger, lest the corruption spreads throughout the entire patient; then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the forehead, another towards the end of the eyebrows; and three on the corners, and one behind on the temple; and hold your hand so that the cauteries come just to the bone, and until the crude humors can exit through the scabs; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before it.
And if the meselry is scattered all over; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization of these cauteries that we have mentioned above, and one cauterizes in some nose, and two cauterizes on the spine of the neck, and three cauterizes on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest, and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the veins that are on the derrière calcifying, so you do not burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and benefits; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the fires. After healing the wound with flour and honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
of swelling
Here is the translation:
of scarifications
When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the instruments of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the crust, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with oil of rose and leaves of plantain, and blood of columbine and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix everything together, and bind with a cloth, and apply to the body until it is healthy.
The treatment of cancer by cautery
When cancer begins to develop, and you want to stop it, then cauterize with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the tumor of the cancer. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the cancer; and always this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen again; and more rightly, it is better to cauterize around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot reduce
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it takes time to reduce or due to the abundance of superfluous flesh which they have, or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or due to the tension; and you see hastening to reduce: then cauterize around many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten to reduce.
And if you see that the cautery is piercing everywhere, heat the cautery of the place where it is formed:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the purification is alleviated. Afterwards cure until it is perfectly healthy.
the treatment of fire with iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a decay of a limb, because it decays the limbs just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery with fire, then heat the iron cauteries very small and great, according to what is needed for the patient or the disease; after cauterying all parts until you have removed all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed. And then let them stay .iii. days, and put on the limbs cauteries suffering from burning with oil until the burns from fire are removed, and all corruption. After the treatment of wounds engendered by cautery.  And if you see after .iii. days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this decay has often been cured with medicine in the form of fire cautery; but always fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you have need of it.
for pores that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a big faulty thing that whelks the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in .ij. manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat .i. cautery which is like a pen of steel, and made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail so that it comes to the font of the nail; and let it stay thus .iii. days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of savage mallows boiled with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be disrooted from their roots. Then cure the foot of wounds engendering char so that it is healthy.
Here is the translation:
the treatment for trembling disease
When some people shake with cold or nerve damage, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you apply three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cautery; if they stop trembling, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
of pus-filled pustules
None appear by default through the bathed body, or pus-filled pustules, that come from gross corrupt matters. If it is necessary at first when they appear, to apply a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made of fir tree resin, which is taken in fire, or of aristologe root, or of a lenticular cautery. And none are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot increase in advance, but are dislodged from the superfluities that come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great flows of blood from the cut artery which is wounded in the wound that comes to the outer skin, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And always when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold very tight so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue anymore; then apply fire cauteries more or less small and large as they are entirely red; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and the place in which the artery is located, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so tight that the blood is restrained.
And if it happens to flee when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to make this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve which is inside, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three manners that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and held in place afterwards.
Who administers stanching of the blood strongly with bandages or putting things tightly on, or similar things, does not profit if not done nearly.
And if it happens to no one and he does not have better medicine present, then he must put his finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and strongly stanch until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but let the cold moisture often be very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter that every disease where it is necessary to apply fire cautery or burning medicine, and the tools and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I put this chapter among the lowest chief just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it less painful than when one turns.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this it requires more careful caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who are injured by their disease so that they die easily from the fierceness that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; and one should have fear of this. And of those who give you their sense, and say: "wait, I am ready"; and the disease is despised. It does not matter that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain of, and of which you can take possession; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have divided from head to foot, so that you find more easily what you will need to master.
from the head full of water
Here is the translation:
And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen, death hastens them; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work on certain cures.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so that it could not bear its own weight; and the moisture was so great that it became death, and this moisture is gathered under the bone beneath the brain, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and be as long as two of us, so that the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more increased, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that the parts of the head are swollen on each side, and the water flows out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture away. After holding back the fragments of drapery and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then disentangle, and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and let the head relax gradually, and give food to the patient in small amounts of dry meat, as long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine whether the opening of the abscess is above, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Cut then to the opening of the abscess, and the filling of the water, and let it be according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and remove the flow of blood, so that the patient dies not from the decrease of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of swelling
When it happens to have a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort cure is with fire cautery, by which one will cauterize the .ij. arteries.
It is necessary, then, when you cauterize the eyes, that the patient makes a gesture with his head; afterwards rub the area of the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then stretch out the patient's neck to the entire length of the cloth; then look where the veins are beating, and the eyes of one and the other are after the ears, and are slightly raised; then mark the eyes at the notch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument .ij. times, until the vein is visible to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the entire head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as .ij. two at the traverse.
And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood jumps up high continuously foaming.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign of an inch and make just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flow so it is six lines, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the siphac, if it happens that apostemes come from nowhere, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of the migrating
When the old migraine comes, and catarrh is sharp, due to the moisture of the tears and the burning in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by means of medicinal cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterized places, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of his temples grow back, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is slightly reposed for a while in some homes that are too cold; and if it is reposed, then strip off the patient's cloak from certain drapings, then rub the bone with a rough cloth, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of such form:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
For the fire cauter is aid to finish the swellings; because it is of great aid against the swellings. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the old cotton with a lot of cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when they are removed, if there are dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, so that it be healthy; and if without cutting the artery so much as you will have, if you hasten to cover by cautery, or you fill the old container with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is congealed; and if you don't have this present, put on the old container your finger so the blood is congealed, and raise the old container of cold water until the blood ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cautery the vein of this trenchant cautery, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid staying too long on the sore. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less onto the sore. And you should have between the .ij. cuts .i. a space of about a finger's width, and then when you have signed on the .ij. places, and you put the hot iron on them until it reaches just to the bone, and cut the vein in .ij. places; and let it be spaced out between the .ij. joints because it is not all soothed by this cautery from top to bottom; and that's the form of the cautery:
of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are dripping from veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not profit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feels a rough walk as if with fremis; and if they are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are warmed, and scorched by the heat of the tears, it has need of this cure.
And they called it an "injured cure", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you do three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be thus, two inches deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others two inches costal by the papers above, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are two inches costal by the papers above; and align your hand with the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of two fingers at the joint.
Of the incision that is to be made on the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two fissures to the very surface which is on the bone, then make another division from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing.
if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not very sharp, and this is its form. And put the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the bone, and the soft edge towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle fissure. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another division in the middle fissure up to the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the fluid that has been taken by the blood; then put in each fissure a piece of old cotton, and apply warm dressings with wine and oil and sage, and beware that apostemes do not come; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a great quantity of lukewarm water, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healthy.
of the evacuation of the eyes
When a vein is accustomed to frequent bloodletting, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision is cloudy, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in perpetual pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know through these accidents that those matters and that cathartic do not come from many veins, and the treatment is useless if it is like this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one on either side. And start from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move towards the brain; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and apply layers of moistened cloth soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is healed, it is necessary that you rub the bone so that it begins to grow, then treat with exciting things that make it inflame.
In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and of colophony four parts, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to inflame throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of these things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing as iron; or seeds, as jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing things as water and oil and similar things.
When a stone or another kind of thing that does not adjust to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if you distill a little violet oil or oil of sisament, then it helps with extraction; and when you do the treatment, and the nostrils swell when the treatment is done, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and thus the ear is above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work, then help with subtle pincers, from which the form is:
If it comes out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then help with extraction using a subtle onion-like double instrument; and if it doesn't come out by this means, then make a hook of iron and put the head of the hook into the ear hole strongly, and swell what is around the hook so that the veins cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out in the form mentioned, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, then take glue from which one takes the bones, and put some cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if she does not get better from all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear in this way: make an abscess swell with a vein, and spasms; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be as round as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healthy. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suckers, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as small and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body that one can feel, then prepare the extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight: if no worms appear, then remove them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the vein from which it is the origin.
And it is narrowed below and widened above. And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the sufferance of the patient, then suck strongly all the way up the vein; do this often until all the worms are removed. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop up inside the vein with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not issue forth as we have said, then prepare distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which it is the origin, as you see.
And it is of silver or copper narrowed below at a small hole, and above it has openings to distill; and to press down the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the filter and envelop it in cotton at the point of arrival; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then put inside the filter all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily until the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and it is the distillations that are warmed by fire, so that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born who does not have any perforation in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a new flesh growing inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from the front of the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes it happens that I saw a small hole, and I saw it well.
That which comes from the front, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which you see, it seems that you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opilation, then work on this spatula, whose form is like this.
And let it be smooth and flat on the front and back all around, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opilation is from new flesh or a cord in the ear, then take it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until this flesh is completely removed.
And if the opilation is deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and lightly scrape with fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation where the patient feels great grief in their hearing, perceive lightly, and be careful not to graze the nerve of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment.
Here is the translation:
And if the bleeding comes out, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treating the distillations.
of the flesh of the papers
It is the ulcer that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it happens that you treat them with tongs and tweezers, and clean them with a spatula of their roots; then apply on the vitriol ointment bruised.
And if they do not decay, then cauterize with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cautery practitioner after incision is useless; and many times they repair, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back.
of the poultice
Many times they come in papers of the eyes things that seem like a poultice in their form and hardness, and because of this it is called "grandine", and it is an accumulation of thick moisture above and below; the operations are such: take warm water to remove the grandine from one part and another, and it's a light thing to know; make a large opening, then gently scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover. if you cannot cover without piercing a little the poultice, do not hurt the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble it into a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if it's small, don't apply force, for the ointments restore quickly and in an instant.
And if the grandine descends to the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the poultice, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part and another; and if the poultice is separated by incision, it does not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, leave the salty water oil, and cure the place of what restores quickly until the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
Here is the translation:
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a strip of linen, and sets up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains excess flesh from each part, then places it on them; and presses with both hands on one side and the other, so that the excess flesh is gathered within the circle; then makes an incision in the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel, cutting a slit no larger than the wound made in the vein opening; and cuts the skin deeply until you reach the excess flesh; and in many dispositions comes excess flesh from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Draw out then a piece of cloth charpit between your two fingers at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and be careful not to touch the incision, that you do not reach the entire scalpel up to the eye, lest you blind it.
And if the excess flesh does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then enlarge the incision slightly so that it appears; then draw it out as we have said, then moisten the drapels in oil and water, and place them on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that is delayed. Then heal them so they are healthy. And if an abscess forms at the shoulder, then heal it with poultices soothing until they are healthy.
the hairs of the papers
When in papers hairs are born misaligned other than natural, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about manners of sickness such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so much that it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iii. manners: either by cautery assembled fire, or by medicine ague according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is made or by incision and costure or by caines, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, stick a needle at all .i. thread above; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs are born beneath these hairs, and draw .i. thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then do in the part beneath the paper, beneath the misaligned hairs, all the spatula covering, from the great tear-duct to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
And if you have a task to perform on someone who has a large quantity of paper according to the softness of the paper; then make a complete spacing between the lines that you have marked, and start from the great lyre just up to a small one; and let it be one of the natural folds near the hairs, then put the onion in one of the angles of the circle, then scrape everything; then assemble the lips at a sewing point of a needle with a subtle thread of wool, and squeeze out blood, and make a flow of superfluous threads on the eyebrows to all sticky things, if you want to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the sewing and threads up to three days or two; then treat the wound without sewing things that are dry and constricting, for the paper relives suddenly at the wound's closure and assembly of it, but the sewing is useless (as the ancients said), and this is a work without fear.
and if you have another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, at three ounces of powder according to the form that is here:
then take what surpasses the small equal forces according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has .i. thread, and put it in the figure; and put .i. another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them evenly between your two fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have made a sign, as we have recounted, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerote and similar gentle ointments;
and it often happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: so you must use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. wounds by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the surface of the parchment of the eye, and stretch the .ij. threads of the .ij. parties firmly; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin that was stretched will mortify and putrefy and decay, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, if the wound has united forces, then cure it so that it may be healthy; and when the wound is cicatrized, and if the paper is lifted, and they do not prick the hairs anymore; and this is the form of the twelve canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the hunt another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the head of the two threads; then put the patient's head in your healthy place; and let it be in the shade if possible, so that the works are declared, for it is a subtle and minor work, then put the needle in all the hunt at the root of the hair opposite, and make it pierce into the paper hastily as much as you can pull it out above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put one of those hairs in the hunt, if there is one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out at all the hunt on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the hunt down to all the thread that you had ordered there, so that the hunt comes out of the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for twelve hours or thirteen, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair of natural whiskers, and elevate it with that which you leave, so that it may be elongated and then lift it.
of the rotting of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the rotting of the eye occurs, it happens in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of working on it is that you split open the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put in thread of linen, and lay it so it may be healthy; and it does not seem to use in its cure things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but it works with mollifying things, such as fenugreic; and the rose water or alembroth and linseed oil are cooked, and ointments of dyapulum founded on none of the eyes, and it envelops a tent, and the cure of this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take heed so it does not swell according to its former shape; and these workings that we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so it does not return according to its former shape.
of the flesh that comes to the eye
This disease that is beneath and truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and prick the flesh, and make the left arm's vein bleed so much to the right, so that the threads join at the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a large spatulum.
And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is convenient, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the wound, and turn the papyrus, and make two wounds or cuts within the papyrus; and be the heads of the two wounds at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made into an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has no "griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are cut beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure with what we have said about mollifying medicines and tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a wound or cut or cautery, it is convenient that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same diseases, according to what is convenient for treatment and more dispositional remedies.
you should cauterize with a paper instrument
When this cauterization has its effect on men in such a way that the paper above is sodden with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform their natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too sharp or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, where you gently scrape off the assembled parts, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and it is all healthy, and there are no more frequent problems in the oily area, and the lifted watery discharge, and of the collar; then put between the paper and oil a linen thread, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of egg whites; and after three days use sweet collars and soothing things until it is healthy.
of the corner of the eye
It knows that the corner of the eye is in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard crust, and another which is not nervous but seems like a white moist congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and pinch it with pincers, it cannot be removed; and one and the other have a similar effect towards the large artery, and gradually increase until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Here is the translation:
And beware that the scalpel does not touch the tender skin and break it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision pour a little of the bruised oil into the eye, and make a dressing with litarge, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, many times it is cured with a similar type of nail medicine; and grows as I have related in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the eye of the patient, and take the scalpel lightly a little agitated according to this form:
And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes little by little and the reason appears, then distill from your mouth into the eye a dressing made of litarge and red ochre and bruised oil, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other treatment according to this same method of opening, until it is entirely removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as if an abscess forms, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh is damaged by the armorer's night in the eye through great nuisance, if it suspends from the onion, and in coping with one part and not all, that the course of tears does not come; then distill in the eye a reddish-colored collyrium made from litharge.
of the flesh that grows on the knee
Their eyes grow red like a rose of baluster, and cover the knee and restrain it with bandages and turn to the doctor, and seem; and the work is that the patient puts his head in his healthy state, then opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as uncines convenient to that, and supports it with force; then copes the first flesh, and goes entirely to the raspator until the end, and guards that no blepharitis affects the eye at the work; and is the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the ankle and small forces of what one esteems, just as the form appears after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then anoint the eye with a broiet or distill a reddish-colored collyrium and apply medicines corrosives, and put on the eye a cotton with egg white, so that it may be assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the wound begins to suppurate, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the abscess with soothing things that calm the hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make all the characters that are adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
But in any case it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they obstruct the sight with their work and weaken the eye for many years. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine if the eye is in this state, whether it is strong or not, and there is no other illness beyond the vein; then you should coil it in such a manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double veins be according to this form.
And let the vein be divided into degrees in the body according to this form:
Then one coils the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extracts the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins that were full of oil; and beware that you do not block the eye with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with only those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collier to corrupt what is more stubborn than the cataract.
And if you cannot coil all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to calm the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is calmed and assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is before until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you open on the abscess, there where it must be cleaned, and draws out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the corruption and blackness, if it has taken on all the appearance of what is its form; and it is called "rough head", and it must be made into a feir inde a .i. chief reont, and it must be pointed like a lime as it is in the present form:
And place on the healthy part of the bone that is corrupted, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so you feel that the corruption is reduced; and do this several times, then restore the healthy part with medicines that are excitants.
if the eyes are cloudy, and there is no birth, and the body of the bowel is cloudy, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the hole of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron, and by bitter medicines, and when it is discovered thus take .I. foret according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated until the head as you see here:
then place on the bone of the forearm, and detach your hand from the eye a little, then turn the entire foret until it pierces the bone and feels the patient through this, since the veins are in it if he holds his hand against his nostril; and then restore the healthy part with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is born and endures the eyes, thus one sees the matter at the nostril; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the discharge from the eye
Here is the translation:
Because of the tearing apart of a torn vein.
When disruptions occur in the torn vein, then open it, and insert a paper thread as if it were a grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you want to repair it, the procedures are such that you put a needle at the root of the affected part just below, then put another needle where there is a double filament from the affected vein; and make them pierce, and leave the first needle in place according to its disposition; then cover the affected part with a double filament and bind it around the torn vein, and hold it firmly, then remove the needle and put it on the moist eyelid in abundance of water; and let it be until the filaments unite with the vein, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy; and never restrain the wound by binding it with a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then prick with a subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and correct the moist albugeanum and descend below the eyes, and enter there immediately; then hold until it is healthy.
of the socket of the eye
Here is the translation:
the veins of the eye
We have seen the similarity of the veins in the division, and it is necessary to pierce; if you work according to health. It is necessary that you hold the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye firmly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a hair at the white part of the eye at the side of the lesser eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the clear thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune-like notch up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you see the opening in this paper by the clarity of the woven fabric, and then put the instrument near where the vein is, then press it down one way after another. If the vein descends now, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting a little, and if the vein rises again by the second way, put the strength with the instrument, and when it is well fixed and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly while turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the vein a little of that same gem, and remove from that eye within. Then put besides the eyes stooping or cloudy in oil rosset and abundance of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. Us, and those who are of our time, put on common broiet with abundance of egg.
And if the marrow cannot enter the eye through its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is of this form:
And pierce the conjunctiva subtly, and do not go too deep in the fontanelle, but make a subtle hole, then inject the marrow as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient .i. sleeping, while he sleeps on his back in .j. a dark place; and be deprived of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do not do this during the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water mounts hastily.
If abscesses come, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on his face .i. a golden rim to cover for some days, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its cases; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the country of Yrach, who told us that in his country they made an instrument to pierce the marrow, with which they sucked out the water, but I never saw any in our land, nor did I read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly arranged:
And thus the head of the bones of this same subtlety, and the last in four angles alike.
from the flesh above the nose
No time is born or nose flesh joined in various ways, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; and if it has such flesh of fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In this case of those flesh which is soft and not fixed, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the onion at those flesh, and treat them with fire; then grasp what you can sustain in the subtle spatula on one part, so that you know that this flesh is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if you are not mounted above, or an abscess forms, drain it as it should be; and if they are malignant apostemes, hasten to cauterize them until the blood is staunched and all the flesh is burned away, then pour in wine or vinegar and water.
If the veins do not open, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, although the instruments do not come for cutting: then it is necessary that you prepare .i. a thread of flax slightly thick, and be careful with our hands, and hold between each thumb's width .i. or less; and place the patient's head on the thread at his nose, and draw out in an odorant manner until it comes through the nose inside the mouth; and many times children do so as a game, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other in being like us who are on the thread. Do this until you know that the veins have corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this .iij. days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then place a cane of plum trees for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines into the nose.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp overturned, like a cane, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
from the flesh over the nose
Many times a disease occurs on the nose called "telul", and grows and becomes large, so it is visible when looked at; and for this reason you must cover it at the beginning, and remove all hair, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay covering until it becomes large, take heed if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense: if not touching with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one covers it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cover everything, then look at the patient and cover it with sense and fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
when the nose is covered and bandaged
Know that when continuous flow comes into one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, for in some homes. Therefore, you must take care that this does not happen to anyone, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then join the .ij. veins to a costure, then cure until it is healthy; and if the veins are already disjoined from one part and another, you must scrape all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the .ij. veins to a costure, and restrain, and powder with powdered dragon's blood, and incense burnt; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of the suturing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
of the abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have dens abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of veins, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them as pinces and cover in each part; then apply the remedy after the incision of vitriol broth, so much that the wound is stained; and then leave it to heal, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
of the decay of the gums
Many times there is an abscess on the gums which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them in place with tongs, and cut to its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on the spot vitriol powder, or other drying and constricting powders; and if that abscess returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cut a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatment for covering.
of the ulcers
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are rough and bitter; and sometimes the black, citrus, and greenish teeth, as much as the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary that you hold the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws be in your care, and take out the teeth or scabs appearing, so that nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, as much as they are worldly; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then recommence to rework on the second day and the third, until you have taken everything; and know that teeth have mastery of diverse forms of treatment for reworking, according to what the work demonstrates, because the root which one removes from the teeth has other forms than those which are between the teeth; and these forms and others will be with you, well-equipped.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay treating as much as you can, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then one has no excuse for delaying. Here is the translation:
After extracting the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently press it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously. And if the tooth is perceived and gnawed, it must be filled with threads, where the roots are; and if it is held subtly in the gums, so that it does not break while extracting; and it must work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient through the malice of the large root, causing greater pains than before. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have mentioned; but they come often by the obstruction of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or because the cartilage breaks, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, apply the burnt vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize.
The shapes of the instruments, which one must use to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so that they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And let there be large limbs so they do not bend in the traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed to hold firmly.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the traction, it is necessary that you place on the cotton cloth moistened with burrage. One day or two., as long as the limbs are numb, then they put on the clamps called "algefri", from which the head seems like a beak of a sign; and let them be made thus as a lime and it is their shape:
And if the roots do not wish to issue into all these clamps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", it is to know the palate, from which it is their shape:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps through this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter:
And if one helps with this instrument that has ten inches, from which there is the form:
and other iron tools that are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which there is the form:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are certain illnesses where the ancients did not teach at all about the diversity of instruments, and it is not broken into a chariot or other bones, or it will rot, if one seeks these instruments that they need, as I have told you, and help with gestures, from which there is the form: And let it be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and support; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural course of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it seems that you know the teeth are not born after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot make it firm or fasten: then take the root; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a shape like a small beak, and let it be of iron sharpened to a point:
And take the instrument little by little in your hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can fasten it, then fix it with a thread like this is its shape:
and it is also like the thread of which one makes the needles; and fix the tooth little by little in your hands daily lightly, so that it does not move until it holds; then apply a smooth surface at the end without any roughness, and if the tooth is too pointed and it hurts the tongue, if you need to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when the tooth falls out
When the front tooth falls out, either by percussion or by decay, and the patient cannot chew because it hurts, and you have treated them with medicines that constrict, but it does not work; if you need to restrain it with a thread of gold, for the silver thread turns green and putrid, but the gold does not move at all; and so the thread should be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and double the knot between the sound teeth, then place the teeth among the bad ones, if there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so it does not move at all; and so your ligature is at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then cut the threads with a pair of scissors, and assemble them, and replace them between the sound tooth, and set it in place so it does not bite the tongue; and then leave it in place as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, hold it in place with another thread; if it stays in place, it will serve for a long time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the sound teeth, and of the bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, you put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not get involved with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the shape of a tooth from an ivory tusk, and you set it in place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
of burning the ligature of the tongue
It never happens that the ligatures which come from under the tongue or naturally, do not grow back; or by accident of a wounded palate; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligature of the large one, so much that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is roughness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you anoint with unguent and cut the large ligament; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the water of rose and of hazel, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and every night, anoint the patient's gums, so they cannot suck. And if a flow of blood comes, put on the head vitriol bruised; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for that; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see the flesh of a color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it is declining into whiteness, and there is moisture, anoint with unguent, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part to another; and if the wound does not heal through your operation, put on vitriol bruised until it is stained, then return to your operation until you treat everything thoroughly; then lift up the water of hazel and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Here is the translation:
You can't press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the amulet, and make the trajectory above where you can; and don't take anything from the tiles with, then cover the instrument, because it is the form that seems a force; and always the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very agile, and is made of iron or tin.
And if you don't have this instrument at hand, so cover it with tourniquets, because it is the form.
And be cutting on one part, and naming on the other part; and when you have covered one of the amulets, so cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and warm and clear, and if blood evacuates, so gargle the patient warmly, or apply cures of green pomgranates that are cut up, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is staunched; then cure until it is healthy; and no other time do abscesses grow in the throat besides these .ij. amulets, so cover them thus as the .ij. amulets are applied.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which was a small abscess of little sense; and it had almost closed up the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed .ij. roots through the .ij. perforations of the nose. I hastened to treat her then, and placed an onion in one nostril, then made a trajectory above, and extracted a large portion of pus; then I repeated the procedure on the other side of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that I placed the onion in those abscesses, and covered part of it, and only issued a little blood; and thus was unclogged the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not cease to cut into that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and refilled the void I had emptied, so much that it grew very large; then I treated her deceitfully and cauterized inside her throat: thus it remained unclogged; and I departed from those regions, and knew only God would do with her after me.
of the vein
When the vein is deep in the vein, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and when it is thick and round, it is called a "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme is appeased, and it is subtle; then it is necessary to cut. And the one which is round and assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of fused color or black, then it is necessary to cut into it. For there is great peril for the patient. Then it is necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, by its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the needle into the vein, and draw it back, and cut with the instruments I have said in the incision of the veins. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluousness that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the veins, and cure until it is healthy. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use fire cautery instead. And the manner of cautery is sharp and pointed. And it is that the patient puts their head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have said or the chapter of cautery, and confirms with a lively and sharp movement, so that it is not too dense nor too clear; and in using the movement of this instrument, by which it is formed:
And have on the head a veil or om which puts the medicine, as if the movements of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the vein; and let the patient sit on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth to the medicine inside, so it does not descend into the throat, and the blister; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the vein for a quarter of an hour, until you see it is reduced and the mordications of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the vein; and do this often, until the cauteries are perfected, then let it dry, and apply afterwards for 3 or 5 days. And if you need to renew the fire of the medicine, then rekindle it, and after the cautery, pour out what is inside the vein, from cotton plugged into a pipe, and clarify what is around the medicine; and be raised by sharp cold, and be cured of gagging as long as it is healthy.
This cure is safer than incision, not that of the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put aisil, and make boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in it have an instrument that is arranged in this manner: And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be inserted into the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, repeat often, until the eye dries out, and take care that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do it more frequently than during the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a tuft of egg white into the head, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for the tuft of egg white does not allow the vapor to bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether, healthy.
Many times it happens to the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing; so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear and is retained in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and attach the sponge to the thread, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will be recognized, and then you will extract further; and if it does not come out according to what we have said, take an instrument for probing in this form:
And let the curved instrument be at the head so it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high upraised; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may come to harm, nor thrust the bone within; and it is of value that the patient himself thrusts the instrument, because it seems easier thus; if he thrusts below, where he draws it forth evenly throughout the entire instrument, so it may be drawn forth.
from the swelling of the throat
No medicine can cure the swelling, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit at all, then gaze into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the swelling, draw it out completely with a small hook, or subtle pincers that are worth it. And if it is not valuable, take a hooked hair, and thrust it into the throat of the patient, then thrust or bend the hooked hair with iron heat, and make it so often. And if you hold the patient's water throughout the day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and gargle without swallowing, and move it with his own hand often; and if you feel the swelling feels the cold, shout.
And if it does not shout as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asphaltide, at the instrument that I have told you in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will soon be calmed. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are charcoal embers, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that perforation let the head of the instrument be; then pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue forth, but comes just to the swelling; and the swelling will now be calmed, and if it does not shout, then recommence the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient to thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and drink no water; and then it is necessary that he urinate freely by this governance.
And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the blood, it is, when one can see it, similar to a curved tenaille entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak of a sign, and it has the roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see its shape:
the surgeons of abscesses
Many types of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways, one is in its own appearance, and because of what it holds in moisture. And the second way is through the veins where they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its completion; and if there are such ones that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints. For when abscesses come from joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, one should pierce it thus so it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is from the foundation, so it does not putrefy within, and becomes inflamed, and creates a fistula; and it cannot be healed in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it's when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminishing of the pain and of the redness, and the debating and the adjusting of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be of long duration of the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no putridity.
In these cases, it bursts according to the member. And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is worthwhile to let the perforation be until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, the body will be filled with much putridity; and perhaps the lips and the inner parts of the body will harden. And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to the member that has need of it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
of ulcers
Where the wounds of a chief vein come from small abscesses, and are ways for us to be in tiles, just like the joint of a gully, and there are many similarities. There is fat and such things where there is moisture, just like poultices; and if there are hard and pierous things to cut with, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act against it. And the work of the cutting is that you try everything .i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then it swells from above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and in oil, and apply to the wound, and let it be until another day; and this corrects what has remained of the nit. And then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not remain of the nit; then treat the ointment wound according to what is suitable, so that it may be healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. much fat, then cut according to this form, from the length; and apply your remedies, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment in order to cure the wound where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, then do what I have told you afterwards. And do the same for the abscess if it is pierous, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
And the cutting into the pierous abscess and the moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and of these .i. abscesses that I cut open or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a rotten stone, rough and whitish, and could not break it; and if one had not made any effort, one would have done as well to make a wound from a stone. In other abscesses coming from the chief, for those that come from the chief of children and the roots of the ears, the operation should be done in at most three days, depending on how much it is necessary to remove the swelling; and the treatment should be done as it is necessary.
of the tumors
Many times have abscesses occurred at the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groins, and many times they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are entwined with each other. And each tumor is specifically located on its side, just like the swelling and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities between these tumors are many. There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case, you see a good disposition in the body, and it appears similar to the color of the body, and changes on each part and is not airy as the veins at the neck or in the artery, and is not deep; so it is necessary to cut above them, and to dissect each part, and to expose the two levres of the heart as oncines, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take it slowly, and be careful that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not let the spatula slip, lest you cut too much, so you do not touch what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put vitriol broiet in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you accomplish it; then inquire into your duty if there remain small tumors, if you cut and mend them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the tumor, it does not matter that you cut that tumor at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton plugged into an Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut out the entire tumor, it is necessary that you reassemble the two levres of the wound, and sew them now, so that there remains no excess flesh due to the size of the tumor. It is necessary that you intend to cut at its root, and remove the excess, and sew as we have said. Those tumors that hold excess flesh, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce it thus as described above, depending on the case, then treat it with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well mended, cure it with ointment and heating charm, until it is healthy.
of squinting
The old men spoke and talked of the incision of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it is the writing of their words.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleaned; and one should not help with this, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws. When the disease is in the channel of the gullet, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it between two or three circles, or a small cutting through, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cutting through the syphac, not in the cartilage.
and thus it is necessary to make the cut at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
And if the masters are afraid, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all the surrounding area, then cut the heart as far as it reaches the trachea; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the syphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the flow of the trachea which stops being fruitful through the place that is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
and let the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with a gentle touch, and sew everything beneath the sense without the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
One should not do this just so long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacking in breath. Then one should cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is protected from death.
and therefore command the old one to let the open wound be so that the evil of the disease passes, and it has passed in three days or in two days. And then they command to bandage the wound and treat, until it was cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took a small knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinews of the arm.
and I was called for by the healer, and I found it thus as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered with a dressing or bandage except for the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healthy.
and I had not harmed the maiden for she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition.
Because I see that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced person, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or natural does not have any obstruction.
And the accident is according to two ways, one of which is similar to a thick swelling in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and there is fear, and it does not seem to work with fierce fires except in the one that is small, and he tries and searches everywhere for the entire internal arrangement. if you find it thus as if in a thick swelling, and it does not penetrate to any vein, then it stops, just as we stop the nose, and he draws to his entire coffin, if there is a point. and search well everywhere, and heal it so that it covers, until it is perfectly healthy.
of us
There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities;
and therefore it is suitable that I should point out all the differences that exist between them and this.
I say that this is a crisis and fever, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it is accompanied by putridity; then the fever and crisis settle.
With the ninth node it has no heat nor fever nor pain, and contains a flux, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large.
and they are according to their appearances, whether grave, or moist, and many colors are thus as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "intermediate", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nodes is that you take or touch the moist place where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the greatness of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this that it knows how to make a good scar.
If the moist corrupts the short, whatever its color may be, thus they do as I have said about other abscesses;
and after the entromissoire no moistness comes, it knows that it is fatty, thus they do then in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the cotte where it lies, so you pull it straight with the nail;
and if you cannot pull it straight, then pull it by pieces so that nothing remains.
For if he remains still, then returns to us many times;
and if he stays still a little, and the wound does not grieve him, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things to calm the hot abscess, and treat with other treatments until he is healthy;
and if it is a large wound, then cut the lips of the wound, and treat what injures the flesh.
and if the vein is bursting, it's contrary or otherwise, hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol, and let it stay for two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and then repose the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterizing what has been delayed from the outset.
Here is the translation:
and they are like the needles with which one cuts the sorescles, and are of citrin iron, or of silver, or of copper, and those that are yellow are more experienced in piercing the knots of fistula;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three knots in three kinds similarly;
and if there are lancets that have three knots, and they are of three kinds; and if there are lancets that have two knots, and lancets with a single knot only, and they are of three kinds; and all this is necessary in their use.
The head of these is to those who make them cutting, and of such there are some that do not cut more than a part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve.
and of these introjections are the alkaline remedies applied to the handles, so that the patient does not perceive themselves at the opening of the abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see.
and one does not use more than the clear charcoal, as for legs, and arms, and limbs, and similar things.
and many times one makes another small instrument, similar to thongs of fisticuffs, according to this form, where one staunches blood:
and one places it many times at the healthy spot which joins the veins, and the arteries, and many times one encounters according to this great form:
Many times they swell the limbs of certain men when their corruption begins, so much that they seem like feminine limbs;
and they become lazy and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, if one knows how to operate according to this form of these lines, right up to G.: Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicine in a gentle circular motion, then assemble the lips of the wound to suture, and care for it until it is healthy;
and the breast is sloping downwards, and it is amazed by its greatness just like it happens with women, if they make a .ij. ribcage above, through similar fissures; because one is holding onto the other at the end of one and of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to the line G; then scrape off the skin which is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
and if it does not heal, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the deterioration of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil. and let it be until it digests the residue and fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
from abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses that grow under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Here is the translation: And when the entire swelling that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply a dressing to make it healthy again.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is sewn which is above, then often come abscesses, and also it has swollen veins and abscesses.
and if one recognizes it thus when it is by the artery, then are the abscesses long in depth; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel strangulation; and when it is by the vein, then are the signs of fever appearing;
and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the arms and in the angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head must avoid it also, and in the one who has an inflamed artery, a bandage is placed above the skin of the loin;
It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head must avoid it also, and in the one who has an inflamed artery, a bandage is placed above the skin of the loin; Then open the incision at the shoulder blade, and carefully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is exposed;
Then put a needle underneath it, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
Then puncture the spot which is between the two ligaments of an intermuscular space, as far as the blood flows out of it, and thus release the abscess;
Then apply the treatment that brings down the swelling, until the ligament is freed; then heal this one of anointing coming to this one, so long as it is healthy;
and if the abscesses are because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin; then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then lance the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as one binds a twisted thread;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, if it breaks another needle altogether at the spot of the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
then cut into the abscess as much as the excess flows out, then cut away the excess from around the heart and let go what is tied;
then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply remedies of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the nostrils
Here is the translation:
And it happens more often with the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and this is a severe abscess, and its color appears like the color of a dead body, and it is in many dispositions without pain.
and when one strains forcefully, the patient feels pain, and it is not as deep in the body, but beneath the heart;
and it moves badly in all directions, and does not go either forward or backward, neither below nor above, and the one who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction by chance;
and he who is at the head or at the forehead, makes the skin on the Spartumile (a type of skin lesion). If the abscess is small, if you hold it with a bandage, and cut at its root;
and if it is large, if you support it with a poultice, and scrub, then scrape the bone and bring the wound together at the seam, and cure until it is healthy.
of thick, hanging lumps Never does it occur in the stomach and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness which is called "fungus" by the similarity to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and thick heads; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw a man who had .ij. or belly which was more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little root, and was always cut, and corroded with moisture.
I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you consider if the patient's moisture is excessive, and the color of the arterial root is whitish and moist with subtle roots;
if you hold the spatula broadly, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when the surgeon comes, there are often too great evacuations of blood, and if you do not take heed, then hasten to give the cautery;
and if you see the patient is fainting and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread of cotton, and tie the arterial root as we have said, and leave it for 8 days;
and then restrain it, and do not stop restraining the thread of the probe as long as it touches the joint, and it will work by itself; and if the roots are thick, fear not to cover in the meantime for the belly, but you can cover half well.
then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre afterwards.
when the swelling is hot
Here is the translation:
and it is through the rupture of the skin and the issuing of the bowel, if the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various issues. And it is through the issuing of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers if it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance if it is constricted, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And it is through moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain; and if it is through blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and it is through windiness, if it is swollen to the touch, and the works are that you examine whether its appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. Here is the translation:
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and let it be straightened out completely, then sign from below around the navel; then he must sit between your hands, then goes into the place where you have signed to the entire spine, then is the majority of the abscess above all the large uncle;
Then open most of the abscess spread out on the thread, and you should indicate with your finger, and drain the intestine. If you find it attached to the thread, then detach it, and empty the intestine at the lower part of the belly.
And if you find the boil, take it on the ankle, and cut away the excess flesh.
and you should make the artery opposite, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and insert nine strong threads, and insert the nine needles inward so that you have made a cross that you may feel piercing;
then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it suppurates, and kill the dead flesh by itself; where you find it when it is subtle and putrefied, then treat what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you find it when it is subtle and putrefied, then treat what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb with what is necessary, and sew the limb up.
swollen tumor
We have spoken in the division about the appearances of tumors, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure with iron; and we say that the tumor grows in the marrow, and requires great caution in its cure, and the ancients said that when a tumor is in the flesh or where it can be reached if it is like a tumor which is in the mammary glands, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one should remove everything when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I cannot heal anyone of them; no one has ever healed any before me.
And the operations, when it is in the flesh or where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him healthier if he has manifest repletion, then perform the operation .i. dig into the flesh to do the operation; then cut out your tumors or tumors, and shave all parts, and remove all bones without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the flesh with your hand or anything, and see if the decorations of blood make you counterindicate the incision of the artery or vein, if it needs to be cauterized so that the wound is stitched; then cure with another cure until he is healthy.
of dropsy Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Then look if the hydropisy is turned towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision above the navel .iij. two fingers right above the pubic bone; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then let your incision be on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's due to spleen, then let it be on the right, and it doesn't matter that the patient guides themselves towards the incision so the superfluous ones don't flow to that weak spot;
Then pierce all the skin to the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to the entire spatium between the skin and the syphac as if scraping out a quantity of an ounce or a small container; then pierce the syphac until the spatium comes to the evacuated spot, and it's the level of the water, then draw it back, and it's the shape of this instrument, which is like a subtle silver tube, and made of tin or light copper, with a small hole below .i. a small perforation; and where it costs one part .iij. perforations; and .ij. on another part, and .i. on another; and it's the head cut like a pen, and it's the shape of the incision that the writers cut with the pen:
at the top above is the scalpel, if it happens that when the instruments come to the water, then descend now onto the instrument; empty the donor of half or a third part, because if you empty more than what is necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he becomes pale, or approaches death;
but in the void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the heart which stops up the passages that are on the skin, as I have spoken, that you perceive in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take from the water a small quantity;
do it no day, and keep yourself from pouring too much water, but only a little. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the grave or dry heat, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and if you abstain from drinking; and the treatment with desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
from the stopping of the flow No child is born who does not have passages in the penis, or the passages are small, or it is not in its place. If you want it to be perceived altogether, then make a very subtle spatula according to this form: then put the passage in a subtle hole, and bind it thus with a thread, for three or four days, and when it wants to urinate, if you open the closure, and let urine flow, and then replace it; and by chance you will not find any problem, because the urine that comes forth does not leave the closure. Here is the translation:
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies thus on their back, with the top of the rod and the handle also like the length of a pen, so that the pierced place is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
the pimples on the rod Many times cysts grow on the rod, and it is a sign of bad flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you should take them with a subtle onion-like treatment, and cut and clean all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment with diafinicon until it is healthy. And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, then you should apply cauterization. When you have cut it out, and if the cyst is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you should remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is extracted, then cure the outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the top of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come in its place, and the wound becomes infected; so you should remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which has been prepared with powdered pomgranates and veal, then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, then arrange the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries help with nine dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must push or conduct a tube of lead through the patient; and when the skin is dry at the top of the rod which has not been circumcised, either because of a wound or an abscess, then you must scrub it with a nine-edged instrument so that the veins are freed, and the head of the rod is delivered from all parts.
And if it is a severe case to consider, then you must scrub with a nine-edged spatula at the top of the rod and skin; then separate gently between nine, and I put a subtle layer of linen on the wounded part in cold water, so that it does not become inflamed again.
of circumcision
Here is the translation:
I say that the old ones did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
On the modification that is made to all the thread of the file I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you cut equally in all directions; but the thread should be well stretched over the skin; and it should be the method of the first work if it is that you make the infant think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer by binding the thread around the rod too tightly, and then you can make it slide in all the ways that you can. Then make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the children do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in; then mend well the disorder that is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below another thread; and hold it as two links by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and cope between the two links, then lift the heat above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
Then make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the children do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in; then mend well the disorder that is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below another thread; and hold it as two links by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and cope between the two links, then lift the heat above hastily and pull the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and put powder on and on the powder a drapil glueit of a mixture of egg yolks cooked in rose water, confectioned with oil of roses and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it may be healthy.
Here is the translation:
The error of mundification is when the heart within fails at the incision; then it is necessary that you stretch to your finger, so that the veins make an abscess; and the scalp equally, and if you cannot hold with your finger, the tendons will take hold, and then the scalp.
And if they surpass three days, and what is beneath the rod is inflamed, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the crust is lightly scraped; then you will cover as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, which will not harm them at all.
Heal then the place of sudden wounds with powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if you cover beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm at all; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
due to retention of urine
Here is the translation:
and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and stretch out their belly from the top of their back, and hold the patient's arm as far as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine does not flow.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument called "siringue", whose form is: and let it be of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and let its cane be one palm long and half, and let it be subtle at the tip.
And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the tip of a piece of flax or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the siringue; and cover the superfluous part of the flax and tie it just at the tip of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and honey of August, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the verge with moist oil of olives and water.
then gently insert the siringue into the verge, until it reaches the root of the verge, then bend the verge back towards the belly; then insert the siringue before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the thing seen, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or it goes astray; then stretch the thread little by little along the flax, and the urine follows the flax, then extract it, and make the urine flow.
and apply the syringe until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient.
of the diseases of the bladder
When blood or pus accumulates in the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see them distill aqua and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has two holes: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the jugular vein leads through which the medicine flows so well that it stops the urge sensibly, if one can then draw out the moisture, and push back when necessary.
and when you want to put your medications in the bladder, place the chief of the cauterizer in the moisture, and draw the drawing which is inside; if you draw the moisture to the cauterizer, and then strongly reinsert it inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the subtle form of the instrument for injection, which one uses to inject the bladder: thus it is;
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below is the vein or the ligaments of the back; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it between two double fillet threads, and heat that moisture over the fire; then place the chief of the injector in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder as all the moisture flows, so that the patient feels that the moisture has now arrived at the bladder;
and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a thong, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and the extraction with assembled medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidneys as they rain, and all the signs, and how one must operate on the size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the kidneys in the bladder often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtlety; and I openly declare, and greatly afflict the patient's penis, and they often repeat, and then become inflamed; and many of these jumps are the foundations; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in the elderly, and it's as if midway, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient with aclyster, in order to expel all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and turn them over onto their back, if the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and it falls many times from above; then make them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands are below their thighs, so that the bladder is completely upside down; then you ask and touch from inside;
Here is the translation:
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where one makes the incision; then he puts on the spatula-like instrument, of which this is the shape:
And make an incision between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left nipple; and let it be straight on the stone, and both sides should be equal or at the fundament, and let the incision be so large that it traverses as far as the width, and within it is constricted, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps the press if the two that are at the fundament, so it does not feel laborious work; and know that there is a stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is gripped to come out; and if there is a part that is underneath, similar to a glob, and rounded, whose issue is light.
At that place where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract with the tenaculi that are like a file on the head, to extract the stone so it does not break; or you put underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small pertus, and if the sensibility is uncovered, then extract with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out with force, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, it is necessary to operate, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes back through the same place that the wounds cannot close; but in any case you must strive to treat, or to break up the tangles, as much as you can treat them piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess; then resolve the patient back into their bed, and do not undo the bandage until the third day.
And when you undo it, rise well the bed of oil and water, then apply the ointment of dyaphinicon and ointment of basilicon, as much as is needed to be healthy.
And if the hot abscess comes to the wound and corrosion, and congeals the blood in the bladder, and holds back the urine, which is known in such a way that without it mixes with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy it.
Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and help in all ways that you know, so it may be healthy; and it is necessary that all the openings that you treat, that you bind the joints, and assemble the medications on the limb.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot flow out; if you treat what I say thus, that you cut many times, it is an excuse for cutting through this treatment. I have already proven this.
Take a iron rod in this shape and it should be at three angles fixed in the tongs:
Then take the thread and bind it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the iron rod in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if it comes out soon, the urine will flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is within the rod. If it is thus broken, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then place the son below the stone and another above, then make the stick straight in the area of the stone between the two ligaments, then hold fast the arrow, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
of the stone of women
Since the stone is often found in women, and if it happens to anyone, then the cure is difficult, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, because it covers with a deeper cut, and great fear is there.
And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and grasp the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle mirror; and she presents a well-aged life in the lives of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone.
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to thrust her finger or foundation and inquire about the stone; and if she finds it, then she constrains beneath her finger, and recommends that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in the form.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the bladder up to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then touch on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft confluence, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let it be cut at the first small size.
then put the razor in the cut, if you feel the stone if it grows into the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that many kinds of stones are: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have roots. If you know the similarities to know the issue.
And if the blood flow is failing, put a glass vitriol broiet on the spot, and hold it for an hour until the blood flow is established; then return to your work, so that the stone is pierced, and have the instruments I told you about in extracting the stone, as men will help you with your work.
And if the blood flow is failing, and it's because of a blocked artery, put powder on the spot and hold tight with tourniquets and bandages, and do not restart this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it anymore, lest the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are restored, then return to your work, so that the stone is pierced.
of a fleshy hernia
Here is the translation:
And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it is declining yellowish, or without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, .i. a short time as the figure of an egg, and it does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white saphac, he feels it well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the introverted quarter, because its form is thus beforehand. According to what comes after the introversion, judge from that which is inside.
According to what comes after the introversion, judge from that which is inside. And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should be placed on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and much of the drapery should be spread under him.
then he should sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs near the hollow of the groin.
Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just to the point where it pinches, and let your incision be entirely straight while dividing the skin of the joints up to the white spot, and carefully scrape off the thin skin according to what you can do.
Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put in your hooks, and the white spot will be above; and do not touch the joint of the hip, but let the white spot come out solely; cut everything or in pieces from the same side subtly, so that if you do not cut well, the water will return.
and if the vein bursts for a lot of work, if you reassemble it in its place when you will have completed the vein of the white spot; then assemble the two lips of the joint of the hip into one suture, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you raise the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspended places, and extract the vein, and cure it as we have said.
And if the wound is assembled in two parties gathered, know that they are two branches; if you cut the other party just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a moist ointment of oil rose.
and put afterwards another moist dressing in wine and oil, and put on the two cushions, and put above doubled drapery, and tie it all together with the lien that is according to this form.
Then take two drapery, and fill with lint according to this resemblance, and let them be assembled by stitching in the girdle of the arm, and one of the heads takes hold at the bottom just up to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and another two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
and no time is medicine applied to this cautery of fire in the form of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the cushions, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the wound is uncovered.
If you take the fire cautery according to this method, and pierce that place with an onion-shaped instrument, and scrape with this subtle cautery burn:
And take the cup in all the ways that you can, so that you scrape everything; and beware that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of the corruption of blood, and beware of the bad practices of surgery.
and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or an abscess bursts or corruption of blood or other thing, if you heal what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is faint-hearted, and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horribleness, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the aqueous humor is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining water, then treat it until the wound is healthy.
and let the white cloth not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one treats the watery discharge of hydropics; thus the shape is formed before; and enlarges .i. a little the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that many are worth leaving;
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad humors; and it is in most cases.
It is to know by excessive bitter anger and anguish, which is spread through bad humors, or from a blow.
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance there are painful abscesses and piercing, and of a dark color, and sometimes it comes from a narrowing of the artery, or an inflammation of the vein.
When it is due to a narrowing of the artery, it is recognized by the formation of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and you must not touch it with your hand.
That which is made from an inflammation of the vein is recognized by its appearance at the point of tender touch of the fingers.
and one can well make a cut on this similarity, and on other scars; and it is that you cut the skin of the joints, then stretch the vein above, and remove the white crust from the surface, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already inflamed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you remove the vein, and cut it.
and if it is attached to the crust, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of flesh is behind the true skin, then it is necessary that you take all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
And when the operations are accomplished, then fill the wound with mulled wine and rose oil, then heal it with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the groin
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like swelling resembling a .i. boil, with the softening of the groin, and the patient must complain greatly when they go;
and the treatment of this illness is well nearly as painful as this one beforehand,
and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then bind the suspender of the loins below your two fingers, For all the vessels that are close to the edge, and prick the masters, and stretch them out strongly;
then cut into the spatula-like instrument, cutting deeply through to the spot where the vessels are, until they are discovered;
and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the blood flow has come, and then tie it again to another vein; then they take a straight measurement, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupting moisture;
then heal the wound as if the others or inject a poultice, so that no vessel bursts that nourishes one of the intestines;
for by this means no harm comes, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of this face The occurrences of this ulcer are by the section that comes from the face, or the extension onto the belly in the part of the loins, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the flanks;
and this treatment is from the face or from its extension, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from lifting a heavy weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the face, are that it comes gradually and slowly, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal right up to the peritoneum, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the swelling, which makes sudden pain come at the beginning, and it is diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's weakness from the swelling.
And sometimes it descends beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is retained inwardly, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron to fear, because they think it will hurt them.
And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to reintegrate the intestine with their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter. then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips.
then stretch out the cord above, and cover all the skin of the joints from the loin. then thrust inside the veins of the waist, uncinate according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
Then scrape the skin that is beneath the leather of the joints, so much that the white skin beneath should be uncovered on all sides.
then put your finger index in the one that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white skin beneath the leather of the vein, and between the second skin,
and separate that which is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white skin above with your left hand, and lift the vein to all the skin towards the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein upwards, and dislocate that which is behind the ligament;
and if you have two fingers in it, if there is a point of the intestine wrapped around or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts into the belly below.
then take a needle or it has a large thread made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the soft syfac, which is behind the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, so long as there are three threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two threads. then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two threads, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter into it, lest an abscess forms there. and set the bandage according to the first long band, two inches of that one, and after these two bands leave enough space which is beneath the heart of the joints, the width of a finger.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg produces; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the joints, until the saneness corrects it, and the swelling, as we have said before.
then mix the millet in oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will mix the bandage that we have mentioned. And no time is it cauterized with a white cloth as we have said, after the incision, because of fear of deterioration of blood.
For this happens often, and let the vein gush as much as it pleases; and if it delays in healing, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
Then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshly hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who knew how to make the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done thus as the ram's horn which is assembled on the nose, in such a way that you bind the veins, after cutting lightly underneath.
then cauterize in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who have a rupture, until the veins are clear; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
No rupture ever occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the loins; and do not descend into the intestines as to the bowels, and if they do descend, it is little, and repair all hours.
and always, if it stays too long at this point, the wound or abscess grows, so that the intestines descend.
and this has happened through the extension of the soft tissue which is like a cloud, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and weakens the limbs and opens them.
and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and no cure is made with iron in this manner.
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then feels the limb of the injured part according to the quantity of two fingers.
and then extract the soft tissue that is under the skin which is swollen, then take the remedy and place it on the apparent limb of the soft tissue.
and you press on the fontanelle of the belly, then cut the jugulars appearing on the syphac on the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch the syphac point where the vein extends to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the curvature of the intestines;
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the threads, if it is undefined and heal the wound, so that it may be healthy.
The syphac is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is easy to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and to cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, first remove the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healthy, and sews the thread.
of the punishment
I know that punishments are established in our law, and therefore I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to do so except for .ij. manners: one of which is that the masters respond when asked, and heal; and the other, because we often have need of punishing some beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say therefore that punishments are made according to .ij. manners: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, so long as the skin is mollified and pendant; then take it with your hand, so long as it is reset and you no longer feel it. Of the punishment of size: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each part with a .i. cope, when you have well searched them; and leave none of the subtle tissue and the subtle tissue that is under the vessels; and this manner of punishment is more moderate than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction sometimes some thing of the thighs remains, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of the tetanus
Tetanus is a twisted cord on the natural part, so much it is too ugly to see; and some women have had it as large as a hand, and that's the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the excess of tetanus from your hand or fingers, and gently stroke; and don't go too deep in the wound, lest corrupted blood flows, then treat with another remedy until it is healthy; and on another twisted cord that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and the remedy, and by chance it bursts forth, and it resembles a cow's disease, and for this reason they called it "cow disease" in old times. It is necessary that you treat it, as we have said regarding tetanus, and the treatment until it is healthy.
of the erratic
Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is born naturally, or occurs by accident due to illness that comes about; or it is a twisted cord, or subtle and hidden, and it is made in the marrow, or in the costal area, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, and childbearing, and by chance the flowers have; and the knowledge of this is through the gaze of the baile. The stoppings are near appearing, if you want to know. If it is a subtle and hidden cord, and it is near the .ij. livres, hasten, and turn thus: put your .ij. fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then bend the .ij. livres forward, so that the subtle and hidden cord is turned, and is over the stoppings; then take a linen cloth, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the spot, and guide the woman to home every day, so that she cannot conceive. And if the cord is hard and hidden, it is necessary that you treat it with the spatula-like instrument resembling a foil of myrtle. If the stoppings are of a new cord, suspend it at the navel and stroke; and take the medicines cleansing the blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, ensemble abun d'uef; then apply a large poultice; so that the wound cannot conceive; and thus it will be long, and apply a tent of linen thread; then treat with other treatments until it is healthy. And when there is a new cord in the marrow, it is necessary to treat it according to this method, if it is not an aposteme that grows. For at the growing aposteme which is in the marrow, one must not touch or do anything.
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation:
of the abscesses of the breast
Here is the translation:
of the swelling
The expert is first at the examination to know the figure of the natural swelling, and the signs are when you see the woman lower down, and desire to smell the air: then hasten the infants to issue forth; then know that this swelling is according to the natural figure, and it is the issue under its chief, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, you must press gently on her belly, so that the infant issues forth; for when they descend under their chief, the second is with him, and the mother is rid of her superfluous fluids by good moderation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes onto its feet, and comes to the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes onto the belly, or elsewhere, and is converted by a bad turn on its neck, and by other evil figures; thus it is necessary at the examination to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid him.
If the infant comes onto its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtue of it is weak, then make her sit on a chair, or where the women hold her; and arose her nature from oil or fenugreek, which has been cooked, and then put the examination between her two little spatula-like fingers, which are the form: and find the secondine, and touch her nail as much as the moisture that is in correspondence with the fetus; and press on the woman's belly so that the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cluster the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesame; then make her take a bath and anoint herself with conditioners, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the infant is born. And if the hands cannot enter, then you must gently guide them in and out; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet high; then remove the chair from the ground, and hold onto the woman, so that she does not fall at the removal; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then touch the hands to the counterpillow that is placed before, and extract the infant, and guide it gently.
from the issue of the child upon its feet When the infant stands on its feet, if it wants to walk upright; and then turns little by little, so that it is even;
then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just above the elbows, if you command to grasp, and make them steady with condition; if it jumps further, then God wants it.
And if it does not jump further as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lighter.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take a mixture of altaea, oil of sesame, and gum resin, and crush everything in a mortar. and apply it to the natural opening of the woman within and remove this joint, then make her sit in a warm bath up to the ribs;
and when she is warmed up from below, make her a girdle of myrrh, and apply it to her, and leave it for an hour; Then make them sit on a seat, then make them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and take the belly lightly, because the infant is now jumping. from the birth of the child onto its knees When the infant comes in this form, then you put its hands little by little on its belly.
from the issue of the child who comes with a large hand during It is necessary to instruct how to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise, and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and arrange her legs in a straight form;
then treat the muscle damage that I have described;
and if it does not swell, make it sit on a seat, then study to bring back the hand; and look at the child according to their natural figure, and make it stretch out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins are loose.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face is turned towards its mother's back. I think that the vein takes its hand, then turns it little by little, and looks at it lightly;
and when it is equalized, then place on the natural muscle tone of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady. in the same manner for all the secondary ones
in the same manner for all the secondary ones When it comes to doing this in the same manner for all the secondary ones, then couple the secondary one to your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated.
and he puts his fingers on his face and on his neck, if the blow of the bow is not retained, and kills him;
then thrust the child inwards, as long as you have placed it thus as it should be, and instruct the woman that she should not take hold of it at any time:
of the twins' birth Here is the translation: They are strange things, and do not live, if they can't be named;
I know that, they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the belly;
and none of them issue naturally as a whole, if we have said so.
And if they issue grievously, thus the cure is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and make it thick and light, doing what it does; and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, or seven, or many up to fifteen, and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom,
and it is evident that the wise one knows all this, for by chance it seems that these things happened to him; do according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has had a stillborn child or a miscarriage, as I said in the division, and it does not succeed, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of good virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her hips be bent downwards, and her legs raised.
and the midwife holds the thigh from below, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart during the delivery of the child;
then anoint the mouth of the womb with oils moistened with musk and altaea and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then oil the bath with these oils and musks. then insert them gently into the womb, then seek the location where they will settle in a suitable place, or she inserts the fingers so that they are comfortable there.
and take care that the veins are prepared so they descend to their head; if you prick the onions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
and if the descent is on his feet, prick them or puncture and massage the moist areas;
and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and let him hold his whole hand lightly, and prick the onion in none of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the desired thing;
then fix an encounter with another onion, or the third you have in this profession, so that the extractions are even;
and then they are evenly stretched out, moving from one part to another, so that they may issue forth, and the onions are held in place by them, as it is their form:
And if one part remains, then anoint the boil with some of its oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
and if it remains in place, set this onion or higher on the joint, and make them do so until they issue forth completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by straightening, then it is necessary that you wrap it in a bandage, so that it becomes whole;
then put the bandage on the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and in this way the feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at birth, or it has an aching assembled chief, then it is necessary that you put the spinous spatula between your two, and make the head straight and extract the aching. where you round it at the instrument which is called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus in this way, I make the children have a large natural head. and then treat the bones for the tendons,
and if the head is strong and holds to the vertebrae, so be it joined, as much as the moisture that is or worse issues from it;
and if it cannot issue, then cut into pieces at the joint that you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce as much as the moisture flows.
And if he stands on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch it with a draped enveloping hand. and rub the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrodes.
and if the other members are ossified, and the head remains. Here is the translation: Then he applies an onion or a warm poultice, and makes a gentle treatment.
and if the mouth of the thigh is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be treated with effort. then one must apply moist and greasy things. and apply poultices, and use gentle, softening, and moistening remedies.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it upright, so arrange that which we have said about the living infant;
and if one cannot operate, if one treats the wound by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary wound.
And when you have done that, arrange what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
and if blood flows out, it should be stopped with a tight bandage, and other treatments should be arranged.
And I saw a woman whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the other dead one. After a long time, wounds came to him in his arm, and swelled so much that it opened, and began with great putrefaction.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one. I marvel greatly, for this belly has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman soon felt relief, and immediately spat out a bit of bowel from her body.
and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
to put the limb back in its place
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, to which one adds the books; and at 10 turning points as 10 heads of the ligaments. In every way, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the wound be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one palm and a half long; and within them the ligaments should be two adjustments of this same wound, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tendons. and it has two joints, if you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you open the marrow to the entire instrument, if you make the woman sit on .i. bed, with her feet hanging and her legs extended, then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then open your hand to the entire instrument, if you have made the ligatures equally, according to the quantity that you saw opening the mouth of the marrow, so that the vein does what it wants.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the secondine is retained in the womb, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and then make him sternly condition himself, and he holds your hands at the mouth and nostrils. and let him jump for this, it is good.
If he cannot, take the pot and make a poultice or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the belly, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centory.
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire; then put a cloth or poultice from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the belly.
and let the blister form until the vapors come out of the marrow; then it will be sterile, as we have said. If the secondary swelling happens quickly. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not flee, thus command the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or in a muscilage of alta, and then put it in its natural state.
and seek the secondary blister; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the marrow does not burst at the extraction. but it must move lightly to the right and to the left, and then be treated; if it comes and dislocates again.
And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of sternument, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not all of what we have said, beware that you do not fall into mistreatment;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with ointment of four drugs;
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
The shape of the instrument is such that one smokes out the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, if it is this.
And it is to see similar to a dog, and put the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tincture as long as it is exhausted, and recommence another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus it has been stifled by subtle signs. it is necessary therefore to apply a poultice that it perceives the subtle sign with its finger, and does not perceive it at all through a spatula or ague, and adjusts the bandage so it does not touch it.
then put on a soft linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not recover, then put or apply a compress of lead, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the infants want to go into chambers.
And sometimes there comes a sudden swelling of wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cut into that sudden thing: if it can be cured, as we have said about the treatment of a deep wound.
of the fistula from the bottom foundation Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and larger than those that come from beneath the foundation of the body, or in the space of the adjacent parts,
if there is a fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and in the meantime moisture accumulates white or subtle pus,
and often these fistula patients; and are known by the fact that they have an evacuation or flatulence or wind when the patient makes an evacuation, and sometimes it happens suddenly without warning.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the penetrating fistula by its foundation, and it does not pierce completely. and it is that you put your right index finger on the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twistedness, if you apply a subtle touch of the tip of your thumb, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the touch or the hair on your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from a bad pertussive evacuation nor ventilation nor vermin, as we have said. know that she does not perceive at all; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if it pours out urine, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is perceived up to the joint of the thigh, it is the tense vein coming up to the place; if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that he is thus bowed, and no medicine is of value suddenly by anointing;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through work, and the vain efforts of foolish doctors who intervene.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs towards his belly; then put a tent of thread, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your finger index,
if you feel then that the tenderness has been perceived; and it is discovered where you feel between your finger the systole or the flesh, then you know that it is persistent; if one does not work it cannot be healed.
One heals all the way when one can well heal some, but this happens little.
and the aid that is done, if it is heated the subtle fire according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before. and the entire hot thing in the fistula, until it comes from the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know that these cracked characters are burned, which are similar to a bird's feather.
and then treat the many ulcers with a poultice, as long as the flesh is tender, then treat the wound by soothing and suddenly closing.
If it is thus healthy, it's good. If it is not, no other way can it be healthy;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the bottom, and place between your finger and the hold a thick covering of flesh or of suet, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the finger; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and thrust back before the hold, and then apply the cautery, as long as it reaches the head of the hold;
and it will be delivered the tent, and will fall; then I will define those worn-out chairs that seem a bird's feather, and none of them remain there.
And if the wound does not heal, and becomes short between you and the skin, then cautery with fire or medicine is needed.
For the fire cautery assembles in this way: it is to know, the drying of those joined bones, and the stopping of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken pieces, as long as the eyes gaze downward, and it is necessary to burn the joined bones in the mud.
Then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed from dry charcoal, and these are the drying medications.
For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes from the deep foundation, and is separated from the body, you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the thread or the suture or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no more than one way of faith and hope, through the management of one of the three methods:
where you apply the cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the fundament, or if you can set it in place and cure it as at first;
and do not go too deep in the fontanel, lest you cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and come to the evacuations by the voluntary sensation; then the cure, as we have said;
then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it will be healthy, or you separate that covering and the wound then that it is cut from the fundament, either by tension or by another instrument pointed; then define the faulty charter that is in the wound, as much as you can;
then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the defective part of the foundation: if it is more comfortable for the patient.
And often fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you push the probe into the fistula, and it is where the costal bone of the foundation lies beneath the skin above. if you take a sharp-pointed probe according to this form at the head; And you thrust it straight into the fistula as far as the head, and insert the thread entirely into the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is perforating in the margin of the underlying foundation within, then extract the thread from that which is pierced, so that you thrust your finger or foundation;
and draw the head of the thread, and join the fistulae together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay there for a day or two;
and restrain it no more than once, until the threads grasp these flesh that are between the two, and hold fast;
Then cure the wound so that it is sewn and healthy.
If the fistula does not burst, if you make it burst in all ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep inside.
For it does not suit to make a copper ligature if it is too deep inside, and then to cure, as we have said, so that it is healthy.
The shape of the spinal fistula that one makes if it is very narrow and constricted, and cuts through in a particular place. and on the other hand, it is not so, because one should not touch what one should not touch, as you see here.
Sinewy parts are according to two manners: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut off the blood immediately. and there is one or more, and they are deep in the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are deep if they have little moisture,
and immediately afterwards, a spot of citrus water or a spot of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a bedchamber, until the foundations issue forth, and appear the threads; if you hurry, and bend it like tendons, or hold it on your finger, then cut it in its roots;
and the uncle cannot hold them due to their moisture, if they take them with a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of camlet; and hold them at your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then heal with other healings until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue forth, then clisterize the patient with a harsh and bitter cluster to clean that which is in the foundation, so that they can issue forth openly;
when the patient cannot take it, and their vein is far from the foundation, then it is a light cure; and it is that you take them by your finger or the nails, and catch, then cure as we have said, so that they be healthy, and fear the incision with iron.
It is necessary that you make the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then draw the thread above and make pierce the needle from another part, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too large; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood.
then put on the foundation a piece of cloth soaked in oil rose or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he should rest.
and then let it cool down as much as it congeals, and when they are cooled, if you apply treatment of anointing and other treatments, until it is healthy.
you dry out the mucus or fundament Many times there is drying of mucus in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you make a poultice at the point of a spatula or on an ulcerated spot, which does not allow it to become moist. then heal as soon as it is swollen so that it becomes healthy.
and if it cannot heal, then restart the treatment more strongly than before, so that it heals much, and becomes scarred. then heal as soon as it is healthy.
because of trembling Here is the translation:
and sometimes the chill is found, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a string from a bird's feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and place that string on the cold spot, so that the circles surround the cold spot entirely. then turn your hand all around the string so that you grasp it entirely around the cold spot, and put it in the front, and extract the cold spot from its roots.
And if you see, make it in the form of a cane of iron or copper, and be subtle underneath and stretch above.
Do not perceive, for you must hold with your finger and press; and if you see, if you cauterize the trembling flesh, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
of the form of theclyster Never make aclyster of silver or copper, or of tin alloy or maillet; and never make one of these small and large instruments, according to those who are accustomed to them.
Those that one uses in the treatment of children and which are weak and painful, are small.
The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, where the belly is tied according to this method:
and it has a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has a perforation on one side .ij., and in the other .i.;
and let the belly be where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and let it be perceived all around with many small perforations,
and let there be between each perforation .i. a space of an inch, then put in these perforations .i. strong thread of twisted thread, crooked in .x. or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack; and when the medicine is inside, if you hold the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cleanse; and that's the form of the circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clister with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then insert it lightly:
then sprinkle the ministers with their two hands together, so that it be all visible, then extract the clister, and raise the patient's legs to the bench,
and if the medicine wants to issue, let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps one night entirely, it is a greater aid.
And if you treat him for a disease of bowel obstruction, and the medicine hastens to expel it, then recommend it until he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or an abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
and it is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have previously stated in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remedy will come into its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if it takes care of itself, it's a matter of setting stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great, and you carefully treat the abscessed swelling: if you make it almost healthy in the head measurement, so that little blood comes from the wound, and the healing is on the opposite side of the wounded part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to get healthier, so let his meat be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat flesh.
and put on the wound, abscesses heated by coming blood, cotton soaked in rose oil soothingly, or in wine steeped.
and if there is no hot abscess, put it on the wound, as long as it is fresh and its blood is not moved by air or powder, which I will tell you a little later;
and if the patient's condition has changed, put it on some ointments, as long as they are healthy.
And if the wound is large, like a slash of a spear and similar things, and the lips cannot be assembled by themselves, then assemble them by stitching, as I will tell you about wounds of the belly, of the stitching.
If the wound is uncovered to the bone, and it is deep, and does not hold but for a little, then cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore firm flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat large pieces of meat, if they taste and smell roasted, like pork, and similar things.
And if you find or acquire putrid matter, and it does not adhere to the bone, then remove all the putridness, and throw it far away, then apply the treatment.
and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which dries in this way so that the wound heals.
And the method of the powder is: take incense, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly. and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap.
and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so that it does not become inflamed; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
And often one makes a poultice of hot ashes, when one has not the incense nor the blood of dragon, but that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved the wound, meanwhile in this state, one does not put less of this powder.
but put on some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it pours forth a flow. then heal the other wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold it steady with subtle pinches;
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, if there is no other remedy than to let the treatment, and not to put anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soothing, thus heat the water in sweet oil, and mix it with rose oil, and cool the water thus in sweet oil. and other wounds of the mine according to this manner, and anoint them with moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind with bandages, then treat until it be healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick or pierce lower down.
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, that is the way to master it.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduct is guarded, because that's where the food goes. Here is the translation: and then hold it firmly, and let it be for some days, then cure the joints with ointments until it is healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound putrefies; and let it be disinfected and aligned with the outlet;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then perform the treatment as I have said in this chapter.
from a wound of a spear or a knife
If it is a blow from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound is ventilated, for if the patient does not expel air: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply into the wound. and return to the body, and open the sore. but I will put an attractive bandage on it, and bind it three times a day.
and if you do not have a bandage, put much cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture.
and have the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 2 days, or more. if there does not come a spasm, nor an evil tremor of the heart, which is not a sign of alteration. and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed. Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy.
and if she cannot heal, and operate, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do it.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether in front or on the back, then treat what is before.
if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then cauterize the wound, and remove the false feathers if they are dislocated. and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound putrefy, then alleviate the extractions.
and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
about the obstruction of the belly
The obstructions of the belly are great and moderate and small;
of the great wound often times the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, which prevents the intrusion of pus;
and the injury is worse, and no time is better than a small wound than a large one.
because one cannot put back into place the internal organs, unless they are replaced gradually and carefully. because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return to their place,
and therefore it is better to heal the lesser wound, because one can reset the intestine in its place rather than others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the four common stitches have to do with the stitching of the belly,
and the stitching of other wounds of the body and four other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will describe each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestinal contents are forced out. and grievous thing is to put back, this is by one of the two manners: where for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, where for the fact that the intestine is swollen by the cold.
And when it is frostbitten, heat it up partially in this manner: soften a sponge or a cloth with warm water and gently lay it on top, where you apply heat by squatting and piercing and puncturing, and raise the intestine until the inflammation is eliminated;
and many times they make these restraining bands, and it is better to remove them by untying.
And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestine with water or a warm potion and evil humors are cooked, for by that it is alleviated, the entrance to a little of things;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument where one gathers the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to moderate the heat that we should not cut without great necessity that it has;
and these are the instruments for making an incision:
if you cut deeply into the curve and do not deviate, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst forth, if you reset it to its natural form in its proper place, see you in a power, for this is worth muscles.
When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part beneath the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is on one of the injured parts if you find that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to manage what I say in large and minor wounds.
In small wounds, use what you have prepared.
then you hold between your hands, I minister pitifully who draws out all the treatment with his hand, and gather the lips; and it is the common manner of stitches,
and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, Then let the top of the wound heal, I do not hasten it, and I fix a needle or there is a strong thread. and pierce the skin with the skin of the hip, with the skin of the sphac,
then hold back with a double thread inside the needle of the finger, then assemble the heads of the wound quickly,
and then let it be in a space, and fix another needle; then tie the double thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have learned about the needles. until the whole wound is closed;
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large, for the subtle needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well: because it is necessary for them to be moistened;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
so they do not accumulate and open the wound before the scab;
and then remove the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and you hold taut threads on the head of the needles to keep them steady and let them be until the wound is sewn;
and this way of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for it suffices to insert a needle or two.
The second cauterization is common, and it is that you gather the two heads of skin and the two heads of flesh together at a single point, where there is a strong middle thread; and when you have pierced these heads all together,
and when you have pierced these heads all together, then reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and put a space between each vertebra, the size of a lesser finger;
this vertebra belongs to the man,
and I found a wound that one of our men had in the belly,
which was injured by a dagger, and it was a wound more than a palm long and it was well of the intestines, nearly two palms of length
and it was a wound in the belly. I returned the intestine then, when it had been without food for 23 hours.
and was the wound sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and was healthy.
And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not heal with ointment, for I stood in a place where one found none, nor any medicines; and put on it a cotton dressing often twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healthy.
Here is the translation:
Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to the point within.
when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have placed the head of the siphaeus or costal or where you have pricked with the needle,
and make it pierce another part of the defective area within just up to the point.
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew thus as the pelleteer makes the pelts, and you let one side of the bandage be loose, and take it up on the other, until the entire dressing is complete.
The second way of dressing, which Galen described properly,
it is so like a fountain, which naturally assembles the broken parts together, and apply one head of the bandage to the other head, in such a way:
insert a needle or a pointed instrument close by, and make it pierce the skin slightly. and let the juices of the blood flow out; then turn the needle, and make it pierce the part that is defective just up to the inner cavity, as the juices of the blood flow out;
then make a perforation on one side and the other of the weakened part just up to the inner edge, in another head of the Miraculum which are on the other side;
and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen says this in his book, and no one bears witness to it,
one should stitch the belly with many needles, or there is a thread in each;
and one should thrust an needle from one part, and another from elsewhere, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is a wound more grievous than others in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the artery has moved. if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the powder soothing charcoal,
if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the powder soothing charcoal, and if the artery has moved, so put no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and sew up the sutures, and the membrane; then heal the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, a lot of cotton, and change it many times a day until it is healthy.
For you do not have mastery of other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the main limbs, if it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperament warm, or in oil rose, and put it between the fingers, and beneath the soles;
and if he feels pain or prickling in the belly, and many times it happens, if they apply a cluster of black wine, and meanwhile the porridge reaches up to the intestine;
and it penetrates deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to its natural passages.
And if the suture jumps from the wound, reset it back as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned towards white or black, it is necessary that you lift the black spot, which is a sign of bad blood that comes from it, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the indices of the heads pendant during the part below the wound until it is far enough to alleviate the extraction when the nerves are quiet, and the wound is relaxed.
from the twisting of the gut
When the intestine is swollen, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some ways,
because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear.
and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and there ensued the evacuation and flatulence;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to subtily treat until it was healthy, and the wounds soothed.
And when I saw him sweat, I doubted that the patient had a pain in his stomach; and he had no point of pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up in such a manner: take firm stitches with large threads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the patient has opened their mouth, if they place it on the two lips,
then place another finger afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;
and cut open the wound. If the head settles into the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of a beast,
in this manner: Take the head of this gut thread that is very much disentangled, and then attach it to the head of this thread, namely a subtle twisted flaxen thread, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its natural position;
and this manner of suturing wounds is not otherwise than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and large, similarly when it is in one of the intestinal gut, if there is no ingenious remedy, because of subtlety.
of a fistula or where it is Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called a "fistula". and similarly when it is swollen and burst open.
And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of hard and white, where one does not feel pain. and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and thin, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times sufficient;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healthy, and there is no flesh. it is not except by one of the eight causes:
it is to know, through the small passage of blood or flesh; or through its evil nature; where for this he has hard crust within, and on the lips, which does not let him have crust; where he has too much of a bump; where the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; for it is that the corruption is a manner of plague; for in the property where the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and inflamed by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
It is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula, which is done by surgical operation.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, to the spine of the back, or to some joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if it has any fistula that does not move near the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you examine the view, if you take a rod of iron or steel, so the fistula is straight, if it is ready.
and if the fistula is twisted, if it seeks a subtle probe of lead, for the probes fold back within the twisting;
and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search well by probing, if one catheterizes through one of the passages,
for the moisture flows from one passage to another, and it is clarified;
then you seek to know by your power if there is a bone or nerve, and it is shaved in the background,
and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it;
and when you will truly know the limb or where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in one of the limbs that I have told you, if the cope follows what I have told you,
or in one of the limbs that I have told you, if the cope follows what I have told you, and bone for the fracture and the rotten flesh that is within; and then the treatment as long as it is healthy,
and if the fistula is well formed in the right place, it is necessary that you cut in a perpendicular direction, as much as you can, then I put moist applications in medicine agua, and the joints just at the head of the fistula,
then I put moist applications in medicine agua, and the joints just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess flesh which is accumulated at the bottom;
and then I put ointments in the wounds, clear and healthy flesh, so that it be healthy;
and if he is not healthy through this, then he should be cauterized as we have said
and if his bone is corrupted by the fistula, then he should be treated. If a vein or nerve is not grieved or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then you should remove it so that the corruption is completely removed, then the treatment of things straying so much that they are healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and renders void as before, know that you are not led just to the fountain:
if it discovers and seeks as much as you are at the bottom, and stop all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healthy, it's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deeply rooted, so you cannot come to an end; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs. if the extraction instrument is suitable for that,
and if there are many bones, so remove them completely, do not leave a single one;
and the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if you burn with fire and moisture, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place on the wound something that promotes suppuration. and let it be until the pus is formed between the bones,
and then they will have less difficulty with the bones;
and if it's a large bone, such as of leg or thigh, if you remove only the corrupted part so that the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of corrupted flesh, and it reaches close to the marrow of the bone; if it is necessary to burn and cut all the way to the corruption, and then to treat until it be healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that befell a certain man in his leg, if you take an example and help with your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body,
until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and had no way to evacuate for opening;
but the doctor, in their foolishness, operated so much that they opened up to the abscesses, and in corrupting many materials, and it became a fistula, and they came to have many holes that all the filth and moisture of the body flowed;
and many doctors made a cure within two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
as long as I was afflicted, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him and that which corrodes through the perforations to a large body; and the body became red from youthful strength, and had a citrine color.
I touched a tent in one of these perforations, and then felt all the perforations.
and I found that one vein comes against the other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the openings as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went up to the bone within;
I seized upon that which appeared to me as the corrupted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
and thus begins to restore the wound with medicines soaked in long tension, and cannot be sewn;
and then he begins again, and uncovers the bone as before,
and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then stopped it, and thought of sewing up the wound;
but I could not do so much that I cut into one palm of the bone, and thrust it forth with all its marrow; then the restoration of medicines; and he was quickly healed and relieved suddenly,
and did not need to start the work again for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For often blood was evacuated, but he was completely healed,
For often blood was evacuated, but he was completely healed, and it grew on the bone of the shoulder a hard callus, and was of good disposition and had no harm nor opposition in every way, neither to alleviate nor to come.
and hold the head steady, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from beneath, and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not bruise the flesh; and put a probe or a tubular instrument beneath the bone to remove the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to cauterize as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to cauterize again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear so, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if the whole skin is discolored; then put a hot iron underneath,
and then one should cauterize from one part to the other the corruption, and let the cautery be done according to the length of the corruption, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or it contains on the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the joints, then there is no other anguish except to cut through;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or in the finger of the foot, then it is very strong that thing, but however it is necessary that you inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you; and you should anoint it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause opposition;
and know that the incisors and the sockets for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the joints, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similarity of work with its instrument;
and know that you will show the instrument with which you have mastered, according to the knowledge of this art, and testify about the ways of the diseases; if you propose the instrument with which you have mastered, according to what it suits him.
of fire The head perishes either due to density or due to excess.
and when you have applied the medicine to that corrosion through the treatment of remedies, and they do not benefit at all, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, if the patient escapes by means of death, or through evil, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the limb;
if the patient escapes by means of death, or through evil, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire. and afterwards the blackness spreads, then it goes to those corroding of limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; if you hasten to cope with it,
and this is through the impact of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar things,
Here is the translation:
And if it comes just to the hand, if the cope reaches the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if the cope reaches the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and it does not deserve any remedies except the quantity of its virtue;
and all thus done when the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes to the first joint, then the cope reaches beyond another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then amputate the whole foot; and if it reaches the leg, then amputate at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the way to amputate or sever the limb is that you tie it above and below; and extend one minister's hand downwards, and another minister's hand upwards, and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious latitude, so that the bone becomes uncovered;
then cover or sew, and put a layer of linen on each part, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy skin, and bring to the patient another wound and abscess to heal.
And if the blood flow decreases when you operate, then cauterize the limb hastily. where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
then wrap the numb limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you that it happened to a certain man in our city:
he had a blackness that seemed to come from fire,
and this corrosion came first in his finger toe, so much that it consumed the entire toe;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to amputate the toe, and was cured;
and long afterwards the corruption returned in his hand finger, and it came to me,
and I put them on things rebounding after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the ulcers;
and it seems that I passed the hand, and I did not want, that I had hope of rebounding the material; and I doubted also that if I cut off his hand, it would not die, for the strength of the man was feeble; and he despaired all, and returned to his land, and hold fast his hand, and he will be healthy;
and I have not found it stated elsewhere that because of this, one does something else, if one has mastery.
Never does an abscess come to a clear skin, and it stays for so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then they break and burst, and the pus jumps out, and the veins become empty, just like a drained vessel; and the skin which is above is also as subtle as the delicate sheets. and does not reach just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy",
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
and the doctor is required to cut around the entire wound, and similarly when it is subtle, just like one wraps. and do not hesitate because of its decay.
And if you find that the wounds are getting worse, and the decay is not on the surface, and the wound is full of flesh, so the treatment with a cluster follows:
Here is the translation: then the rectifier of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take arsenic, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put copper in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it into a liquid and into honey, and clean the wound, and hold the peritons; and let the medicine sit for three hours, then strain it by pressing;
do this many times, until the wounds are cicatrized, and the pus is removed;
and no time should be cleaned with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, it is that you take ashes of wood from vine, and throw water above.
then boil, and clarify, until you know that the blood is well purged;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, nor the Egyptian medicine with water of ashes, if you clarify with water and honey or it has a little bit of littarge powder; where you apply a mixture of honey and wine, which has the properties of mundifying and cleaning, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wounds are well cleaned, if you apply a mixture of what creates birth to flesh in it,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in the treatment of ointments;
and if the passage of the sinus is small, and the canal of theclyster cannot enter, if you enlarge it with a iron instrument a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, where application of basilicon, so that it be enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, thus prick and let it suppurate as much as it can, or the cluster may enter,
and if the perforation that makes a hole is above, thus cover or make a lower level than it is. For when the hole is in the fontanelle, thus do not let it become inflamed there; and if you cannot cover the seat below thus as you want, if it appears in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is,
and if you cannot cover the seat below thus as you want, if it appears in this manner: that the bowel moves gently downwards, and does not leave anything behind from the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
and apply a dressing of linen that covers the entire breast; then cover the affected area of the breast, i.e. a small area larger than at first, then is the gentle adjustment of the bandage according to the quantity of the pierced hole. and place it on the pierced hole of the breast to align the fracture, and do not remove the large bandage until after several days.
and he who is above the pierced hole of the breast, removes it frequently to reset the fracture, and know that which runs from the fracture, whether it is venom or poison or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
and when the medicine has extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender part of the breast, if you know that the breasts are affected already, and approach the healthy ones;
and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you dislocate the wound, If you change the other dressing, and renew the binding.
And if the senses are disturbed by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear. And if subtle veins come to the surface after long tension, do not despair of health.
For health approaches. For there are men who delay in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if the bowel is indigestible, it knows how to release itself after many days, it seems that the breasts do not become accustomed;
and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are painful, if you apply moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue, as we have said definitively, because it has a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
take ointment definitively, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine equal in substance;
Then he must be cooked and used; and this same mixture makes honey-cooked groats. when we apply it, it is not present,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue it to the dressing, and apply it to the wound, and many times I have ministered to a logger's long wound, and roots of the sky, which is as if flour of times and hundred.
and roots of the sky, which is as if flour of times and hundred. and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use; and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment,
and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail of the hand, or at the foot, or which happens to grow on other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if an abscess forms here, and they run and pour pus as far as it runs to the root of the finger, and by chance they corrupt everything;
and there come ulcers up to the bone, as far as it comes to foul-smelling pain, and the head of the finger is swollen, and the color is dark.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not profit at all, Here is the translation: then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh inside, and it starts to point, and becomes white, then you must put something under the nail that points at the flesh, and put the bottle up high, and hold this subtle and light character. and apply to the remaining flesh of the wound medicines that are burning and corrosive to cauterize everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it, and pull out strongly, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
and if you see the finger decay, so cut it off at the joint as we said before that it is like that. then heal it until it is healthy;
and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, so it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut off the finger at the joint of the hand, cutting across the upper part;
and beware that the incision does not reach just to the skin which is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it to calm it down.
The two fingers that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all numb, and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is a fingernail,
and none of them grow from the root of the joint, or the birth is in no way from our fingers. That which grows on no nut of the toe does not move, and that which grows at the joint of the toe, by chance moves;
the size of the one who is fleshed is light, in such manner: cut it at its root with a large spatula.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold two fingers together.
In those who are born with their fingers or toes bent inward, it is necessary that you first straighten the rounded flesh up to the bone, then feel the bone to a suitable socket, then heal it as long as it is healthy.
The sudden movements that come together suddenly come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn by fire, or from similar things.
If it happens that you feel that dislocation, then the duty is to repair it according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or wrapped in a millstone oil rosset, so they do not dislocate; where you put between two subtle pieces of plank, so that the eyes are suspended, as it is necessary.
they suddenly come together with the palm, if they cope with that suspension as it is necessary.
Of veins
They are large, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors, which come into the limbs of the body;
and there is more in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that they cut, and treat on fire the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein, and treat it all on fire.
The cutting is done in this manner: first raise the leg to a warm and very hot temperature, so that the thick blood is subtitled. then hold the leg of the patient from above the hip, just to the part below the knee; then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision,
then release and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's vein can suffer;
and then the ligature, and he instructs that he abstains from eating meat cooked with black coal;
and recommend evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not annoy the patient.
The elevations of the limb are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to warm water as hot as it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you have no balms, heat it with fire, and then apply the cup at the vein of the loin to the head of the knee, or in the part beneath the armpit;
then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of each part, until it appears as one feels;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems also like a white cord;
then push the vein beneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then place it lightly at the ankle;
Then burn with fire in another place, thus two wounds; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then apply the ointment to the wound, just as you have done, and attach it to another ulcer, just as you had done previously;
then burn with another cauterization, or more if you are a master of it, then apply the ointment, and burn on the toe of the foot;
then remove and apply the ointment up to the second cauterization; then extract the cauterization from cauterization, until it is completely removed, then burn;
and if you cannot pull it back and lift it, if you prick with a strong double-threaded needle at all points. and pull and tug, and prick below with a strong thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is settled; and take care that it does not seize up, for if it seizes up, you cannot pull or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have fully pulled it back, place on the wound a lint soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
And if his vision is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, it is necessary that you bend it gently, but do not touch it; and treat it as we have previously said.
it is necessary that you bend it gently, but do not touch it; and treat it as we have previously said. The shape of the iron instrument with which one touches the vision is curved, and does not cut, so it does not touch the vein;
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is in the legs, in warm regions where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in soil where there is no moisture;
and perhaps it grows in another part rather than the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin,
as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, growing between the skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very large inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the veins, and begins to swell outward, like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth seven and a half inches up to the elbow, and the nail,
and leave the cloth on the leg, and all the times it is not in default, if you envelop it with the cloth, and the nail; and if it is too long, cut part of it off, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut into its root, until it is all removed; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
and it is not at all times this vein when it is treated with five fingers' length, or ten inches; and a hand came to me, whose fingers were ten inches long, and when you take its measure, if it bursts into four or five, and pierces just to the ends,
Here is the translation:
And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and it comes from many perforations, and there are many ulcers; heal them thus as we have said before.
From wounds that grow between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
and it is a small vein that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body, rising and falling, and it feels like a good flow from member to member, as much as it descends into the skin or it goes, and jumps forth;
and it is a sign of bad digestion of certain humors, if they come forth like worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or belly;
and doubt not of its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it curving and straying, if one cannot be steadfast that when it goes:
it is necessary then that you read the place above and below with a strong and well-straightened lien,
then cut above and the straying vein, and if the verse is deeply implanted in the flesh, and you do not find it, If you cauterize with fire, until it dies.
and the greatest harm that he does, is that he corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or approaching near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then cope with it above, and remove it completely;
and it is necessary to use the patient's moderation of corpus of soluble medicines for the evil humidors,
and beware of rotten flesh eating away at the putridity.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence. This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes into some members, and then it moves from member to member; and I see what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and soon after, I saw it grow as big as a vein on the shoulder, more painful than anything, just like living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little afterwards it corrupts throughout the whole body, so much that it comes into the other arm;
then it seems to me that it turns again inward towards the body, as I see it.
I was very surprised at how it moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this illness in this manner. However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I do not avoid what he wants, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because of this, the constricted womb appears;
and I do not appear to be in accordance with this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said. if the lie is above and below hastily, and then cope with it until that windiness constrains the issue in its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the cure for those who expel windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's wisdom, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
The diversity of them is that there are some which have large heads, and small ones, and notched, and rounded; and those which have jagged edges, and those which have lengths, and those where there are fragments; and that which falls on any member if it falls according to several manners: whether in a principal member it injures,
if like brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then on any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear: if it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many guises; and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and heal the wound.
And the symptom of the brain when the arrow is in the head and pierces the bone, and exits the forehead which is above the brain, it is when there is Scotomy and numbness and reversal and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perplexity of understanding, and evacuations of the colon; and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and it jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a pimple, and it jumps out also as if bruised flesh;
and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow so it does not remain inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not at all loose. and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a pimple, and in a dark bloody flux, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Here is the translation:
And the sign of the arrow that did not penetrate deeply into the arm is that without pus or swelling from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient's color changes, and he sighs deeply and casts a high fever.
And if the arrow head breaks into the covering of the bladder, it is beneath the small ribs; and it casts great anguish and great pain and sighs; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow head breaks in the stomach, by chance it comes out of the wound with some undigested food.
And if the arrow head breaks in the belly, and it comes out at a point of feces through the intestine, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the blood vessel breaks in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, as the arm and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositions. When the blood vessel is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because I did something similar.
It happened to a certain man whose blood vessel burst or broke in the root of the nail: I touched it, and pulled from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and it was without feeling numbness.
And I pulled out an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the skin beneath, and the arrow was put back, and could not be felt except for the tip towards the hollow, and it was a large arrow of a Turkish bow, with an iron tip without any edge; the game was without harm, and no bad accidents happened to me.
And pull out a arrowhead from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrowhead at the ears:
I seized the barbs, and subtly pulled as much as I could, and the Christian was saved.
And I extracted an arrowhead from a man's body, which had fallen into his belly, and I thought he was dying;
and then when it had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all; I cut into the arrow, and I engineered it, and I made the trajectory straight, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell or stuck, and the wound is swollen above;
and delay extracting the arrow from him, and do not disturb his natural disposition, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
And you saw another man who had an arrow wound on his face, and the wound was swollen;
and he lingered thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And they extracted an arrow from the king's prince's man, which was stuck in his nose, and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
I was called to the treatment after she had fallen, three days prior. If I found the wound very constricted.
I touched her everywhere with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and she felt a throbbing pain beneath her right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I put on the injured place a digestive attractive plaster, because the wounds do not swell. and I appear to have healed the wound of the arrow.
and I appear to have healed the wound of the arrow. I put on the plaster daily, and restored the wounded place, and thus I held back the patient's long-term pain.
until he felt the arrow, that is, a day within his nose; and it did not bother him. I put on the wound a medicinal corroding medicine by gentle hours, until it was uncovered,
and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had become stuck in the flesh; then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it went well beyond the terms for three months,
and then examine if the wound is where I touched the tendons, and the muscle of one part and another, and cannot issue;
then I did not cease to subtly feel and ingeniously examine the instruments, until I grasped it, that is, the well-made tendons. according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may draw it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account;
but wise masters compare well a great many things, and on what is present and failing, find new work, and a new instrument, at the understanding of the strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except in seven manners. or through the skin where they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumps forth where it enters, it's an arrow entering into the flesh, and jumps forth at no time now.
And if she does not jump now, let her wait until the flesh is porous within, and may the dislocation be alleviated.
and also if she is fixed in the bone, and she cannot exit, let her wait thus for some days, and move a little each day;
and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, prick within at all .i. subtle forest, as much as the eyes within are enlarged, and then pull.
And if the arrow is embedded in the limb of the body so that one cannot see it, then seek it out with the entire tendon. and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
and if you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow. and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the abscess is great; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds,
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds, if the flesh is torn which is deeply fixed with two fingers by the muscle where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can draw it out; and subtly understand that you do not break the arrow, that you extract it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, if you leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood counteracts you, if you diminish what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision into the nerve and vein, and make an effort so that you can extract the arrow without danger.
where you touch or press, or hold firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell on them, for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens into something of it, or the skin is inflamed in a place if one sees or feels it outwardly:
cut then upwards, as much as the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommences the extraction until it comes forth;
and if there is a remainder of the arrowhead, cut around the entire shaft;
and if the shaft breaks, and you want to administer a remedy, then it administers an instrument that cuts. if the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
and if the arrow is hairy, he applies it to the instrument with a point entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it converges.
And if the arrowhead is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is near the surface, and you can touch it, then you can cover over it.
and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is necessary. and treat it until it is healthy.
The shape of the tongs used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the blood.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because there it has or at the head 16.
it is to know: 2 veins which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins; and the 2 arteries which are in the 2 temples appearing; and those veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the nose-bridge; and the gums which are around the neck; and the veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are two in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the common people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basiliac, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the artery is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the abdomen, and it is the one that is bled, which appears clearly on the skin.
And the little vein is the one that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
and on the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is below the curve of the hollow of the left shin. and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right shin; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side.
and on the other leg are three veins below those.
The knowledge of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraine. and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and scrub the area where the veins are of a rough fabric; then the patient should restrain his neck to a single gaze, so that the veins appear behind the ears in the dependent areas of the head: where the hammers strike your finger, and where you feel the pulsation beneath your finger, it is a sign of an abscess;
then take the lancet, and thrust it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein above, and cut and peel back the skin well, you must give two drops of traversing, and make issue two bloods as much as you see;
then hold it steady and raise it, until it is healthy;
and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the arteries that are in the temples, if it is worth migrating to an old vein, and swollen, and accustomed to opthalmia, and at the root of the watery eyes;
and the quality of the wound if it is thus as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse beneath your finger, and then signs of the fracture;
then apply the cauterizing iron to the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below. and apply the vein above, and the cope, as you have done with other veins, and make correction of the blood according to your need;
then undo the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put it on cotton;
and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their coping and extraction, where the book begins.
The illness of the forehead vein, which is just as valuable as the illness of the cephalic as ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness;
and the quality is that the illnesses constrict their neck by twisting, so much that the veins appear; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the form:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; Then release to the patient the neck, and lay the vein so it is healthy and never swells from a large flame.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
then the vein, and let the vein be of equal traverse, a little thick, a little long, a little wide, for there is no cartilage.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
The vein of the arm that is worth aagu, and to strong force, and to evil diseases of the face, As if migraine and redness come to the face, and especially when it is chronic.
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches his nose to your left hand, and take a subtle flame long, and hold it in the hollow of the eyebrow in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now start to flow;
and do not go too much in depth, and make a correction of the blood according to the necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is almost completely restored;
The health of the .ij. joints helps with the straightening of the arm, and at the beginning of messelry, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corroding, and herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the health is that the patients stretch their neck from one side to the other, as we have said; and let the masters stand above the patient's head, and the patients sit on a stool.
then prick the vein of the arm slightly larger, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as the master is;
then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the liver The health of the veins above the liver helps with pain in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks in the liver, and painful nose and entrails.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right liver and the other on the left. and they are recognized by this, that they are black, and by this, around them there are small black veins: examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if you examine the largest of each part, and all thus make the veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
From the healthy area below the tongue Here is the translation:
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and he raises his tongue, and looks from below on each side a black vein:
feel both the one and the other, and do not press too much in depth, for there are the arteries.
The veins of the neck where one commonly feels are sensed in two ways:
or when pricking everywhere, a large flame appears, or a subtle olive-green color if one cuts deeply, and it is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it is useful for opening the veins that are full of gross blood apparent, and that contain gross blood and turmoil; and it is the form of the olive flame:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for healing subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
and it is necessary for the healer to heal carefully, and that he beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he touches the artery, and blood comes out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be pricking the phlegm, but rather trimming it like a nail.
And if the ulcer does not open manifestly, then you must extract it, and change to another; where you want no rupture of it, or you heal the vein in his arm: it opens manifestly; and trim the phlegm like a nail, as we have said.
And if you want to examine the level of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, that you touch the level as much as you feel the pulse; Then sign the level of the notch, and then stretch out the arm, and cover the vein of the flame with anise;
and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the level swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from the artery: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if the wound is not cleansed, and it grows worse, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut open the artery so that it reveals the head of the veins; and cleanse the wound.
And take a scraping of fistula, and make it, and take one of the embers and lay them well just next to the other journey;
If the wound is cleansed, it's good; if not, then cure, as we have said, with powders that cleanse blood.
And the cleansing remedies are not grievous in many dispositions for the small wound of the plague, and the possession of the doctrine of the arm's power.
The vein's wisdom is a thousand times better if it draws blood from above the head and below the body. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the vein to be warmed by the nerve that is below, and if it does not penetrate deeply enough, and it finds the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the health is grievously affected, and by chance it cannot be healed;
and it is necessary to open the nerve many times, and if it does not open in any men because of its subtlety, it is necessary that you loosen the sinew of the instrument with ease; and avoid loosening the nerve at your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then it should be made to flow gently.
The sinew of the cephalic aids, which attracts blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to cauterize at the flame of olive oil or at the flame of mirtyne, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Here is the translation: and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when it fails at first, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing, is that healing is not achieved unless it preserves health,
and to avoid future diseases; and it is the healthy vein made in one of the three veins that are or touched: that is to say, cephalic, fasting, and basilica; and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 3 days.
The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no determined hour, but only when need is felt by day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
and it is not advisable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until the seventh month. Nor is it advisable to cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is advisable that they evacuate the intestines with a light clyster. if it has much bad humors retained, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines to the principal members.
One does not become healthy who is too full of food, nor who is drunk, as long as he is furious, nor dropsical;
and becomes worse on the part of the sick one after colic passion, and vomiting, and discomfort of the stomach, and multiplication of habits in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and all that is contrary to virtue, or by means of the arm or of the whole body;
then subtle are the humors, if the blood is thick, through food and through drinks and through medicines, if you have them in great abundance;
then between or bath, it is not a thing that does not weaken, to subtily thin out the blood;
and you close the vein of the foot below the thigh, as we have said;
and you beware that day of operation, and of point, and of slipped disc, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the veins be higher than the one that is being treated, and rub the arm three or four times;
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
and then he rubs the joint with his hands until the veins swell, and he feels them;
then he anoints the surgeons with a little oil of a small flask, then places his finger of his left hand under that vein below the joint where he wants to operate, so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced. For there are veins that flee as if they were cords to the surgeon, and if there are those that are full of windiness, if one touches the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is of those.
and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or in haste, if the vein is not swollen.
And if the vein is swollen, and the patient is in spasm, let it be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: Here is the translation:
and if the perforation is small, or the bleeding is subtle and you doubt whether it has not bled as much as you see, then thrust the same perforation fully into the flame directly;
and hold it a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the eyes inflamed, do not recommence the bleeding, and put a little of the oil of the lily on it, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is modified in this eye with the oil;
and thus administer the lily oil in each wound that you bleed, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same method makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one puts it on the place; if the blood is subtle and separates when it is too large.
And if there come big abscesses, which occur many times, especially when it is not healthy enough except at that time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and put on the place a sponge moistened with water and oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has issued from the vein, and if it remains on the place for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm; and if you see, put among none of those things of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, masterly, or similarly.
And many times there is abscess and appearance at the healthy part of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of those things that we have said, for by chance in court without the artery; but it makes .i. a plaster secure to harden the spot, then cure with another cure, until it be healthy.
And extract each blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Because the patient's blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see a large tumor, let it diminish until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large.
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him less often and more slowly, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this method of bleeding is free from corruption of blood and gathering of nerves, and it is better than the long bleeding which is not large.
And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a gentle poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is heated, then draw out three or four times the blood.
And if it is of cold complexion, then apply a gentle poultice made from muscat syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sweet-smelling syrup.
And if it swells at the health, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he has a broth of beef, and subtle sweet-smelling syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to anoint his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is affected by great wound, that he anoints little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
And he who wants to anoint his arm after the first healing, and it has strong flesh, if he anoints seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to heal from another part, if he should heal on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within the body which is already heated, and it causes fever to come; if one wants to treat a great quantity, and widen the pores as much as possible, so that it may issue forth in perspiration. Then you consider all the conditions of health, and put your hand on their pulse when they are healthy, so death does not come into their body. and this happens often, when the healer is negligent;
and it does not matter when you want to dislocate the arm, and make blood issue a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on; nor if it is curved, that he stretches the arm hastily, for that would be bad;
but let it be until it heals the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as much as the blood that is congealed at the opening of the vein issues forth, and put on a small amount of oil in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it too much, until the abscess is calmed.
And if it is necessary to bleed twice, let it be in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein near the hand because it is composed.
And the manner of the healthy one is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so long as the vein becomes red.
then should it be bound moderately, so that the vein appears good, then the healthy part now from across, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the perforations be wide, and be healthy near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put your hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not reinsert your hand into cold water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger of the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
hold the hand, and put it in cold water, until the vein becomes swollen, if one sees it; and if the vein is crossed, and if you cut it entirely, do not hurt anything;
and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are situated very close to the skin,
and then put your hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue.
And when you have drawn out blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Here is the translation:
The wisdom of the sage is worth all the diseases that are beneath the body, as well as diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his wisdom is that the patient's pain is alleviated by placing a warm poultice on the vein, and rubbing it gently until it perspires. and applying it beneath the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many kidneys are affected.
Here is the translation:
And if you cauterize the patient on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein that traverses also like a coping; and let the flames be anointed.
And if the blood cannot issue out, put the foot in water, and let the vein be well cleaned.
And if the veins fail at first, start again a second time from underneath a little, because the blood is salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make a similar vein from the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic leg is at the junction of the thigh, and its health depends on the pain of the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its health is that patients get better or worsen, and stretch above the thigh three fingers in twisting,
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then the health appears in all the ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is good that you take care of it, for the vein is healthy, and it is much restored to many people at home.
and it is good that you take care of it, for the vein is healthy, and it is much restored to many people at home. And if you do not find it, a healthy vein appears or gives in the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as you see fit, and then release the ligature, and put on cotton and bind; it is now healthy.
The healthiness of cupping
Cupping is made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
And this ventilation which is without touching if it is according to two manners: either it is at all fire, or without fire;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the ventous below the chin; and the cupping on the shoulders; and the cupping on the hips; and the cuppings in the shoulders arms; and the cuppings of the legs; and the cuppings of the ribs; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this, one should not be afraid to take it, as one does when collecting blood from a vein; and it is not suitable that it be administered, nor at all by fire or sensation of fire, in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is suitable to administer, or due to habit, if we begin to give it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time;
for there are those who, when they have a task of administering, have a heavy hand;
and if there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who have a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood; and if there are those who dread, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to take a purge after three hours of the day.
The health of the nose helps with the grief of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this ventilation is in the place of the sanity of the cephalic,
and it does not suit anyone who has a cold complexion in use, or who has a catarrh, because that causes them great harm;
and therefore it does not suit those who are old in use, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often get dizzy, become oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping device a little lower down due to the doubt of oblivion.
The ventilation in the hollow of the neck is at the level of the healthy head and the basilic vein, and therefore it has value for the shortening of the thigh. and in fracture of the channel of the forearm, and in swelling, and in replenishment;
and it is necessary to puncture little, for if it holds too firmly, then it causes obstruction or stomach and heart.
The ventilations at the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and obstructions and migraines, and in the constriction, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the hand of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to apply their hand to put it in place, so they do not touch the artery, and do not cause any effusion of blood.
The breaths from beneath the chin are worth a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the hands of the veins of the two lips.
The breaths from the shoulders are worth a disease that comes from heat and from fullness.
The breaths from the thighs are worth as much as those of the two veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many incisions, because the flesh is naked of skin, and it knows beneath the nerves and arteries.
The cupping which is on the backside is useful for removing deep-seated humor, and for illnesses beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of copper, so it has mastery to draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The cuppings of the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are useful for ancient pains in the loins, and in the marrow, and in the bladder, and reset the fluxes; and are in place of .ij. sophenes, and .ij. chevilles, and altogether they refresh the body after long use, and make come paumison in more dispositions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck immediately, and put it hastily, and remove evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the red and swollen place, and appear the roughness of the blood; then firm, and reapply the cuppings, and take heed in the disposition of the bodies, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once softly, and necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtly open up the passage of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we suffice with striking only once.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, it is necessary to start again; and if the blood is thick, then we should strike deeply, and the terminus is that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
and it is suitable for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have stiff pores, that you anoint the hairs of the abscesses with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in this way, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of bitter wood, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
And if one has a tender and large pores skin, it does not need to apply oil.
but it needs to be washed after the irrigation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar others.
And he who has much moisture, if he rises from axle, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have gross excesses rise from old wine, or water of elder, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things.
and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping device before bathing, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping treatment.
and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped. And beware of the patient who is choleric, and whose blood is too agitated and inflamed; it is necessary that he take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and apply poultices, and flesh of swallows, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and applies poultices little by little, and applies small poultices and small birds' meat;
and the day when he feels better, if he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before the ventilation, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let the skin be subtle, but it is not suitable except for those who are hot in the body.
The cupping glasses that are placed without piercing are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, because these members cannot suffer from piercing on their skin.
and do not perform it more than to attract blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the veins are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the bowels to thin out the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue through adventure the operation, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one puts it on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness,
and these windy places are emptied by sucking so strongly; and never are they treated together with fire, and never are they filled with stagnant water,
as in evil diseases of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the windy place with warm stagnant water, or with water where it has cooked conovolent herbs for that purpose.
The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is thus:
And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth from the front, and it has or forms around the middle a small hole, just as if to put in an awl,
and it is of iron, soft in front so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
and it has in the middle a crosswise iron or iron rod, for placing a candle's flame,
and they are big and small according to the diseases and the age of those who contract them;
for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean from the fat.
And one must then put this veinous humour on the limb:
take the candle of wax or lead, and put it in the veinous humour across the rod which is in the veinous humour, Let the brightness be at the bottom of the cupping device so it does not burn the patient.
and then place it on the limb, and let the two be on the orifice that we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapor goes out, and remove the cupping device.
and take hold of the limb as before, and frequently repeat it, if you are a master.
In the cupping device, which is administered in disease of the lungs, at every acute stage, there is no vein or orifice, and it is not administered unless when it is full of blood, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible.
and it's the form:
Veins are not amenable to treatment unless in members where one cannot put compresses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in the naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar places;
and the quality of the usage is that when you find veins that are in tender sweet nerves without obstruction, then take them;
and put a soft bandage on them, so they become familiar with it, and have no wind in their belly; and then be cleansed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the ulcers;
and when they are full, and they will make a crust, see if it is the place where one can put a cupping, then put it, for it is very valuable afterwards.
If not, lift the place of the axle, and then of the water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and you must wash it thoroughly afterwards with the course of the sound veins, if it is muddy; I will drizzle on a cold water, and put it in place, so that the vein is stretched.
and if the vein is multiplied, then put on a crushed vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, so that it may be stretched.
or you put on the limb a poultice of peas shells, and let them stay until they adhere to the limb, it will staunch now.
and if you have more material at hand, take other veins.
And if the sinews do not take well, rub the limb with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sinew goes out. and then put them in place, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere;
and when you see that they cling, sprinkle a little of aloe and of crushed silk, or of ash, so that they will adhere now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish wise man departs from this chapter, for they never found anything in the ancient books, nor did they read a letter.
and for this reason, the science is strange in our land, for I never found any good in it.
and I know nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life.
and I have described here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters beforehand.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and stays on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twist or bruise comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so that nothing is lacking to you entirely, just as weakness of body, or infants, or old men.
or the tension is not too tight, or too cold; and beware of cold joints, it is to know cold joints, and flesh of birds and of goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat rough coarse foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, so that you have no doubt of hot abscess, nor of spreading of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government that they had used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with foods that make big nourishment, where they have viscosity, just as one would cook in water, and rice, and bread, and pieces of meat, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things. For a suitable nourishment is represented by milk and more quickly heals the fracture.
And know that old and decrepit broken bones cannot be well restored or reunited according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, just like the bones of small children;
But in no way is it cured, reset on the broken bone .i. large tendons that are strained and join the limb together, so that it is strengthened as it was before; and not at all point of its working, and for this reason one must nourish it with thick foods, just as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fracture. For there is a fracture that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, just like the cutting of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, just like the cutting of a quill for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a complete small crack.
And each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
and it is known, the fracture of the bone because the joints are twisted, and open well by default, and sound when pressed by hand;
and when there is no twisting in the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small fracture. If it does not suit you to move the hand, but put on medicines that come hereafter, and then hold steady now subtly.
And know that the break which goes in the hollow, and are the disjointed parts, they must now be set in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not grow there;
and if abscesses grow there, let it be for a day, until the abscesses are appeased; then set it in equal measure that you can lift gently and knowingly, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it suits afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is dislocated from its place, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with strings, or with a string and your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are rejoined, you reset them by adjusting them to their proper places with your fingers, and be careful not to cause the patient injury or pain;
and adjust the broken heads of the bones according to their best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if you straighten it properly, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to their work through their bad practice cause abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is at rest, thoroughly instruct the patient that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and ensure well that the limb is so positioned that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and one must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and one must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twists do not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that the broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in shape.
For there are small limbs, thus arms and fingers and similar: if it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle wraps.
and those that are large, thus hips and legs: if it is necessary to envelop with a large and hard bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire large limb, and restrain all parts equally, so that there is no unevenness.
Then the entire limb is lightly touched, 3 or 4 times, according to the member, and hold your hand a little above the fracture and hold it less, so that the fracture then disengages a little.
and soften the limb a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy skin, then take another limb, and turn again above the broken limb;
then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first lesson above;
then put between the lightly touched limbs of linen or cloth, so that it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, apply something calming to the inflamed area, which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for a few days;
then hold it steady with strips of a wide ribbon, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm branches, and arrange them according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the strip one places on the fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large;
Then hold steady on the studs as you did at the first treatment, then put a thread underneath, just as on the breakage at the first treatment.
The tighter it is underneath, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of soft flax.
For if the threads are large, just as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and it's a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there is less than two fingers' width between each stud.
And if the patient is wounded by the studs of the staples after the tightening on their sound skin, then put beneath them swabs of flax or some other dressing, so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the cure hereafter.
And beware that it is not necessary to strain these broken members on the first day. For when the member is large, it is not necessary to put these dressings on before five or six days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that suddenly occurs.
and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore breakage, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is kept as near the miller's wall, and mix it with a lot of egg whites, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common manner of plaster to restore breakage in many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Here is the translation:
Another way to apply it that is worth twisting: take mugwort and violets, in the amount of ten; mix and grind, in the amount of eight; add a little water; boil Armenian bole in the amount of ten; and pound well, and combine with water or abundant egg whites, and administer.
Another way to apply it to joints and ease the dislocation of their places, and alleviate sudden pain, and the size of the bone, and the breakage: take new flax, and grind it in a mill and in cooked oil, and put it on the place. This plaster does not restore at all, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly relieving pains.
Another way to apply a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earth-bound peony leaves, and pound them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to apply a plaster for the restoration of bone breakage and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, violet flowers, fern powder, each part; and pound, and combine with wine, and if the member is hot, combine with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way to treat more forcefully than the first, when a hard abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seed of flax, baluster, mellilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and camomile, all in one part; and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb anything more than cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on a broken limb, for restoration, warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and leaves of decocted omes, or feathers of a bird, and vismalve, and let it simmer, and pound, and make an ointment and put it on the affected area.
And then you dislocate it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not dislocate it by hand for several days.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten it, and dislocate it, and remove the splint now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of seawater, moistened, and dip into water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on a dry linen cloth, softened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
And reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little splinting, and do not strain it so much as before; and treat subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are here entirely, and you have mastery of applying and binding, then recommend it, as you had done the first equal treatment.
And if it does not come to the limb from what we have said, do not delay further than three days or four days or five days or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
Then retain it more than at first, and the swelling absorbs its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is drying out more than mastery is not, know that nourishments cannot come to it. Apply the warm water treatment then, every time you lay it down, and that is each third day, and ease a little the ligature.
Here is the translation:
of various ways of fracture Many ways of fractures are, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck of bone is broken just above the socket which is beneath the bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and therefore this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Where the sword cuts the bone from above with a downward blow, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or fissure, or cut of stone, or fall on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound or large or small.
And if there is a wound that is located in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
And if the wound is made by falling on stone, or by a blow, or by similar things, and it makes the piece of bone enter below, and it is like the joints are dislocated as when the joiners set them in place; so between the bones within.
And this happens more to those who have humid or moist heads, like children's heads.
and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged, as if they were brittle; and I will speak of it in its place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks through the detection above them, and the inquiry into their tension, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
The similarity of the hairline is known by this: when one discovers the bone, and one rubs above it, then it reveals the black break.
In the treatment of fracture, beware of accidents befalling the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and bruising, and feverishness, and eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, if he cannot recover without doubt.
And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the numbness comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the vein before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the vein before the seventh day, lest the tendon beneath the vein become corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
And if the break of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and it is that you take hold of the chief nerve of the afflicted head, and uncover it on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more gently than you can.
And if the discharge of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess falls, it is aided by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with medicated plaisters soaked in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscess falls and is pacified, and be assured of the discharge of blood; then begin to cut into the bone with an osteotome, and it is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut at the tightest point beforehand, and this is the method:
And then you make another incision, a larger one than the first.
And the second method is that you have various instruments, some are narrow and others wide, and are pointed, and are of iron indeed; and work lightly, so you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce around, thus that you do not ministrations with instruments, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the tender test, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place in the thickness of the bone, thus that you have instruments for every tender test; and this is the form of the three kinds of instruments:
The quality for piercing into the broken bone is that you put an instrument on the bone, and turn it with your two hands so that you know the bone is pierced; then you remove the instrument to another part a little afterwards, and thus do everywhere, then cut around the incision in the space of the bone which is between the pertusions, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you hold as if with pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn it out, it is necessary that you take the instrument that is hidden in the bone to another entire instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tender and more subtle than the other incisors;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no nails, if they lightly touch the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is that which Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears obvious, so that when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this lance-like incision, from which it is the form:
And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you carefully cut around the entire bone, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath.
If it is burned by fire, let the bone be lightly touched, for one touches well without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered only slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to take off the scales with a subtle rasp, which you should have in different quantities, to prepare each place as most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you rasp with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing so until it is well.
In each of the other delicate hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily responded to by one who has put their study into this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soften it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and soften it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first dressing; and make it as light as possible, so you do not aggravate the wound, then apply from above another lien, and do not constrict it more than necessary until it holds the wound sufficiently;
and let it be so for a day or two, until the hot abscesses are appeased, then disband them, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and powder of violets, and incense powder, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and apply again medicines without harshness or biting;
and beware that the wound is not too clean, so you do not leave it to suppurate, nor allow it to gather together, for when it gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and causes the patient great malice; for when one places something biting on the wound, it becomes inflamed from above.
Here is the translation:
And if no better results come from the medicine that one has put on, which has some virtue, then it is necessary to take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and dissolve in four drops, and apply it to the skin. then heal by various methods of treatments that are suitable, so that he may be healthy.
Know that often the three parts of the nail are broken above, or one part by the socket, because they are three bones; and that beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the three parts is broken, then it is necessary to put your little finger or pertus of the nail, and match the break equally with your index finger, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be reduced to its place, then it is necessary that you set it straight at the head of a radius slightly large.
And if the fracture is of two parts, you will make another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then it will begin to form a head of new skin, and the fracture will be in one part.
Where you apply it elsewhere, the break is there; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And they say that one should soften the tendons in burr, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites and powder of mill; then let the tendon, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes apply egg whites on the nose instead of tendons, and if it is a swollen drapil around, and hold the break, and soothe the patient within; or do what you have seen.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerotate or cotton moistened with oil of roses, or in a poultice of dyaculum.
And if apostemes come, apply an emplaster made with flour of sixament, and powder of incense, mixed with album of egg, then place light poultices, and do not bind where the node is.
and if the break of the node is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the estrumens suitable for that, then sew up the fissure, and treat the things which are causing harm in this way, and suddenly, just as emplasters and ointments suitable for that.
and if there is no node with a naked wound, then treat with tentes, and I place cannes of lead, until it be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is broken beneath, and there is no sign of a wound above, and the break is beneath so subtly, and it is not broken in two, unless the cartilage within, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of the right hand, and gently feel the break within, and hold it firm with the other hand above, and make it even.
And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated in two, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
And if the teeth have movement, or are broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a well-made steel, or a piece of even, long and wide leather according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then put it back in place as it is changing; and apply a poultice made from mill powder with plenty of egg white or flour of six-month-old wheat, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy; many times it is healed in twenty-two days.
And if abscesses or wounds come, treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, remove a small piece of bone that has been broken off; if you subtly extract the broken-off pieces with suitable instruments for that.
And if the wound is narrow, open it with a flame according to the need.
And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there is no delay, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it becomes healthy.
of the strength The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in two manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have to stretch it further, put a round sphere of cloth or leather under the patient's shoulder, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the force with your hand, so that you set the break evenly, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot bring the head of the force into alignment, because it comes in the wrong way, then it is necessary that the patient leans back onto their seat, and put under the shoulder a small cushion, and push the ministers below the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the force is lifted.
And then adjust the break with your fingers, and if you feel debris, then it is necessary that you probe within; and pull out the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then take one of the instruments you have; but put under the force this instrument, to ward off the syphac.
and it seems a spoon, and it is not a chisel, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the possibility of the wound; and have .ij. pieces, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, according to the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of powder from soft millet and egg white, and put light bandages on, and put a splint underneath, if you have mastery of it; then take a very large bandage of a palm's breadth in length, then put a double layer of dressing on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a subtle strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains pendant; and place the steel on the broken bone, and turn the bandage around the neck, and above the healthy spine, and above the diseased spine; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the break firmly, and you clearly see that the steel does not move on the broken bone, if you reward it each day, and when the tendons are relaxed, if it is restrained;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until twenty days.
then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs to be changed, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less than any other treatments.
of the break of the shoulder
Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and you do not know how to set it right except by touch; if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millet with abundant egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not aligned with any part of the shoulder, use the strap made of linen threads, so that the strap is evenly aligned; and then hold it firmly in place with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the joint every day; and all the times it becomes inflamed, adjust it, and put the strap in its proper place, and ease the patient's side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be assured, for it is not a case that can be set right lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not below the heart, if it breaks, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscessous heat.
of the breaking of the thigh
The thigh is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alignment, and numbness, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels well afterwards.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplausters and stoups above the subtle layer of salt, or another light dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it to the broken bone, so it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it is reset, then hold it; and if it wishes to dislocate again, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the flesh, or pain or abscess, if you hasten, and loosen the emplauster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then reset the emplauster, and hold it until it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
It knows that the breaking of the ribs does not come from elsewhere but from the large ones behind the back, and inside the head, and do not feel otherwise because they are slippery; and one feels it well during the inquiry in both.
And the remedies are that you put equal to the breaking, as it is necessary. And then put the plaster, and hold it with a stick, so you have mastery of it.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inside, the patient feels very great pain and puncture, just as if from a piercing, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits greatly, spewing out blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the stomach, in order to soften the rupture at the weak point.
We do not make this, because hot abscesses will not come, if they have not arrived. And if they have arrived, then bleed them.
And they say that some of those who put cups on the skin, to suck out the matter, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping does not attract the excess humors from the skin due to the weakness of the disposition.
And some of the veins that one must cover the limb with a warm oil cloth, and place tents between the ribs to make the treatment equal on both sides, then it will be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the swelling that touches the cloth, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open up the broken rib area, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to support the wound; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then close the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters, until they are healthy. And if abscesses come, then place warm roset oil cloths, and apply them to the area; and treat while the area that needs an abscess is being treated, and apply gentle pressure on the ribs where it is needed, until they are healthy.
of the broken neck bone
Sometimes the break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will become dislocated; and also in the spine of the back. And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed of their hands being softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel it. Be aware that it is mortally in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them firmly and steadily, be aware that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so apply a cure.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated on their belly, it is an involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated on their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Be aware that it is mortally: do not labor in vain for their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of Mayeu, as much as it soothes; then apply a comforting and drying plaster, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover on the heart of the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, at a costure, then the treatment of ointment in January, until it be healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the kowe", if you put your pouchet in your left hand, and put it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the emplaustre and the stake on, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make a fomentation, and remove, and treat the wound until it be healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Because the bone of the hip is broken, and if it breaks, then there will not be a little bit of comfort at the head; and make a long bandage, and decline to the paralyzed parts, and comes to the patient's pain in the back, and piercing, and inflames what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand on it, so that you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and the shape of it are; and if the fracture is solely at the head, then put equally this fracture, so that it be in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be facilitated. And when you have made it even, place it on a plaster, then place it on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the bandage beneath the ribs, until the ligature is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if the aposteme (abscess) breaks out, do not touch it, so that the aposteme is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold steady as it is suitable, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The joints are those that are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, one must restore it according to one of the methods: one of which is that you take a full fist of middle-sized grasping, according to this form:
And lay the joints thus, and bend them upwards, and seat the patient on a chair; then put his broken arm on a stick, until it comes to the armpit, and have in the middle of a curve of wood, then bend on some heavy object or the minister extends downwards; then place the mirrors with the fracture even at their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his stretcher, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands the ministers that one should hold what is on the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold beneath all the joints, and each extends to its part.
Here is the translation:
And if apostemes (boils) occur, do not restrain them for just seven days, and apply a soft and gentle ointment, such as rose oil, until the boils are soothed; then hold steady, and the way to hold steady is that you place the dressing on the bruise, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and apply the bandage, and hold steady on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in a steady position, and nothing disturbs it, or if the bone does not move.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the bruise a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the bruise, two fingers' width on each side; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter, holding more strongly and less loosely.
And if you see the alignment of the splints, and the holding, as we have said, in order to restore the broken limb, and you doubt the boil, leave it to bind for just seven days, as we have said; then examine each day the bandage, so that no swelling comes to the area, or the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you adjust it, as we have said.
Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", of which one is small, and it is the one that joins the shoulder; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes they break together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must gently extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
And if it's the large foscile, you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and raise the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations as an arm to the part below his hand, or to a bandage, and another ministration above. And then you put them in their proper place, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disarray that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do so according to the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, glue .i. a dressing made of cerote oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply .i. the dressing subtly, so that the abscesses are appeased. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of powdered mill flour with abundant water, afterwards put on the stables, and let the staple of the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have 8 or 10 staples or arms in more positions: either the fracture is in one of the bones, or in .ij.; and hold more above the fracture than other part, and less often in aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is stretched, be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And treat the limb and the lien afterwards for several days. And if some evil accidents come to the limb, as it is accustomed to happen to the limb, then you must warm the limb with hot water, so that the evil accidents are appeased; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then resume the strapping, and if the liens are weakened and the bones disarrayed, and similar things, then address it.
And if the patient's nerves cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then you must relax it a little, and let it be so for some days, until the nerves are corrected, and then hold steady.
And if the patient's nerves do not come to the limb, then do not release it until 20 days. Or in the meantime, then he puts his hands on his neck, and makes his necks equal, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers having little fractures, and it does not come but rather frequently collapses many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient be crossed, and stands straight in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and puts them equal to the mirrors, so they are well joined; and puts the plaster and the bandages, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the wound; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is on the palmar side of the hand, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken hand; and then strap with a long bandage, and let the splint be of a soft leather, as thick as the palm of the hand, and strap it, so that it holds as necessary.
And if the break is on the back of the hand, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and stop the bandage between the fingers.
And if the break occurs at one of the fingers, it is a pocket, put it equal, as necessary; and strap it with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight splint to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in another finger, like in the index or one of the others, put it equal, and tie it with the healthy finger that comes after; or you tie them together, holding in place, or you put on a splint, as necessary; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and beware of what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below. And the patient puts his face on it, then each minister extends his bond to his equal part; and that is when the breakage is in the bone.
And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bonds goes towards the thumb, and the other bonds below the breakage. And also if it is close to the knee, then the bonds are placed beneath the knee, and the extension is downward; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with their natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not form there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the ligature is made in such manner. It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the surplus, then twist the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, from under the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then place these bandages on the fracture, and place a staple on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to equalize the constriction, then begin to tie strongly two or three turns above the fracture; and as you go further above the fracture, there is less constriction; then take the end of the thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and untie the staples that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, until you come to the foot; and the constriction, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there comes no abscess nor inflammation or similar things.
And if it happens, then release it, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are pricking, then you must extract them, so much as one can; and if one cannot, then one must break the bone, and make a new route; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
And it is not broken the thigh thus that one puts staples, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not close with the patient's pain.
And it is known that the hip joint is restored to its place, either less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the groove of the knee
It is known that in the groove of the knee there is often little breakage, but it splits many times. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure, or a perforation, and has all the pain, and feels the pain, and this is felt very well.
And the restoration is such that one puts equal what is rounded to its two, so that it is assembled as one can; then put the plaster, and I put a round staple, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it is convenient, then reward all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, just like hot abscesses and similar things; put to each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
You know that in the leg there are two bones, where one is called by right "non-muscle", and the other is called "foscile"; and it has all the same fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the work is all here.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely awry.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and turn underneath. Then adjust the extension, and make it even, and place the stitches evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are several pieces, so that the extension is minor and lighter; and align according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that encompass the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to underneath; then wrap with two layers of bandages above and below, and place them in the middle, and at this point the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and nobody will hinder the length of the leg, which is made of wood, and you put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done, it is seen in the break or wound; and every day move the leg to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if you cure until it is healthy.
of the breaks of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no break, but sometimes the bones of the foot come to a break and two pieces, and it does not happen except in several dispositions.
And if it happens that you have broken bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on the pillow, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small tablecloth at .ij. plain joints, then hold the foot in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, then release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, then reset them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that tablecloth I mentioned, and hold it in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each toe a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the tablecloth under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the foot, so that it holds the belly of the foot well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and attend to each accident as it befits.
of the fracture of the bone at the thumb
When the bone of the woman's nature is fractured, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline it towards the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the belly with cotton, and put a large amount as much as a sto; then take out the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or eight: if the fracture will be restored, and you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a chain to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the chain strongly, so that the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the thumb of the man or woman is fractured, restore it thus as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into it, and attends to my book. For the fracture signifies more dispositions in the right way of restoration: then give the gift.
On the wound, when it is broken, take an eye of a bone and bind the wound; then wrap drapels around, and let it be for two or three days, and it will heal quickly.
of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healthy now, so that the healthiness we have stated testify to it.
And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol ointment, and you have nothing else, then restart to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you will cause a bad accident.
And if the broken bones appear exposed on the uncovered heart, then it is necessary that you put them in place gently with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extensions are not adapted to put equal in your hands, then set the instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to take .iii. or .iiii., according to what is needed for each cure of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under the compression on the limb at your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved iron be placed on the head of the exposed bone; and the button is set once, so long as it holds, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reduce the bone, as we have said, take the head of an instrument suitable for that, whether it be incisor or saw, to your power; then reset what is stuck in the bone with rough and minute scrapings.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then apply a black wine drapeil, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wound, such as cerote or other ointment, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the break; and many times fools have done this, and have caused death or corrosion to the patient.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, rough drapels, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, whether it be a day or two, to anoint the wound with a bow, if you have put wine on it, and apply ointment to heal wounds, as we apply tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb three times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it be sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the bone returns to its lightest movement.
And if it still resists, and it cannot be put back together but returns to its bone, knows that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you cure the wound with tenderness, and remove all those disjointed pieces that bring about this pain.
And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what is said in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it foolishly, for many times death comes from it, but let it putrefy; perhaps it will fall apart after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of the bruises that come upon the swelling
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and they could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to a multitude of medications; or due to too large movements, not at the right time; or because it has little blood in its body, thus it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient's body thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the medication soothes the pain, until the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
the member which is twisted after the healing
Here is the translation:
And often the node is removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands. And so the movement is readjusted to the limb every hour.
And if the twisted part is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be cauterized with iron, so it must be covered just up to the bone, with subtle and gentle incision; and put dressing and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary now to reposition immediately.
For if one delays, the limbs swell, and by chance if it is reset to its place; because it is not good to move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains.
In every way, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the abscesses are appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reposition it lightly, and treat each limb as its treatment returns to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to foot.
of the jawbone
Sometimes the jawbone is dislocated and loose, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and become soft; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper positions more easily.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in this manner the ministers touch the head of the patient, and insert their fingers as a pincer into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other fingers should be placed deftly, to set evenly; and instruct the patient that they relax their jaws, and move them from all sides.
And the fingers place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if the waters of hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay the reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, if you put on a soft cloth moistened with oil of rose and wax, then tie it lightly with many threads.
and the patient should sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then chew what he wants lightly, and not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be put in place for an hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and sudden attacks occur, and perhaps a solution of stomach problems, and perhaps vomiting of pure colic.
And when you see this, then know that it is a perilous condition; and many times he who has had it dies, in eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge from the inner side of the rib and the foot, and is often dislodged at the defect, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is towards the hip cannot be dislodged; if not, and if it does get dislodged at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder blade, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the upper part of the bone; and the second is at the lower part of the thigh; and sometimes it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the nerves; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the bone, especially to those who have little flesh, because to those who have little flesh, it quickly becomes swollen; to those who have enough flesh, it swells at the joints, and returns to the joints.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder becomes swollen from an abscess, and he believes it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary therefore that you test it, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the axis, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axis touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an elbow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movements.
and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the toucher;
and this type of dislocation is not forced to be reset, when it is new, or if the patient's fever is bad.
And the method is that the ministers raise the hand of the patient above, then place their fingers beneath the joint, and lift the joint with force above the level; and the ministers raise the hand, and stretch it above, then place it beneath; if it will be quickly set.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply mollifying and soothing remedies, such as a decoction of altaea and fenugrec and mellilote in water, and so be treated.
then be careful to settle the patient on their back, and place under the axilla a straight stick equal in length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors at the heel of the foot on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient;
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
and it is that you make a present effort, namely to have someone who is stronger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the axilla of the patient, and lift the axilla high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister treats the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick into the ground, so that the head is also fixed like a pestle, and it should not be too big nor too slender. then it should be placed beneath the patient, but so that it has soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing upright on a long stick; then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return through all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take a stick of two cubits in length and four fingers in width, which has the head rounded so as to enter obliquely beneath the bone, according to this form:
then place the head of the stick beneath the bone, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the bone of the patient; and extend your arm above the stick of the length, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a support of a chair of good width, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place now.
And when it is thus, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a sphere of equal wool, then put the plaster made with powder of soft mill, with incense and egg whites, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold it under the seat strongly, and turn the lien on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that you massage a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after five or six days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in this chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five or six days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are pinched or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is of the ankle, and the shoulders, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and one administers another treatment; and cures until it be healthy.
And if after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and slow movement, if the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the joint
You know that the joint of the joint is dislocated to points, and to points it returns; and it is dislocated from all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not replaced, for one sees it well and feels it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the wounded limb with the healthy one, then it cannot be seen openly. For the joint is shrunk, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that abscesses do not form, for if abscesses form, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to his .ij. hands; and his arms be expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the wounded limb, from above and below, and adjust the joint to its small pieces together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and strengthens from the root of the palm the wounded limb which is dislocated.
And if he does not want to return to his place, then strongly extend it; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the mirror touches the joint of his hand, if he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then put the joint in its proper form, until it regains.
and when it is in its place, then put a dry plaster on with an abundance of egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it stay for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, then release the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then recommence the plaster and the bandage, and let it be for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels gripped after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fatty mutton poultice, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into the bath. and when he sweats, rub the joint temporarily, then put the poultice on again, and then enter into the bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see that, put on a warm, moist cloth with butter, and hold it in place; so it will return to its proper condition.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints Always, it is necessary to reset it quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb is not swollen, or that an abscess does not form there.
And the remedy is that you place the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers, and align them evenly, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and holds it still until it recovers.
However, it is necessary that you examine whether it is properly in place; then put the injured part of his hand on a table at extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the injured part of his hand on the table, and align it so that he places his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it now recovers, it is good.
If not, then strain the swollen abscesses gently, and let them settle down so that they do not start again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further than necessary, for as long as the hand is numb, and cannot hold onto anything at all: then know that the nerves are injured, or the arteries; if there is no other means of relief except to cauterize in this case, and by chance it may be of no use.
And when the hand is in place, set on the emplaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no grinding, then soak it in warm water, and rub it as long as it becomes healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any part, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly
then the fingers are straightened, and the dislocation is pushed back into its sockets as it recovers, then support the top of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed
and let it be for a few hours, and then make it equal that hour; and do not tie it, as we have said, and loosen the joint from that hour, and make it move, and re-tie it; and do this frequently, until it is straight
and thus you do it, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it as you have done before, so that it becomes healthy; and thus you do it, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
because of the dislocation of the spine in the back
When the spine in the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without feeling, and cannot be retained, and many times some members are softened, or the hips or the two arms or joints.
And many times the sciatic nerve is affected at four places; the one that is affected at the back is called "gilbositis":
The treatment is that you rewarm the gilbositis that has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the entire tot.
And the one that comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment say grand promises, where there is no great profit in all.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the chest before, no one is safe from it;
and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in a straight line, and have support from behind him, so he does not slip;
then fix the stick to the ground firmly at the head, and another at the feet, and bind with a cord beneath the patient's joints, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and the minister knows the ligaments, one to the head and others to the feet, among the .ij. tendons;
and they should be well fastened, the tendon as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine forcefully, until it regains strength.
And if it does not regain strength by this cure, take a table of .iij. long arms, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the table beneath the patient, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it regains strength to its joint; and if you see, then make it turn to the turning machine that turns by hand.
And it is that you place two thumbs at the head of the patient's arm of great size, and towards the feet two others, and between each thumb, from above and below, a palm's width apart;
and have in each thumb a perforation, where the thong runs, and let the thumbs be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two thumbs have one turning thumb, because the thong turns, and have in two turnings two small thumbs of a palm's width, to turn the thong;
and then put the thong that is among the assistants to the thong towards the head, and the other thong towards the feet at the other thong, and each of the ministers turns his thong with all the thong, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is aligned, then place on the plaster of desiccative with a quantity of egg whites, and then the bandages, and then the staple of a small table of two inches in width, which grips the limb of the gibosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a thong, as we have said, and use the subtle treatment of nourishment, so that it be sane;
and if anything happens at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the instrument that we have mentioned before; and never should one administer on a piece of wood,
and never does the appearance come in the rear of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens, because one must not have pride: by chance death may occur.
of the dislocations of the hip
One knows that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations suddenly, not like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parties: within and above, and in front and behind; and more within there are hollows, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the fire; and it is the joints that are swollen from hot aposteme abscesses, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of the one who is about to faint, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of the one who is about to faint, it is that they straighten their leg according to the accomplishment; however, they do not bend their knee without pain, and if they want to urinate, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and swell the ankle, and when they walk, it passes above the heel.
And the signs of one who has it in the back are that they cannot stretch their knee, nor double, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is dislocated under the ribs.
The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you recognize that the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no immediate cure; and it does not seem that it has a presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three manners of dislocation, you hasten that you turn the joint, and it is inside and outside, and the movement is to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it seems that you should apply a strong ministering, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he presses his hands beneath his haunches, then ties with a soft thread on the hip; and another tightens the top of the thread;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to three similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then you must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the parrison, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread on the root of the hip, and the limb that is beneath the angle, then stretch the thread above towards the angle, and towards the fortress;
Then take another minister by the arm, and embrace the large joint of the hip patient, and stretch it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft cord above the two heels, and above the two knees, and so the sick leg is stretched two inches more than the others.
Then be suspended from the top of a pole, and be one arm's length above the ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and another minister be suspended with the patient, who embraces the hip in its former shape, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at its former shape, so adjust the patient, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretch a cord properly on the sick leg, and also on the foot.
Then put the fire tongs, one at the head and another at the feet, then place the fire tongs between the hips of the patient in this shape; and have wet cloths wrapped around, so they do not burn the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and the surgeons hold equal with their hand the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press in this way as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, then you must stretch the sick leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the surgeons' hand on the angle of the sick limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the forearm, it does not require stretching the patient downwards, nor lifting from the ground, instead it requires that it be just as if the joint was dislocated at the forearm, as we have said about the bedding on the .ij. joints; and it be on its face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
and it will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the joint does not move;
and rest for 2 or 3 days, then remove it, and apply the plaster on top; and if you see that they are even, bind it, as before, and leave it for 2 days; then remove it, and make it comfortable enough so that the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, forward, and backward; and do not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as much as possible, and place your back against their face, and put your foot against their feet.
Then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the joint in the shape of the knee; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has well-set his leg to his thigh lightly.
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for two or three days, then unbind it; and do not overexert the patient's effort, so long as the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not at all, administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, so that it may be healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The heels are sometimes numb, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it stretches before the part where it is dislocated.
The limbs are easier to reset, and one must extend them gently with their hands when they are numb only slightly.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and bind them with a strap, above the ankle, on the leg.
Then prick the foot with your right hand, and then with the left. Do it several times, then stretch upwards, and beautifully bend the foot upwards;
and do it several times, as we have said, bending and pricking the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, restart the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a small pillow firmly on the ground between his thighs, and wrap the drapery around, so that it does not hurt the patient;
then take hold of the thighs with one hand, and another hand stretches out to his hands or to the strap, so that it lies on the neck of the foot; Then extend each minister equally, and the straps should be between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches them.
Then put the mirrors equally at the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at a point, put the plaster and bandages on, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are above the knee behind, so that they are not too constricted.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are numb, hold them firmly; then loosen them on the third day or fourth, and defer going to the patient for four days. and if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he does not dislocate again.
And if abscesses break out, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two
When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them skillfully without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of your toes or fingers, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a table at the head, then hold firmly, and let it be for two hours, then dislocate; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patients die.
do not be overconfident in the treatment, if you are not knowledgeable in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not piteous and merciful and slow, not hasty.
and apply gentle heat at the beginning of things to calm an abscess, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscesses will not come to life.
and when the limb is in its place, then administer gentle heat to calm the abscess, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of desiccated herbs.
and with the dislocation to fracture, and you will find less difficulty, if you follow our instructions, and do what we have said about simple illnesses;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen.
