Here is the translation of the text: And it has come to me in a vision that I must complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and has been entirely lost everywhere, so the knowledge is perished and decayed, and nothing remains except for small descriptions in old books that have been moved by hand. And from this has come the error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is estranged the knowledge.
Or it seems to me that I will bring it back to life by organizing this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abridgement; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cautery and other tools of work, accompanied by the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the justice of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons and the number of vertebrae, and the behavior and moving and resting muscles, and from the source of their origin.
And for this reason, Hippocrates says that a name with a name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, should beware lest he fall into error and kill people; thus I have wanted many times to warn those who undertake this science but abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut open an abscess on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew that he would die if it was not removed.
And I saw another surgeon who took on the treatment of a duke from our land who had his leg broken and with the break was wounded; and the ignorant surgeon held the break over the wound by strong force, not leaving the wound even an inch of space, and left it in this state until the leg became completely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to arrive to set the leg free; and when I had loosened it so he was at ease and felt no pain.
But in all ways the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who opened up an inflamed abscess and then inflamed it even more through the wickedness of his procedure.
For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that everything that is corrupt can be removed.
And for this reason, dear son, you must needs know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple conditions; and I will show each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you take care to keep yourself safe, so that the foolish surgeon cannot speak ill of you.
So take your instruments in hand, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrifying diseases of grievous sickness; and put away your instruments from those things that make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of any bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicine cauterizations, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Therefore, in order that we remember our work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am not satisfied with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cauterization aids universally in every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely, hot temperament with dry matter and dry temperament with dry matter.
In hot and dry temperament together with matter, some have disagreed and said that cauterization is great aid; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is not worth anything for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat or dryness for a hot disease; and that person who said the opposite says that cauterization makes great aid in hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true some time through experience.
And in any case, do not meddle with it unless you are one who has tried it and knows through long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the chances and risks of the time; as for other temperaments, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on cauterization.
And know, son, that cauterization together with fire is a secret of cures, and of greater good than burning cauterization.
For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is burned, and does no harm to any other member if one does not name.
Burning medicines come from one member to another, and bring harm to the afflicted member with grievous suffering; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire because of its excellence and the goodness of its substance does not do this unless there is excessiveness.
And I have found this in experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret which is bound up with fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases from bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating; so receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is put under by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot be delayed until greater evil comes to the member.
And never think so, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine in terms of its speed of action, and virtue of its work and authority.
And it is a possibility that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and superfluous things are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the right time or place where there is excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in some disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it works. Therefore it is clear that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterizations with gold instruments are more potent than those of iron, and they did not say this for anything other than the quality of gold and its excellence in substance; and they said that the place where the cauterization is done does not do harm, but this is not true because I have tried it, and found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, as they said.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it becomes quickly cooled down; and if you heat it too much, they melt in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
And therefore we use burning cauterization because we have found it to be advantageous to our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be more easy to find.
of olive cauterization
These cauterizations are worth for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two ways to do this because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pain in the dens and pain in the throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by soluble medicine, moistening the head three or four times, according to what the virtues, age, and habit of the patient can bear; and then make the patient's head redden.
And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your weight; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes; and let it come to your two middle fingers, so that it bleeds a little then apply the cauterization which is called "olivare", whose form this is:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it go down and out by moving your hand slowly and gradually to the side; then lift your hand suddenly, and repair the spot if you see the bone one small step; and if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a piece of silk, and put it in a soft and fluffy cotton pad, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; after that apply a moist cloth to butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that cure the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacy" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; and therefore it is helpful.
And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then take off what has been burned from the bone, and be healed.
And others say that one should cauterize so much above, and push it in so hard that the bone is as wide as a thread that women put into their purses for this reason that the humors may flow out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that one should heal and soothe.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some people where there is a lack of courage; and it seems to me that I should leave them alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we observe in other members; and likewise when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and moistening for me, and from this use I work for the salvation of my body.
of ancient pain from the head
When chronic pain comes from the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's pills and powders called "cochie", and purgatives for the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have spoken of before, it is not worth it.
Take care if the patient's head is of strong constitution, and not too cold; then cauterize below that previous cautery a little as we have said above.
After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head right up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and keep your hand so steady that you don't see right up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and that's the form:
of the head's cautery When sudden pain comes from one part of the head and spreads to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by mundane medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and none of it helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, namely by hot medicine and fire.
The cauterizations by hot medicine are such that you take a dose of aloes, remove the bark and regrind it into a small amount to be used for two eyes; then make an incision on the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can put the aloes under the skin; and when it has been put under the skin, tie and tighten it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; then release it and let the aloes juice flow out for 2 or 3 days; then apply a poultice of butter so that it starts to ooze.
After the poultice treatment, as long as it is healed; and if you see that this method does not work, then do what some burning medicines that I have written or treatise on burning medicines prescribe.
The cauterization by fire is such according to this method. Heat the cauterizing iron in the following form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or a small bowl, and it has a slight curvature; and one puts it on the painful place, and holds one's hand and turns the iron slightly until the half of the spoon-shaped part of the key is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and stop the abundant bleeding.
After that, put cotton on the wound and leave it for 3 days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", do it all at once, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previous cauterizations by hot medicine and fire do not work, then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful place a line half a digit long, and lift your hand once, and strain yourself so that you don't cut the artery and don't touch right up to the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard only for the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially for one who does not know how and is not an expert; and leave the work in my hands; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the opposite side of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears due to cold
When pain comes from the ear due to cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat up this cauterizing iron called "poins" in the following form:
After that, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is on both sides, and remove it a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to be treated; and make 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
of the torment of the mouth
Torment which must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that are caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterizations for similar things that come from scorched nerves.
When you cure this likeness of torment that is caused by phlegm and idleness, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third at the juncture of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery right above the ear on top of the horn-shaped part of the head, and another in the temple just as long as a finger's breadth; and leave the cautery there until half of the key is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
And this is the likeness of the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after that, treat the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
To this illness it is fitting to give the patient great and many pills for the brain; afterwards, wash the chief of the patient thoroughly, and place on the occiput a poultice made of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and that is the manner of cauterization: if you do so as I have said.
If he is cleansed thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations around the head from top to neck, with a space of two fingers between each cauterization, and treat him as the others, and if you see anything swollen or inflamed, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until he is cleansed; and that cauterization which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is fitting that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said before; afterwards, wash the chief of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it so that as much of the gallbladder as is burned, and lift your hand; afterwards, treat until he is cleansed, and it is the cauterization which is called "olivare" that we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is fitting to first cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make gargarism and mastication cleansing the brain often with good meat; afterwards, wash the chief in the middle, and make one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and it is the olivier cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
When due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities or moists are corrupted and thick phlegm is produced, then make those cauterizations as we have said to one who has paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which his brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
After wash the head of the patient; after make one linen tourniquet well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and the patient's head be crossed, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and mix well with butter of ancient herbs; and heat it temperately so that the thread can bear being dipped in it; after empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for one treatment, with good governance, until he is cured.
Or if you see that the cauterization is causing points in many places all over the cauterization. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain sufficiently; and then put on a wet cotton cloth with butter and goose fat.
of the inflammation of the eyes When inflammation comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and keep him from all moistures, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting.
After command him to wet his head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descending of inflammation is to both eyes together, or to one; and stop all the veins and arteries that are under the gallbladder, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stanch it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how to stanch it; and never make a cauterization or haterel under the two bones behind.
of the tears of the heart
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of inflammation descending to the eyes: one cauterization on the head, and two cauterizations on the temples, and two cauterizations or haterel under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize slowly above the eyebrow at each small cauterization.
of the tears of the heart within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three raw eggs; afterwards wash his head, and make a cauterization on the middle of the olivary cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" cauterization on the eyebrows, a little below the hairline; and beware of not cutting off the artery. And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this "olivare" cauterization. This is its form:
And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the eyebrows as long as the eyebrow is; and do not leave your hand off until one third of the paper has been burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points at the oil Never happens that the hair of the eyelids is converted to the inside, and points at the oil, and it makes one cauterization according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Or the cauterization by fire commands the patient to leave the hair as long and equal as it is; and if they point at their birthplace, then bind the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and are equal, then the patient places it in his own sound; afterwards signs above the paper of eyes a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be below the hairs; then he puts damp cotton on egg white and muscillaige of persilium on the eye, then heat the cautery where there is the form.
After cauterizing on the figure you have signed bit by bit many times, until the scars are burned away in that place; and the sign of health from the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put damp cotton on butter until the scarring is removed; afterwards anoint with ointment until he is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start again the cautery on the same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, so cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural height, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs into the eye.
The fire cauterization of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment form of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each a third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the form that you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the disease is held in one eye only, one must work in one, and if in both alike; and put damp cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head should be in his own sound and place your two fingers showing over the medicine, and press a little bit and move it all the times that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the burning as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your hand. And when the burning is past, then lift up the lid of earth, and see if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by the constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If not, then put on more medicine on the place or where the medicine has no effect, until your works are equal, and your eyes are in order; then put on damp cotton on butter until the scars are gone, afterwards heal the wound with ointment which is called "dyafenis" and other, until he is healed.
And if you must take great care of your work so that the medicine does not damage the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start again the medicine on that place which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; afterwards heal until he is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this is your constriction; and do not be surprised if the right path is not shown to him who has studied this art.
This seems to be a heading or title for a section on the treatment of fistulas using cauterization.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand; and take the messenger's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or leave its head; afterwards put damp cotton on egg white or juice of persilium on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is like this: and shape the chief as if it were the shape of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, so be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see, so be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is good for your work.
Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and draw out the bowel; afterwards put hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nerve above the eye, so that your hands do not make foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you start the cautery just to the bone, it would be well. If not, then restart the cautery once more, and another time if necessary, and leave it for three days; afterwards put on damp cotton on butter, and the cure of drying ointment until he is healed, and if forty days pass without being healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and let him rest according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a manner of cauterization for fistulas that none of the ancients said. Understand by fistula, and cut open the place; afterwards put into the opening one subtle caustic of the form: and they make it to the quantity of one third of a bean; and hold your hand or caustic firmly, and do not move the patient's head until the melted wax does not run into his eye; and it is necessary that you put on the eye of the patient damp cotton in egg white or in earth: the wax so opens up the place of fistula, and cures by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the nerve, and bring back the fistula to its proper place in the body according to what is fitting.
This seems to be a heading or title for a section on cracks in lips. Many times occur cracks in lips that are called "piles", and indeed in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing tool according to this form:
And put it in those cracks quickly, until it comes out clean; afterwards heal the wound with ointment until he is healed.
This seems to be a heading or title for a section on abscesses of the throat.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or at the roots of the teeth; and it has become putrid and rotten and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards fill up or plug the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cools down to the fontanelle, and at the back; and do so once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until he is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
Movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then place the patient's head on your shoulder; afterwards, apply the cautery in this manner as if you were putting a cord around the tooth; and put hot hastiness inside the cautery, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards, lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay for an hour and richly flowing fever.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are now confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
Of the pain of the teeth
When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness, either there is cold or warmth, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in two manners: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it into a iron or earthen spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in hot butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do many times until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put a hot iron there until the fire comes to the crown of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is such that you take a piece of iron or earthenware, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards, heat the cauterizer, until the form comes out, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this many times, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in the pressing of that cauterizer, and then richly flowing fever; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the cauterizer with a handle of which the form comes after, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from one side; and put the hot cauterizer on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the fontanelle of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and put a moistened cotton cloth in butter until the soreness is removed; afterwards, cure the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture overcomes the channels of the thorax, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards, apply a cauterizer to the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, nor burn the flesh but just a little. Afterwards, apply another cauterizer to the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cauterizer that is called "clavicle" which we have the form before; and cure the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
Of the cough When all and every disease of the thorax is of cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and it is an old illness, then apply two cauterizers on the breast in the armpits; and another cauterizer inside the chest between the breasts; and it is the cauterizer that is called "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
And if you see, apply a cauterizer to the whole area that is called "points" according to the form that was said before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to 30, or around it. Afterwards, cure the wound according to what was said before, and the cauterizers should be at three rains according to this form:
And because of that the cauterizer is lighter, because you make three in one go.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, place the patient on their back and on their side; afterwards, lift the skin that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inwardly, then apply the cauterizer which has two handles like this form:
and cauterize the skin until it is perforated up to the side, and the figure of the cauterization comes out with three cauterizers; and because of that, the cauterization is done with the cauterizer that has three handles, for which the figure of cauterization are six cauterizers; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cauterizer that has three handles:
And sometimes it is applied on one nerve, for which there are eight cauterizers.
After that, put the cauterizer on and sprinkle it with powder; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little or nothing happens, then make a cauterizer on the thick part of the clavicle cauterizer, or many cauterizers in piercing. For the joint is refilled, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Of the cauterization of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauterizations of aristologe roots for pleurisy, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and burn it with fire, and apply one cauterizer between the breastbone and the neck, and two small cauterizers just below that in the part that is beneath the beard; and two cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little; and one cauterizer inside the chest, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest after the cauterizer that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but rather apply it openly just as in perfuming.
And it is said by an old one that some man uses a fire cautery similar to a razor's edge, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and soon after the pain stops, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now or a fistula appears which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not help, then there are three manners of cauterization that are all good.
One of which manners is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line, according to the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver's cauterization as we have said before; and do not press your hand against all the cauterization, and let the patient be mindful on his back.
And another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key which is near the mouse, or where the patient's flank comes towards the left side, and be mindful of the elevations when you lift the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and let the cauterization be according to the breadth of the body.
After you put the two handles in flames until the key is perceived from the other side, and then take out the cauterizer, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the cauterizer with three handles. After the cure when it has produced purulence after a long time, and this method is more effective than the others of the cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is not good for dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast; and let the cauterizers be well pressed against the key.
After that, leave the cauterizer open to gather purulence for a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and salvation would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the aid of God.
The shape of the cauterizer for the belly is the same as the one we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what was put here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow moisture, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and index finger; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn. And do not enter too deeply by force, lest the yellow moisture flows forth, and let the cauterizers be according to this shape:
After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the index finger; and let the cauterizers be of length, one under the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizers open for a long time without curing, until the moisture subsides; after that, do the cures of the other cures we have said.
of menstruation
When the menses come from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having great vitality, then make one large cauterization on the stomach according to what was said before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the circulatory cauterizer; and three cauterizations around the belly fine as each single cauterizer is fine, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cauterization on the armpit, and one cauterization on each side, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or one or several, and are ancient and consist of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind beneath Almecdate pace by pace in triangulating, and one cauterization under the belly. Two musts;
and if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then make one large cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse for all the cauterizer is fine; and leave the cauterizer open for a long time. After that, cure the patient until he is healed.
of the scrofula which is called "Thelul"
When you treat the Thelul, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and then put it entirely ablaze on that Thelul coping; and I leave your hand until the cauterizers come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood flows forth; do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with ointments which are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cauterizer on the Alchatim, it will have greater aid.
of an ill-cured wound
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When a fistula comes to anyone, and is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, you should prove the entire wound to be very fine, and take care that you know exactly how deep it is. After that, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and put it into the fistula according to the amount of depth that the wound has entered, and continue the cauterization until the corrupt flesh and pus are burned away, once, twice, or three times, depending on the need; and beware not to burn the nerves that are nearby, nor the large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, take care of these places, and do not make a fire except in a charred place, and think that it is not perilous; after that, cure the patient until he is healed, and if the wound is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed; but if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is torn and corrupted the bone to the font; and thus as one of those who we will say in its place.
Of the sickness of kidneys When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and from great windiness, and does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on the kidneys from one side and another at the cauterized clavicle that we have said before; and if we catarize in medium, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will do more great help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery on the outside of the part where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, each one as long as a finger's breadth; and make one cauterization behind the back, if you need two; and let the cauterized clavicle be according to the form said before.
Of the womb When the womb is cold and moist, and does not cease to conceive because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that one makes three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in the fire cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterized clavicle be as we have said.
Of the groin
When the viscous moistures descend to the groin of the crotch, and because of this the patient moves out of its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lump of the departure vein is found, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the groin of the crotch at one cauterization similar to a circle, and sign before the lump around the groin as it turns, so that the groin be inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those from which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three large cauterizations of the olivaire, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the quarters; and care for it until it is healed.
Of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the groin of the crotch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been cured of what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Then make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is this: that you cauterize three triangular cauterizations on the groin of the crotch, according to this form, making good depth and great, and leaving between each cauterization a space the width of a thumb, and let it be an olivaire; sometimes one makes a cauterization in middle on the top of the groin, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you see that the cauterization is in the shape of a circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the groin; but make it in this manner that the circles contain all the groin, and all the spaces of the quarter be burned.
And that is the manner in which one makes a cauterization in sciatica, when the pain stays in the groin and does not reach as far as the hip or leg. And if it comes to the hip and leg, then make two cauterizations on either side where the patient says the pain is felt, and one cauterization above the ankle three fingerbreadths from the left; and let the cauterization be cutellaire, and let the spaces of the quarter be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or almost there, then make a cauterization where he feels the pain three points or four at the "point" cauterization.
And if it is necessary to do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the kneecap towards the hip, then make a cauterization at the cutellaire or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave too much of the burning nor burn the main arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it burning so that the leg was all inflamed, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted through all the feet. After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu'il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, and be scalded until it is completely red and gives off a burning sensation,
Albucasim says that we should use little of this fire treatment due to fear of its regard, and if we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured, and where it is applied.
Of the pain from the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive bloodletting, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these similarities are worth cauterization, unless it comes from an infusion of cold material.
It is necessary after this that the patient be voided of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked out by inches, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization should be done according to the "poins" cautery; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations at the nail-like middle according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow space when they arise, and fear; and you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and in our appearance which comes on top of other vertebrae.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize it at the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
And the cauterization will penetrate each part of the vertebra equally. And if you wish, then cauterize around the vertebra at the piercing cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another. After curing, leave it in place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cauterization in the area of the spine which is in spasm from nerve.
Of the pain of the joints.
When pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which apothecaries properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-like according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cauterization at all the points which one claims to be "point". And if pains come up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cauterization on each knee three or four times from each part, in all olive-like; and if you have need of more, then do more, but do not keep your hand farther away than when the sparks of fire are burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the shoulders or to the armpits, then cauterize each part, and do good governance with the patient and administer medicines. For if you govern him well and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the help of God.
Of the itching of the scalp.
When itching comes in angers, and the boils descend to the groin and this is newly, then it is necessary that when you see it to be cured, he does not eat at all that day; and that he uses things which loosen the bowels, so that the phlegm descends from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are healed, and then reposition them at your fingers, and mark out under the itching on the bone of the elbow, and in all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then cauterize as this form:
until it is white and he begins to sense something. Then reposition the boils in their place; and command him to hold his hand so that they do not return backwards; and work well on the patient's hips, and put one cushion and one servant under them, and another above the breast which holds his hands; then place the cauterization on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again as many times as you wish to reach the bone; and be mindful subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cauterization; that you do not burn him; and that through this the patient will not die or suffer other evils.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are worthless. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to theirs; after three days, cure the wound of butter as long as the scabbing is removed; after cure other ointments until he is healed, and make the patient lie down on his back for 40 days until the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that his nourishments be exhausted long enough so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise up, have him given a well-made poultice, and apply it for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and when he has learned this lesson, he is healed entirely. And I will say afterwards in its chapter the cure of cutting. Of the itching of the belly.
When itches come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cauterization of the cauterizations again according to its quantity, and let the third part of the fire be burned; after cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the place of inches and make one line along the width above the itch, and another below, and move your hand through all the olive-like cauterization. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
Of old pain in some member. When pain comes to some member, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cauterization called "points", and the cauterizations should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twisting and of pain. If he is healed from the first cauterization, well; if not, start another one on top of that one, because it is a custom that it must change to the member that is closest to it, therefore you should make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
Surgeonship
The mesels are helped sometimes by fire treatment with great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not let it descend or remain, and you doubt whether corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauterizations on the head: one inside the head to nine fingers' breadth, and another towards the forehead to the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the skin comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
And if the surgeonship is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize those cauterizations we have said on the head, and one cauterization inside the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the crupper and another below, and two on each of the shoulders; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are behind the calcant, lest you burn them; and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I do of cauterizing, the more it brings aid and profit; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cauterizing, just as healthy people do, because their body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauterizations be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron. Afterward, cure the wound with a poultice made of flour, honey, and other remedies until it is healed.
of inflammation
When inflammation comes to any member and is cured by medicines and ointments and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then one makes cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauteries be a little entering into the flesh of the knee; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes a cauterization at the hand, foot, and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the inflammation is removed; but otherwise no one meddles in it unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease called "ulcers" is inflamed, and the skill of medicine is worth nothing, then one cauterizes it with a cauterization, somewhat deep, according to the thickness of the knee flesh, until the white discharge is removed, and its color changes; then cure with a poultice made of flour, lentils, and rose oil, and leaves of plantain, and blood of hen and blood of almond, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
the cure for chancre by cauterization
When chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it arresting, then cauterize it with a cauterization that looks like a circle, all around the tour of the chancre. And yet wise men say that one should make a cauterization also in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem to me good, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once; and more rightly is it that it should be cauterized around, with the cauterization called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
of inflammation that cannot be killed
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes too long to die or because of the abundance that it produces or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, very old) and he has little blood or due to time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauterizations in quick succession; afterward let it be thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it bursting forth at all the cauterization, then heat the cauterization where there is the shape:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has pierced the knee, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them outside in just this way that the course of the corruption is alleviated. Afterward, cure until it is completely healed.
the cure of fire with iron
Another way disease occurs which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of the member, for it corrupts the members just as fire corrupts dry ropes. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the cauterizations very small and great, according to what is needed at the place or where the disease is; afterward, cauterize all around until you remove all the corruption, so that nothing remains but everything that was corrupted is removed. And then leave it three days, and apply on the burnt places a poultice with oil so that the eschars of fire are removed, and all the corruption. Afterward, cure with ointments engendering flesh. If you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it's good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted places. And this corruption has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
of boils that come to the feet
Many times it happens that on the feet outside comes a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large, foul-smelling thing that wounds the foot. And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways: fire cauterization and hot water cauterization. Fire cauterization is when you heat one cauterization as if it were a comb made of vulture's feathers, and make it of good iron to fit the size of the boil and have subtle edges; after which you put everything hot on the boil, and turn your hand all around the boil until it reaches the bottom of the boil; and then leave it thus for three days until it begins to give off pus. Then apply a poultice made of wild marjoram leaves with oil, and let the poultice sit on the entire night, and the boil will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with ointments engendering flesh until it is healed.
Et s'il sont convertit par defors le corps, et maintes fois avient et en mains et empiecz, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d'aigue chaude;
The treatment of shaking.
When some people shake from chilliness or numbness, or quartan fever, or another, it is necessary that you make him .iiii. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the weight, and one on the belly at the olive cautery; if he stops shaking, and his health will hasten from the cold disease.
the smelly boils
Sometimes boils or smelly boils appear on the body bathed, which come from corrupt matter. So it is necessary when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the boil: a fine cautery of myrtle bark, by which the point will be taken up in fire, or of long aristologe root, or a lenticular cautery. And sometimes one should cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further ahead, but are broken open the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Often great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or from the incision of an abscess, or from the cautery of a member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to stanch.
And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and strain mightily until the blood is calmed beneath your fingers, and no more drips out; then put at the fire the olive cauteries, large and small, as many as are red; then take one, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein which you hold with your two fingers, and hold the cautery until the blood is staunched.
And if it spouts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery has stopped, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is staunched; and be mindful that you do not burn the nerve that is below, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well stop it without great harm, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to staunch blood; and let it be bound and restrained accordingly.
Whoever will cause stanching of blood will bind it tightly with cloths or put hot things on it, or other similar things, unless it does not benefit.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and strain well until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently while it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and staunched; and make an inquiry ahead to get what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the reasons and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the head just as far as this, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
And thus as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come to cures. Some come with such a bad condition that they will die quickly due to the ferocity of their disease, and the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of these things. And of these there are some who will give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly, but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and hold; and use prophesy and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Dear friend, may Our Lord give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy spirit of His hand, Amen.
Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I have divided from the beginning just as far as this, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
from the head full of water
Know that this disease often occurs in children at birth, and when the midwife strains too strongly on the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a reason that is unknown.
And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen have hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is not worth the trouble to work on such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the skull was growing thicker each day to the point where it could no longer be sustained; and so moistened that he would have died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the sphenoid, between the key and the bone; and the treatment is such when the moisture is between the key and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two of our fingers, as long as the moisture flows; and behold the shape of the sphenoid:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the head split open from each part, and the fluid jumps far when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions into the head in this manner:
And after the incision extract all the moisture. Then close the incisions with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days; then loosen it and care for the wound by tents and ointments, and let the head be drained equally, and then allow the patient to eat dry food without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the aposteme opens up, and the gathering of the fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Cut then at the place where the aposteme opens up, and the gathering of the fluid, and cut according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there is a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
Of relapse
When it happens to anyone that has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is the fire cautery with which you will cauterize the two arteries.
Then it is necessary, when you see them about to be cauterized, that the patient bends back their head; after which they strike the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then take the patient's neck and tie it tight with one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the leeches of both are afterwards behind the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the leeches with enchie, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp spatula in two parts, so that the cut comes up to the bone, and this is by the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the spatula below the artery and cut above, cutting in the same way as two do across.
And when the vein is cut, then blood springs forth continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space with three fingers, then mark with enchie and cut up to the bone; and what is necessary for the blood to flow forth is .vi. cubits, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of the syphac, then cut so that apostemes do not come there, then drain the wound and bind, and care with ointments until it is healed.
of migraine
When ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in temples and old foreheads and similar things, and it is treated by manners of medical cures and all that does not help him, then we cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back their hair from their temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then the patient tightens their neck with some cloths, then strikes the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then raise it up with pincers, and part it well from the tunics that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turn it at the point of the uncina, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two hairs. For if it is not cut, then blood does not flow out entirely.
And take the blood of .vi. cubits up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two loops of a strong double-threaded silk thread, so that there is no bleeding before the wound heals, and there is no loss of blood; then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the area with a cauterizing spatula up to the bone until the hairs are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
For the cauterization is help to finish the moisture: for this reason it is of greater help with the moistures. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when one loosens them, take care of dry medicines that bring forth flesh and tents, until he is healed; and if without a pause from the artery as long as you work, then hasten to cauterize by fire, or use vitriol to stop the bleeding; and if you do not have these present, place your cloth on the place so that the bleeding ceases, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be strained as is necessary; and what is main and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-cutting spatula, but the cutting should be well spaced to withstand the heat for a longer time. For when the cuttings are too dense, they hold their heat less. And it should have between the two cutlets one large space of width, and then when you have marked with enchie the two loops, and you heat the iron hot on top until it comes up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two loops; and let them be separated between the two hairs because they are not sealed by this cautery entirely; and that is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine done there, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel or front perspiration like trembling; and so the skin is tender and moist as if the hairs of paper were fallen, and the papers are scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary for this cure.
Et l'apelerent li ancien "cure contuse", et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu'il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l'une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusqu' neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l'incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au travers joins;
from the incision that is near the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the kernel that is between the two notches right up to the sphenoid bone that is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
and put the instrument called "culterelle" in the first notch, and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape: And put the curved edge facing towards the flesh and the blunt edge facing the bone, and push it as far as it reaches the middle notch. And cut off all the vessels that flow down from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears from the kernel; then make another cut in the middle notch up to the other notch; and then extract the blood equally, and express the place where the blood has been taken; then put a cloth of old cotton into each notch, and cover with moist cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, and guard so that no apostemes arise; on the third day, loosen the bond, and administer great relief with lukewarm water, then apply basilicum ointment with rose oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When anyone comes with a long-standing cataract and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening the sight, and the papillae burned; and the hair falls out, and the head is in great pain above, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and the cataract do not come from one vein alone, but from many veins, and the mother vein which is there, so it is this.
And you instruct the patient to recline his forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another one of medium width. One inch. And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and remove your hand from the temples that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow into an esponge, then desecrate between the two lips of the incision and put in a piece of old cotton and linen; then cover with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to form apostemes; when it is done, you should rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then apply remedies that cause flesh to appear.
In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds in order to bring forth flesh everywhere.
of the removal of the ears
All that comes out of the ears is one of the three things: either grains, or bestial matter, or stone-like substance similar to iron; or seed, such as jaundice, lentils, peas; or flowing substances, such as water and oil, and similar things.
When it comes out of the ear a stone or other thing that does not belong to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, let some violet oil or sesame oil drip into it, then administer extraction; and make the patient sneeze with condiments, and block their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and lift up the ear above. Many times it has come out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with fine tweezers, where there is the shape:
If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer extraction with the fine pincer of a small pair of forceps; and if it does not come out through this, then make a wire chain and put the head of the chain or perforation of the ear very tight, and block what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it firmly, for many times it has come out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue from which birds are taken, and put some instrument on point to do this, and put a small piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it further. And if it does not come out through all the things we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear before an aposteme arises and spasms; and the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient's head bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient down between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or flesh dependent; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it as far as you can, and suck on it hastily to your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and they swell, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a fine, thin spatula according to this shape:
and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
In water then that comes out of the ear, it is good for the patient to use condiment-induced sneezing first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be covered with another piece of cloth or a cloth on top of it where the water is. If it jumps out through this, that's good. If not, then take many stones according to their length and thickness, and heat them slightly over fire; and put one into the patient's ear, and push another stone from the other side, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone after stone until all the water comes out, and thus it jumps out completely. And if you see, then take a reed, and put one end of it into the ear, and burn the other end over fire until most of the reed is burned; then do the same with other reeds until the water comes out entirely, as we have said in the stone.
In the removal of the bestial matter, if it is small in size, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then administer extraction with fine tweezers; and that is the easiest thing to remove which is in the ear.
When extracting the vermin from ears, as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear to the sun: if there are any worms, treat them with fine tweezers; if none appear, take a thread of the kind that has the shape:
And it is narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then succeed in pulling out the entire thread; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they don't obey to come out, stop around the thread with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they don't emerge like we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the removal of worms, and you will find it in the treatment of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, according to the form as you see:
And it is narrow below and wide above made of silver or tin, with small holes to distill; and for pressing within the distillation using a well-made tin instrument, and if you see, take a scraper and wrap it around the point with a cotton cloth; then pour your oil or juice into it, and as much of your medicine as you can into the thread, and have the thread in the ear; then put it into the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or trickles from the ear; and if the patient feels within, and the distillation is in a small pot warmed by fire so that one can distill it in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
From the stoppering of ears
No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppering a wound or new growth inside the ear, and these stoppers sometimes come very far into the ear so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a small hole and it can be seen clearly.
That which comes very far in, if one cannot see it, is from a grievous inflammation or multiple dispositions, and that which can be seen requires that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity apparent, then work with all this spatium as it has the shape:
And it should be rough and scraping in front and back all along, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opacity is from new flesh or the body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape it away until all the flesh is removed.
And if the opacity is very far in the ear, then take a subtle scraper and warm it slightly over the fire, then put it on the body of the ear. If you sense the opacity that the patient feels grief at hearing, gently pierce and beware not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian mastic.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure until it is sound.
And if the bleeding stops, then take an sponge and dip it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
of paper skin
This crust that comes on the paper skin of the eyelids when they are moist and dry, then it is necessary that you stretch them with tenacula and tweezers, and scrape off a spatium from its roots; then put on the surface vitriol broth.
And if they peel off without leaving any skin, then the cataract of fine lenticular cautery and the cauterized area after incision is worth nothing; and many times they are repainted, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
of the hare
Many times come on the paper skin of the eyelids things that seem like hare's fur in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the works are such: beware if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the cut along the edge, then scrape each part gently, then take with tweezers and scrape. If you can't scrape without piercing the paper slightly, don't harm the patient; and if the tear is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if it's small, don't do anything strong, for the ointments will restore it soon and remove the flesh.
And if the grandine is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn over the paper and extract the grandine with fine tweezers, and scrape and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it doesn't harm anything; and when the grandine is scraped off, pour vinegar water into the ear and cure the part that removed flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is accumulated in the membranes of the paper skin above, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes; and they come with a discharge in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces all day, and sleep on top, and are their paper skin below moistened by the swelling and appearance that has been covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the part between your fingers and feel the exinach inside.
And the manner of the treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap; and then take one cloth made of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled inside the circle; then make a small incision in the middle of the moist area, not more than the size of the wound that you would make for a vine; and make the skin smooth as far as you see the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, the exinach comes out of the incision, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then take then a whole piece of rough cloth between your knees at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and beware that you do not put anything in the slit, lest you bruise all the way to the eye, lest you bleed.
And if the skin does not open at the beginning of the slit, then widen the slit slightly until it opens; then take it as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who boil and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then cure it until it is healed. And if the wound becomes inflamed, then cure it with poultices soothing it until it is healed.
of hairs of paper
When hairs of paper grow, they become tangled with something other than their natural state, and are inflamed, which harms the eyes, and brings about manners of illnesses such as tearfulness and softening of the papers and opacity, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is the cure according to three ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicinal poultice according to what is written in this chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, as I will say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper from oil to your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert an awl into one thread above; and let this be on the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow near these hairs, and guide one thread above all the paper, and turn it at the razor's edge; then make in the part below the paper, below the tangled hairs, all the way to the great tear canal to the small; then pull out one thread, and put a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then sign on the paper a figure like the leaf of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see increasing the paper which is divided all around.
And if there is one who needs to cut off a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper has softened; then make all the way along the tear canal above the two lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear canal down to small; and let it be one of the incisions near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the key, then scrape off all; then assemble the two lips with a stitching made by an awl on one thread of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the surplus threads stick to the two small circles above any glued things, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, and leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching or constraining things, because the paper revives at the moment of the wound's healing and assembly with it, but the stitching is corrupt (as the ancients said), and that is work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told, at three separate stitches according to the shape that is here:
then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
And if you have no power to hold the forceps and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread at the great tear canal, and the second thread at the small one, and assemble between your knees the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: if necessary, use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make a hole in it according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the tear canal; and cut off at the two ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what rises from the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations into two parts form; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die, wither, and fall off, until it falls away by itself.
If it takes too long, then cut off the forces that rise, and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of silk soft and subtle; then assemble the threads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and let it be under the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and small work, then insert the needle into all the chase at the root of the tangled hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you draw it up to the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it comes forth all over the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below to all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes forth from the pores above and you can see it by the vision of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it be for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the skin becomes smooth; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural beard, and lift it up with that one, so that it is stretched out and then lifted.
of the pouring of oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or the pouring comes to the eye, if there are two kinds: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from wound, or cut, or burn, and from similar things.
And the manner of treatment for this is that you cut open the wound, and separate the lips, and put linseed tents inside it, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its cure things that dry up and constrict. For if you do so, the disease will come back worse than before; but it is better to work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or alum water, and flaxseed, be cooked, and oil of dragon's blood melted in some oil, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it with these.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to make sure it does not harden again in the same form as it was before; and these treatments we have mentioned are nothing other than remedies for this disease, so that it may come back in the same form as it was before.
of the flesh that comes to the eye
This disease that is underneath and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and gash and burn and similar things; and the way of treatment for it is that you take a needle, which has one double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce through the left eyelid as far as the right, so that the thread will come out in two pieces of the flesh; then remove the flesh above to the entire needle, and cut at one broad spatula.
And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should, that is good; but if not, then take one raser and place it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts inside the paper; and let the holes of the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the shape of a letter whose name is "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its edges below, from what follows the paper; then join the two separated parts, and sew them with one thread of linen; then perform the cure with the softening medicines and tents, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from gash or cut or burn, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said before; then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the treatment in accordance with the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument for every possibility that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
the suddenness of the paper
When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is bound with white of egg, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a raser under the paper, lift it up; and let it be held by pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the thin spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatula is too sharp or bleeds the eye; and your incision, from which you remove that assembled part, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and the whole assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye, salted water is used, and a sweet broth, and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye damp wool in abundance of egg; and after three days use the vinegar and similar things until it is healed.
of the swelling of the eye
Know that the swelling is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard boil on the skin, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when one touches it with iron and cools it with pincers, it cannot be removed; and both of these appearances begin near the great eyelid, and grows little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then works the eyes; and lift up the paper with one hand, then coil the swelling with pincers of small doubleure, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or cow, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the swelling, and pierce it to the entire needle, and tie the swelling with one thread and extend it above, and cut off at all the root of the hair that follows the prune and the silk to the hair just up to the head; then cut off what remains in the root of the eyelid to the entire thin spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid so that through incision the body does not produce tears habitually; and sometimes the swelling is tied only with an onyx stone, and a thread, as we have said; then one cuts off all the soft spatula of which this is the form:
And take care that the spatula does not touch the fatty flesh and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little bit of boiled silk into the eye, and make a broth with lard, and let it be until the next day; then perform the cure as necessary until it is healed.
And if the swelling is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the onyches cannot enter, many times this appearance of swelling is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it growing, then work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly, a little bit sharp, according to this form:
And remove the swelling above subtly, and if you see that it is not decreasing and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a broth made of lard and red vinegar and boiled silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as if it were a boil, then pour milk, and first cure the hot apostema until it is healed, then begin again the treatment as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the skin of the wound impedes sight by great harm, then suspend it with an onion, and cut out a part but not all, so that there may not be a flow of tears; then distill into the eye a red collyrium which is made from latakia.
Of the flesh that grows on the pupil.
Some men's eyes sometimes grow red flesh, and cover the pupil and restrain above the papillae and turn it away from the face; and it seems like a pomegranate rose; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in a certain direction, then opens the eyelids, and cools all that flesh with suitable onions, and sustains it with force; then cuts the first layer of flesh, and continues cutting to the end, and takes care not to harm the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the sputum be as we have said in the incision of the udder and for small forces by which one removes the scab, just as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then pour oil of silex or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines into it; place a piece of cotton on top with an egg white to secure the aposteme hot; and if there is nothing left and the blood chokes you, and you fear hot aposteme, then leave the eye and cure the aposteme with soothing things for hot aposteme; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do all the flesh that has been removed from the eye by this process.
But it is necessary that you speed up the cure of each weak eye in a natural way; and by accident, work with iron; and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that these members are suffering from that operation.
of the veins of the eyes.
Scabs are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate the vision's operation and weaken the eye forever. It is necessary then to first look at whether the eye has scabs, if there is only one disease besides the scab; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a certain direction, then suspend those veins with all the onions according to his wisdom, and let the onions be subtle doubles according to this form:
And let there be two onions by degree in one body according to this form:
Then coil the forces of those veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care not to harm the eye at all with the sputum, and do this operation at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is left of the scab.
And if you are unable to coil all that in one hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it stay some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of hot aposteme, then resume according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the abscess of the eye.
The doctor is called "arissati" abscess: when you cure it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a sign in it that you must cut into the aposteme, where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then return all the instruments of which there is this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron to a new head, and be pointed like a file as in the present form:
And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with medicinal caustics.
If the bone is sewn up, and flesh grows, and the body of the bowstring is sewn up, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemed, and bad things happen, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the abscess to the navel of the rain according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is uncovered take one force according to this form, and let the iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be reduced to its chief as you see here.
Then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and withdraw your hand from the eye a little, then turn the force all around until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what the veins do if they hold their hand on their navel; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bone, the matter will go to the navel; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the exit of the eye.
When the eyes are fully opened and there is no blockage or constriction in the navel, nor diminishment, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply poultices or hirudines to suck without hurting, then place on the eye a bandage made of aloe, encens, and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and drapery; and the manner of the drapery is that you take soft drapery enough, and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain it above a durable binding, and repeat the poultices to suck without hurting; then remove the poultices and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the bandage loosens, then it is necessary that you tighten it much; then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, this is good; if not, then repeat the plastering and the drapery and the bandage and the poultices until he is healed.
of the rupture of the vitreous humor.
When disruptions come to the vitreous humor, and it bursts forth like a grain of resin, and it is quite astonishing to see; then if you see it bursting forth, the operation is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below, just up to the surface above, and then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the eyelid; and make it pierce through, and leave the first awl as it is; then cut the place where the double thread is and tie one part of the vitreous humor around, and tighten it well, then extract the awl and apply a moist linen cloth to the eye with plenty of egg white; and let it be like that until the threads have chosen the vitreous humor, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor in each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
If the eyes show great appearance, then pierce with a subtle spatula that comes near to the fontanelle of the eye, and drain the moisture, albogined, down into the eyes, and let it enter as soon.
From the bottom of the eye.
This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the swelling that forms in the eye, resembling a liquid descending, and it's not actually liquid; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on one prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from two parts, and gently move them until you see the swelling come up to your eyes; then it will be fixed, and do not descend and be dislodged, so that the light is seen, and the patient sees things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it's liquid, and if the descent of the swelling is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make a small incision on the corneal tissue .i. drop by continuing along the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the swelling comes out; and when it is out, then distill in the eye hot water mixed with honey or liquid fenugreek boiled with honey, and be cured of another cure until it is healed.
From the waters of the eye.
We have the resemblance of the waters in division, and what is needed to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light because of the sun, and the good eye being healthy and strained very tightly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then put the point of the instrument under the crown by the thickness of a nail in that corner of the eye to the part of the minor tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so much until it pierces into the corner of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the span which is from the prune leaf to the end of the nourishment; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the corneal tissue, and put the instrument just above or where the water is, then express below one path after another. If the water descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in their eye.
After resting for a little while, and if the water rises again on the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, then gently draw out almagda by rotating your hand a little at a time; and then put in the eye a small amount of pure gemstone, and leave it inside the oil. Then take by the way out the oil soaked or cloth moistened with rose oil and hen's egg whites, and bind with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, place on the common broth with an abundance of hen's eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too far in, but make one subtle incision, then put in almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a suitable bed with bedding, where he sleeps on his back in a dark room; and be vigilant about all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition just until the third day; then release him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary for you to do this immediately after the incision or during the treatment now, but it is necessary for you to wait a bit, because the water rises quickly.
If an abscess arises, then loosen the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, then loosen the sight and put on a cloth or bandage to cover for a few days, and be in that dark room. And then get out of the house little by little, and turn back into their condition; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from the land of Yrach, who told us that in their country they make almagda pierce, by which the water is drained, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in old books; and by chance this is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are made of proper earth.
And the ends of these are of the same subtlety, and the last one is in three sharp corners.
From the skin on the nose.
Sometimes nose hairs are born or not, and there are some that resemble scorpions with many joints; and if such exist where the skin is enchanted with a flux of color, and if the skin is soft with a bone color. In that then of these skins which is soft, and not at all enchanted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open their nostrils, and pour the onyx liquid onto those hairs, and treat them gently; then take what you can sustain with a subtle spatula from one side, until you know that that skin is completely removed.
And if there remains any part that cannot be cut off, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, until nothing is left; and if without bothering you, or an abscess arises, then apply the cauterize as needed; and if it's malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the wound is stopped and all the hairs are removed, then pour on the nose a mixture of oil and water or wine.
If the nose opens and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if the moistors does not pierce as needed, know that there is a hair born in the bone above, so the instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary that you put one linen thread about the size of your thumb, and it should be oiled by hand, with some spacing between each node; and place the patient's head on the thread in their nose at their power, and treat in a fragrant manner until it comes inside the mouth through the nose; and many times they do this to children at school, and it is a light thing for someone who wants to do it; then hold one end of the thread that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and let them go as we are with the thread. Do this until you know that the night has corrupted that hair, then take out the thread, wash away the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the nose just like before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the hair; and then put a lead bandage on the nose some days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medicines, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purify the head, through which they distill oils and medicines in the nose.
Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, semblant  une lampe ouverte, comme une caille, et le conduit aussi; et si tu voies, fais une caille close, et soient les estrumens pleins pour espurger le chef; et ait une mainche au chef pour le tenir quant on chaufre l'huile ou quelque liqueur.
Of the flesh on the night.
Many times there is on the head at night a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great in time, so much that it is visible to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut it off at the beginning, and remove all fat, then put on the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting it off until it is great, take heed if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts it sometimes, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of gentle touch, not of foul color, and you see that it can be all cut off, then empty the patient and cut off the abscess without fear, and treat the wound with things soothing and restraining.
when the night is cut off and washed
Know that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these cartilaginous works, little profit is gained, more so in some men. It is therefore necessary to consider this in each case, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring together the two lips on a suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their roughness as long as they seep, then bring together the two lips on a suture, and restrain it, and powder on top with blood of dragon, and incense powder; and put on the powders a piece of emplastry of strength or other emplastry suitable, and leave it until it cures by itself, then cure it with oil until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you bring together the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known.
of abscesses of the lips
Many men have inside their lips abscesses hard, resembling grains of mustard seeds, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each notch, and take out as pincers and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the wound after the incision with vinegar powder, until the blood is stopped; and then lift off the poultice easily, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times there is on the gums flesh accumulated, which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut off at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on the wound vinegar powder, or other drying and constricting powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it off again, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of ulcers
Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant scrapings; and sometimes the teeth are black and green and yellow, as far as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; it is necessary that you make the patient sit in your hands, and his teeth be in thy saint, and remove the teeth or the scrapings until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and the greyness, and the yellowness and the other discolorations, as long as they are removed; and if one takes away what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, one recommences to remove the second day and the third, until you have removed all; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scraper with which we remove the teeth has different forms than he with which we remove between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as long as you can, for this must not be done; for it is a very high substance just up to the point where one has no excuse for pulling. Then when the patient is constrained to pull out the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain of the healthy tooth. Many times the pain had misled the patient, and he thought it was a holy tooth, and had the good tooth pulled out; and yet the pain did not depart from him because of this, until the bad extraction, for we have already decided to do so with these saints; and when you are well certain of the healthy tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all parts; then move it to your hands or to subtle forceps at the first pace and pace, until it is well extracted, then secure the forceps firmly; and be the patient's hand in thy saint between thy knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After pulling out the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump away, take one of these instruments and insert it into each part lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the teeth are perforated and bruised, it is necessary that you fill them with drapes, where the perforations are; and then restrain it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when straining; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take heed that you do not break it, and leave one part, and let the tooth return to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than the first. And take heed that you do not act as ignorant saints who, through their haste and boldness, sometimes break the chariot, and do not bring what we have told; but they often bring great diseases through the roots that remain, or through the chariot that breaks, just as we have so often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the wound with wine, vinegar, and seawater; and if blood comes from it, which often happens, apply a poultice made of vinegar powder; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
The forms of instruments, with which one pulls out the teeth first, are those with long pointed tips and large handles, which do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be of great strength so that they do not bend at all to the pulling, and be well tempered as iron, and be toothed so that they may hold tightly.
Of the root of the teeth When the root remains at the pulling, it is necessary that you put a damp cloth of butter on the spot .i. one day or two days, until the flesh is softened, then insert the pincers called "algefri", by which the joint appears to be well-shaped; and should be made inside as if with a file and that is its form:
And if the roots do not want to come out at all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is known as a palisade, by which this is its form:
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the roots jump out because of this, it is good; if not, then help with all instruments, by which the forms come hereafter:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two handles, it is thus the form:
and other tools that are before in relation to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pincers, it is thus the form:
And it is this instrument strong so that it cannot break; and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and skilled masters find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the old did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases and one does not break anything or another bone, or if it can be done, then one seeks instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and is aided by gestures; and this is its form: And be strong and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but one can hold and remove; and then restore the spot with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then reset all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to their natural body shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot smooth or file it: then draw a line; and if it is uneven with the tooth, then take this instrument which has this form, and it resembles a small beak, and be made of sharp iron.
And the copes are cut and cut in small pieces over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file like this is its form:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth piece by piece over several days gently, so that it does not move until it chooses; then smooth out the end to any rasp, and if the teeth are too sharp and hurt the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the front teeth loosen, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without crying, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, and this does not work; then one must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rotten, but gold never rots; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are misaligned, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the loose teeth in their place, one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and smoothly, until they do not move anymore; and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the thread with pincers and assemble the teeth, and reposition them between the healthy tooth and the loose one, so that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it like this as tight as possible until it can remain, and if it loosens or the threads break, then restrain it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of aligning the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones, just as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, gradually and carefully, just as we have said; and do not intervene if you are not a wise and skilled person, and one time make the shape of an osseous dent from a whalebone, and put it at the location where there is a defect, and restrain it so that it does not escape, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
to cover the link of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or is natural, as one is born with it; or by accident of a wound that has healed; and the work is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament of the wide part, until the tongue is freed from its dwelling place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, then put in an unguent and cut the wide part that ligament; and be sure that the opening is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you are finished, then lift the tongue with rose water and oil, or cold water, and place a linen tent under the tongue; and let the patient sleep each night, so that the wound cannot heal. And if bleeding comes, then put on vitriol powder over the wound; and if the blood flows, then cauterize it with a slow fire cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And if you see it to be of a foul color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining into gangrene, and there is moisture, then throw away the unguent, and make a poultice with a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one part to another; and if the blood flows at your work, then put on vitriol powder until it is stained, then return to your work until you have finished all the treatment; then lift the tongue with oil and vinegar, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of throat apostemes
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees godath, and les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, and quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, and elles ne sont sanees, if pren garde: se cest apostemes dur de petit sens and de fusse color, if ne lou touchier mie de fer. And if it is rouges and li racine est grosse, if ne lou touchier mie de fer, as well for the decorrement of sanc; but lou laisse tant quil soit meur, and adonques tu lou partiras, or il rompirait par soi; and if it is de blainche color reont, and li racine est subtilz, if aies apareilliet lestrument pour coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose and est apaisiez. Adonques fait seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and ses chis soit en ton sain, and li oevre la bouche and lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, and presse la lengue desoz a tout lestrument, de coi ci est li forme; and soit dargent or darain subtil as well as uns coutelz:
Can you press the tongue all over this instrument, and you see the aposteme, if take hold of it and push it into the amandres, and train it upwards as much as you can; and do nothing with the cloths, then cut to the instrument, so that it is in the form, which seems like some force; and yet the top are curved, and one side another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or andaine:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, so that it is in the form:
And be twisting on one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the amandres, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and gentle, and if there is a flow of blood, gargle the patient with cold water, or cooked grated apples, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it so long as it is sound; and sometimes other apostemes are born in the throat besides the two amandres, so cut them then like the two amandres equally.
And I cured a woman of an aposteme that was born inside her throat, to wit, one aposteme of little sense; and I had well closed all the throat, so that the woman could not exhale because the passage was blocked, nor eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days. The apostemes were so high that they had been pushed up through two openings of the nose. I hastened then at once, and inserted an oncin into one, then pulled it out with force, and drew out a great portion of flesh; then refilled the other opening of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I inserted the oncin into these apostemes, and cut off part of them, and only a little blood flowed forth; and thus was unblocked the passage of the throat of the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and ceased not to cut away that aposteme for a long time; and the apostemes recrossed and filled again the place I had emptied, so that it became very large; then I bound it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it did not grow further; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to them after me.
of the vein
When swelling descends to the vein, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is below a lump and rounded, it is called "vein". When it is cured as we said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the apostemes are appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cut it; and if it is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a reddish color or black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision. For there is great peril for the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue to the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then insert the oncin into the vein, and pull it down, and cut at one of the two instruments that I said in the incision of the two amandres. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluity that is beyond natural term; for if you cut more, you will harm the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two amandres, and cure it so long as it is sound. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use a trick at the cauterization with no fear. And the manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses their tongue to the instrument which we said in the chapter on cautery, and mixes with hot boiling water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and employs the handle of this instrument, which is the form:
And if the patient has a beard or hair on their head, put the medicine in it as the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument all over the medicine on the vein; and have the patient sit up straight on their side, so that the saliva and mucous flow from their mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat and wound. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the vein for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it numb and the medication's irritation is appeased; and if you see anything, take a cotton cloth and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument into the hollow cane above, until the cotton rises on the vein; and do this many times until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, start again, and after the cautery wash around the vein with a cloth dipped in cold water, and cure by gargling as long as it is sound.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take camphor and yarrow and origan and rue and chamomile and vervain and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and put a little water, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument shaped according to this manner: Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, and soit li uns des chis boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l'uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;
Maintes fois s'aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, or aucune chose;
And let the instruments be curved at the top so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to harm, nor push the bone inside; and see that the patient inserts the instrument, for it is best if he knows what he is doing or if the thing is awkward; so he inserts it downwards, or pulls it far out of all the instruments equally, until it is far.
Of the snot from the throat
There is no medicine for snot from the throat, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the patient's throat by sunlight, after you press his tongue onto the instrument that I told you. And if you see the snot, pull it out slowly with a small hook or thin forceps that are suitable for this. And if this is not worth it, take a braided cord, and insert it into the patient's throat, then attach one hot iron to the end of the cord, and do this often. And if the patient has water all day, then take a full vial of cold water, and open his mouth, and spit out without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the snot feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asefetide, using the instrument that I told you about in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without trouble. And the manner of the fumigation is this: take a pot which has live coals, and let the pos be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that perforation be the key of the instrument; then throw your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the end of the cord into his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the snot; and the snot will now fall, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to come out through this management.
And the form of the instrument with which you treat the snot is this: when you can see it, it resembles curved forceps for inserting into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has a lime-like roughness, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold its form:
the chapters on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is remembered in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is the same as itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for those that are in the body. For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the jointed limb are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced until the bowels are mature according to their completion; and there are some that need piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like an abscess that is in a joint. For when an abscess comes from a joint, and one leaves it alone until it has burst outward, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is on the main limb, and you delay perforation until it is mature, then harm will come to the main limb; or if it is at the foundation, then one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe; and it is not good to pierce a ripe abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is at the foundation, lest it burst forth and become elongated inside, and becomes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is abated, and the departures of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and of swelling and inflammation of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it appears most dependent on the location of the abscess, and where it opens outward; and be the perforation long enough to reach into the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no swelling.
In those that are swollen, according to the shape of that member. And when abscesses are in jointed limbs, it is best to wait until they are confirmed in completed digestion, as we said. For if you pierce them before that, the body will be filled with a great deal of pus; and by chance, the lips and the underlying tissues will become hardened. And there are some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. And it is necessary to make small incisions for small abscesses, and large incisions for large abscesses, and many openings according to the appearance of the grandeur of the abscess; and there are some abscesses where one must cut the skin, and cover; when it has become as flaccid as a cloth, then do as is done with babies: and there are some that are split into three angles, and there are some that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, such as abscesses of the kidneys; and there are some where one makes a rounded cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Those who do not have a head, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it thoroughly. And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has accumulated a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, to not pull out all the pus at once, but rather take out some of it; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then pull out nothing more above; do this gradually over time, until all the pus comes out. Moreover, if the patient is weak in constitution, or a woman giving birth, or small children, or elderly men who are decrepit. For the hopes that sometimes fluctuate with the issue of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take precautions. Therefore, carefully read this treatise on great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then dress the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, then apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen fluff without moisture, and tie it just until the third day; then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor leu decorrant par maintes fois.
It is necessary to know universally in treating abscesses: and I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
of boils
Wherever the boil comes from little abscesses, and they are ways of ours that are in nets, like a weaver of silk; and there is many similarities. There are some that are fat and such or have moisture as pustules; and if there are any that are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make it contrary. And the works of cutting so are that you try out every one. i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes here after, whatever thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, then let it dry above the long hair. And when the moisture is empty, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it will return again when you leave anything; then plunge cotton into Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and salt, and apply the dressing to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and then begin the cotton again, just as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with ointment as necessary, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds one fat night, then cut into according to this form, above the long hair; and throw away all your lint, and scrape off from all sides, and put all your care in drawing out what is there; and if the artery makes it contrary, then do what I told you after. And likewise do with the abscess if it is stony, and of cutting and curing just as I told you.
And the cutting above the stony and moist abscess is easier, because they are full of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head or where there is no moisture, and one of them was an abscess that I cut open on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if anyone had done anything to it, they would have made as much a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming on the head, except for those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, in order to let the pus issue; and cure them as it is necessary.
of scrofulae
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many and are intertwined with one another. And each scrofula is properly contained within its own case, just like the boils and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the likenesses of these scrofulae are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malicious ones that will not obey health. Therefore, when you see one with a good disposition to be touched, and it has the appearance of the color of the body, and is mute on each side, and is not inflamed towards the neck or artery or conduit, and is not deeply seated; then it is necessary to cut it open above, and scrape off each part, and make the two lips of the boil as lint, if you need it, just as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor let the spatula slip away, so that your hands may escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you finish, then put vitriol or some powders that retain blood in the wound, and stop the bleeding; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, then return to your work until you have completed it; then examine whether any small scrofulae remain, and cut them open and scrape them off. And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then it is not necessary that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall away without harm; then apply the wound to old cotton dipped in Egyptian oil, and cure it.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then it is necessary that you gather up the two lips of the wound and sew them together now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root and draw it out, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, perforate where it appears to be moist; and perforate it thus, dependent, then apply tentatives with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then cure it with ointment promoting flesh, until it is healed.
of swelling
The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
To those who have swelling, it is necessary that the incision of the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not make use of these things for this reason, because all the veins and the plexus of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the plexus, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the syphac's cut, not in the cartilage.
and that it is suitable for the section of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all the lint, then cuts the boil so that it comes to the channel; and avoids the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut open the syphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the flemmula of the channel which jumps forth through the broken ligament and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open a while.
And when the hour is passed from which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with care, and sew it all up without cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until they are healed.
I also said that one should not do this just until the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the fault is about to fail. Then cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the privy parts.
and I was called to cure her, and found her just as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor guided the flow except for the throat, and the blood was flowing out through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was cured.
and it happened to the maiden that she recovered her voice, and returned to her normal condition.
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
of the thick throat.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish-yellow color, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no trickery.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, from which one is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there should be fear, and it is not suitable to make fires except in the one who is small, and he tests and searches every intimate thing. if you find it just like a small lump of fat, and cannot be drained in any way, if you cut it, as one cuts flesh, and treat it with all its folds, if there is not. and search thoroughly, and heal it as is fitting, until it is perfectly healed.
of the flesh.
There are many kinds of flesh that I will describe all their likenesses.
and it is fitting that I say the whole difference that is between flesh and pus.
I say that pus is warm and feverish, holding on until the ebullition has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the flesh there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains a sac which is its own pouch and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a yellowish color, and becomes big.
and they are according to two likenesses, either fatty or moist, and very much of color are as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the flesh, that you examine and inquire first through all the instruments that are called "intimate", according to what its form will be or according to the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of flesh is that you take or more moist liquid than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers in and out, as much as you know that the instruments have pierced the skin, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the instrument, and take heed in what it jumps forth.
If the moist discharge is clear, whatever its color may be, then treat it as I said for other abscesses.
and if after the instrument no moist discharge comes, know that it is fatty, then treat it thus: take pincers and gently scrape off each side and watch the spot where it lies, until you bring it to a healthy state with the flesh.
and if you cannot bring it to a healthy state, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the flesh will return many times;
and if even a small piece remains and the blood grieves you, then apply a wound with some corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and put on soothing things for the hot abscess, and heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
and if the flesh is large, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and heal it with those things that produce flesh.
and if the vein beats against you or another thing is contrary, or if you are in a hurry and apply the liquid of vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound has purged, and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cutting what remains of the flesh.
Behold the forms of the intimate instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, to search for abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are made of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and are more proven to find black lead to search for abscesses of fistula.
and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the probes are of many likenesses, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and there are probes that have two abscesses of three kinds also.
and there are probes that have three abscesses, and they are also of three kinds; and there are probes that have two abscesses, and single probes with one abscess only, and they are all of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The tip of these probes is cutting, and there are some that do not cut at all except from one side, which we use to scrape off the flesh, so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve.
and from these internal things are the swellings responded in bandages, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
and one does not use more than a third part in a well-shaped limb, such as legs, arms, and breasts, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the skins of figs, according to this shape, with which one stops blood;
and it is placed sometimes in the place that heals by cutting open veins and arteries, and sometimes retorted according to this great form;
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should observe according to this form of the above line up to g; then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal ointment, then join the two lips of the wound at the seam, and heal it until it is sound;
and if the breast inclines downward and is shriveled because of its size like it happens in women, then cut it into two panels above, by two similar incisions; so that the one is joined to the other at the end of each, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line b to line g; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the cure, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the bleeding of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and let it be until the remaining and fat are softened, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
This abscess that comes from under the armpit is a type of hard scrofula or if it has nodules, and there are some that contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and cure it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then cut it as we have said in incisions of scrofula, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is swollen, then many times abscesses come, and it also happens with the vein that is inflated and abscessed;
and if one knows this when it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it in your hands, then you feel one lump; and when it is because of the vein, then there appears to be nothing going away from it;
and it is folly to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and arms and neck and in many other places, and is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and also for that which is at the head, and in that which is inflated from an artery, make an incision above the long skin.
It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and also for that which is at the head, and in that which is inflated from an artery, make an incision above the long skin. then perform the incision as one would for a tumor, and carefully separate the artery from its surrounding tissue, until it is fully exposed.
then pass under it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and restrain the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then prick the place between the two ties with a trocar until the blood flows out that is in it, and be relieved of the abscess.
then apply the treatment that discharges pus, until the tie breaks. then cure it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you stain with your hand as much of the abscess as possible to all the skin. then pass the needle under the place that you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce, and there will be a doubled thread, so that you can pull it from the other side. then tie the abscess, just as I have told you, or with the string of one part to two parts of the thread.
and if you doubt that the threads will not come out far enough, then rebend another needle to all four threads under all of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in three places.
then cut the abscess until the excess flows out, then cut away the excess skin and leave what is tied.
then put on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nails
Just like abscesses come in the artery and vein when they are hardened or due to excessive effort, or similar things, so too do abscesses come at the nails when they are worn out or due to great labor, and similar causes.
And this happens more often at the joints and in the hands and all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it occurs in many dispositions without pain.
and when one strains strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the deepest part of the body, but just below the skin.
and it swells up from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor above or below, and that which is in the joints should not be cut with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
and that which is on the head or forehead, make the skin at the eyebrow. If the abscess is small, then hold it with a pair of forceps and cut it in its root.
If it is large, then suspend it on a hook, and flay, then bone and reassemble the wound to the seam, and maintain the care until it is healed.
of great swellings hanging down Never happens in any part except the belly and not elsewhere at all, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to those, and has subtle roots, and a thick head; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and immediately began to emit moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6. The work of incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the flesh is white and moist and of subtle root.
if you cut into the spatula-like part large, and the fire cautery is in your presence. For when cutting comes often too great outflow of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one well-made thread of linen, and bind the flesh as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the linen thread until the flesh is cut, and take great care by this means; and if the roots are large, then be afraid to cut further into the belly, but you can well cut half.
then cauterize it so that it does not relapse; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut into the flesh which is of a foul color and poor sensation and little regard.
For it is an infected abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre later after this.
when the boil is full
If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound or incision in syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other routures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from inflammation;
and if it is from the routure of syphilis and by the issue of pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with diverse issues. And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its mouth it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes bound, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strong work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it resist; and if it is due to blood, then it opens by these signs, the abscess being large and hard, and fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is due to inflammation, then it is sore when touched, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is from the blood of an artery, or vein, or inflammation. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then sign over the entire abscess. then command him to sit quietly between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed all over the spatula-like part. then cut off half of the abscess above the great incision.
then work on the half of the abscess that is extended above the tie, and put your finger index on it, and cut into the intestine. if you find it taken by the tie, then untie it, and push the intestine further out of the belly.
and if you find the boil, then take hold of it with the hook, and cut off the excessiveness;
and if the artery or vein is against you, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads on them, and insert the two needles through what you have done in a crosswise manner as if you were piercing.
then tighten the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can heal, and take care of the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and can heal, then treat it as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and can heal, then treat it as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and sew it shut.
of the chancre
We have said in the division, the likenesses of chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment; and we say that chancre breaks out in the armpits, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancient ones said that when chancre is in a place where it can be removed like the chancre that is in the armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, one should completely remove it when it begins; and when it is large and old, then it is not necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it, nor has anyone been cured before me.
And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with some black bile; then make him well if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient for the operation; then give your hooks or chancre to the boil, and cover it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow completely, and inspect the wound carefully with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein is contrary to you, then cauterize it so that the blood stops flowing; then treat him with another treatment until he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division, the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only lit; and one should not touch iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you are treating this likeness of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, as in all cases, including solution of the bowels and similar things; so do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong vigor, and he only has dropsy without other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work thus: Have the patient sit straight on your hands, and the attendants press the belly out with water at the lowest part of the back, then take the spiculae spinous according to this form: It should be cut into two parts up to a point, yet not so sharp that it can reach the intestine when you insert it, and not cause harm.
Then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if so, it is necessary that you cut into them three fingers to the right below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel three fingers; and if it is due to the kidneys, then it will be on the right, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to all the spiculae spinous between the skin and the sacral bone just as in shaving up to the length of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the sacral bone until the spiculae come to the seventh rib, and that is the place for water, then treat it further, and insert this instrument which is the form: And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and it is made of lead or lighter material, and has in the lower part one small pit; and on one side three pits, and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the keys are cut like a feather, and that is the form of the incision which writers call the pen.
At the top of it is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, you should now pour what is above onto the instrument; empty then one third or two thirds, for if you empty more than is necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls faint, or approaches death.
But empty it according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now because the key that stops the pit on the sacral bone, which I spoke of, should be pierced in this manner; then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat the water with a small quantity.
Do this every day, and take care not to leave more than a small amount of water. And if you doubt the patient and leave too much water, it will cause heat in the cure of the grave or sand, and by sweating or bathing and exposure to the sun, and he will become thirsty; and treat him with desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
of the stoppage of the penis There is no child born who does not have a pit in the penis, or the pit is small, or it is not in its place. If so, then it is necessary to pierce each spiculae spinous very subtly according to this form: then put one small plug of pitch into the pit and tie it up and hold it thus for three days or four; and when he needs to make urine, take out the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it; and by chance it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not allow the plug to remain closed. Those whose pit is small are treated with pitch plugs, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have the pit in its place are wounded, because no one is born with the pit at the top of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot evacuate because the matter cannot come out to the edge, and that is a bad disease.
And the way to do this is that the patient lies on his back, then lifts up the head of the penis and cuts it off like a pen nib, so that the pit opens in the middle as it should; and take care not to let blood come out which often happens, and if it does, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until he is healed.
of pustules on the penis Many times these pustules come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; it is necessary that you take them to a subtle onion, cut them off and clean all, then apply wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until he is healed. And if the pustule is malignant, with foul color and stench, it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it. When you have cut it off, and the pustule is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pustule that is inside first; and when it is secured, then treat what is outside. Because if you treat them together, the head of the penis will not be assured that it will not be pierced, and corruption will come to its tip and to the groin; therefore it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the rind of green pears and vetches, then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
And if bleeding comes, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization is good for two dispositions together: namely, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a plug of pitch into the urethra, and have the patient urinate through it; and when the skin has been softened at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or has been wounded or abscessed, then it is necessary to shave it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the penis be delivered from all parts.
and if it is a grievous thing to do this, then it is necessary that you shave with a spiculae spinous a small part of the head of the penis and skin; then remove well between two, and put a thin cloth of linen damp in cold water, so that it does not harden again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; although when we do this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient people did not circumcise their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one inch, with great force, and with all a new instrument; so it was done when there were two skins, and by chance if one cuts above and leaves that below.
Or the wound recovers, and there is double pain, and the purification of the skin around the inch is not secure at the tip of the member; and the purification of the ulcer by chance escapes the iron, and the work corrupts, and many times it happens thus that they do not need purification and I have seen this.
From the purification which is done with force to all the thread of the bond I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, so it cuts equally in one whole stroke, but that the thread be well strained around the skin; and be the manner of the first work such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything more than binding the thread around the penis only, and then let him relax in all ways that you can. Then make it stay between your hands straight, and reposition the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and bring it up as far as the head of the penis is; then clean it well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the signet with a double thread, then tie it below one piece to another string; and hold it at two strings by the second ligature to the pouch and to the thumb index, and cut between the two strings, then lift the cut above hastily and bring the head of the penis.
Then make it stay between your hands straight, and reposition the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and bring it up as far as the head of the penis is; then clean it well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the signet with a double thread, then tie it below one piece to another string; and hold it at two strings by the second ligature to the pouch and to the thumb index, and cut between the two strings, then lift the cut above hastily and bring the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and top a drapery glued with an egg yolk cooked together with rose water, tempered with oil of good and fresh roses, and leave it like that until the next day, and cure him with another remedy until he is healed.
The form of the forces for purification is this: the two heads are held and cut, and they are equally great as the hands.
The error of the purification is when the knife bleeds inside the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the lump makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it takes three days, and that which is below the penis is swollen, then let it be so until the abscess is appeased, and lightly scrape off; then cut it as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, for nothing will harm it.
Then cure the limb with sudden wound powder, which we have said to treat about powders, and if you cut too much with the knife, and it goes above, then it will not harm; then cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to opilation of stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or flesh tumor, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to stone which is lodged or caught at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent down on his knees; and his feet are placed on the back, and he stretches his belly from the part above the back, and constrains the patient's loins as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, whereby the urine is released.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", whereby there is this form: and it is made of subtle silver hair, like the feathers of a bird; and it has a handle one and a half palms long, and it is subtle at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie it at the head with a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the siringue; and cut off the surplus wool and insert it just up to the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and hen's egg, and make the patient sit on a stool, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
Then place the siringue lightly into the penis, as far as it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the buttocks; then insert the siringue forward just up to the bladder, and let the patient feel come as far as the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the guide or conductor is twisted; then pull the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow.
and begin again with the siringue until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient.
of the diseases of the bladder
When ulcerations or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see it distilled in water and medicine, then make use of all the instruments called "clepsedre", and that is its form:
It is closed and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the lips are shaped so that the medicine flows out such that it stops well at the end of the penis without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and pour when needed.
and when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out the liquid that is inside; then you will draw out the moisture through the syringe, and then push it hard back in; if the moistures go in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus:
And it is made of silver or copper, and the key is higher up; and below that is one sheath or the strings fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see catheterizing the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and warm one piece of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the syringe into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has been released, so that the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
et if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert one strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put what you see of oil and moisture and water inside, and tie in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing by hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone that is engendered by rains, and all signs, and which stone one should work on with a chisel; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often in children, and it's a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears as hair, and makes the patient's penis hurt, and makes him pee many times, and then becomes inflamed; and often the foundations are broken; and is lighter the healing of children until they have four years, and is much more grievous in old men, and is for those who are middle-aged, between youth and old age; and is the cure easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders the seeking out of the stone.
Then take hold of the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is entirely inclining down; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall at first touch, moisten your two fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is young, or with middle oil, if the patient is middle-aged; and insert them into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your two fingers, then bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press above on your two fingers, and push it out at the back where you see cutting.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the stones, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the stones in the part where one makes the incision; then he should insert the spatula carefully, so that this is the shape.
And make the incision between what is between the stones and the foundation, not in the middle but next to the left side of the naevus; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers should be at the foundation, and the incision should be so that it is wide behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
by chance the press may be so that the stone which is in the foundation jumps forth with little effort; and know that there are stones which have angles, and margins: if it is difficult to get out; and those which are below, resembling a ball, and rounded, from which the issue is easy.
To that stone which has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it doesn't jump out, you must strain above with the forceps that are like a file at the top, to slowly draw out the stone so that it won't escape; or you put below one instrument with a subtle curved point at the top; and if you can't manage it thus, then enlarge one small hole, and if the blood flows forth, then constrict it with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, then first bring out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then draw it forth, and the small ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, you must split it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes forth again where the wound cannot close; but still strive to draw out or break into pieces with forceps, until you have drawn it out in pieces.
and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and compress it, and place on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then resupply the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, then arise very well the wound's appearance in oil and water; then treat the patient with diaphanicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until they are healed.
And if hot apostemes come to the wound and corroisons, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained there by this means, so that it does not flow with the urine: then put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and ruin it.
then lift the wound with water and oil and silk, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, you bind his two hips together, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
And if the stone is small and it is in the urethral canal of the penis and fixed inside, and urine cannot come out; then cure him as I said before, by cutting repeatedly, or excuse yourself from cutting for this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Take one iron rod according to this shape and be fixed at three angles in one piece:
Then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand slowly, piece by piece, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; then soon the urine will come forth, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. It breaks soon, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then make the penis come to a stop at the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and loosen the thread, and purify the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
of stone from women
Often it happens that stone is lodged in women, and if it does happen, it is a grievous cure, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will uncover herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of surgery; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more inward than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
And if necessity summons you to do so, it is necessary that you take a wise woman who knows well, and find her one who can help, and if you cannot find such, then seek out one chaste and subtle mirror; and the present one, an old woman well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command concerning the examination of the stone.
and look very well to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to push her buttocks or fundament and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then force it down under her fundament, and command her to push her fundament or with the patient, and gently press her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary to move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it will be made apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and let the cut be as small as possible.
then push the right side of the cut, if you feel the stone so far down in the wound that the stone can then come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and great, rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; thus know their likenesses to know how to proceed.
And if the blood rises, put vitriol powder on it, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to aid you in your work.
and if the blood rises, and it's from the artery that was cut, put powder on the spot and strain of tents and bandages, and don't start again, and leave the stone alone and don't touch it at all, lest the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is assuaged and the wounds have settled, then return to your work until the stone is out.
of fleshly hernia
Ramace aquouse is nothing else than an accumulation of moisture or white sac, which is below the skin of the scrotum that contains the testicle; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the testicle, if one thinks it is another testicle; and it's the skin of the scrotum between the white sac that we have said; and these things only happen when there is no other cause.
And the formation of this ramace is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and it spreads that material.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it's declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or white as water, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white sac that we have said, then it is an abscess of the testicles, or a long pouch like the figure of an egg, and does not open up the testicle, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it is an abscess with a part of the testicle, and for that reason one thinks it's another testicle.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, then it's easy to feel; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try to examine it carefully, for that is how the form appears as we have said before. Accordingly, what comes after the examination, judge of what is inside.
Accordingly, what comes after the examination, judge of what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be nourished according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then place a pillow on his back, on something slightly high, and put many cloths underneath him.
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the scrotum.
then take the spatula left-hand, and cut the skin of the testicles between the long part and the finger-like projection, and make your incision entirely straight as you divide the skin of the testicles just up to the white sac, and scrape out subtly according to one's power.
then pierce the white sac plain with water to a small opening, and extract all the water, and then put in your fingers, and stretch the white sac upwards; and do not touch the scrotum, but only the white sac; cut it all or in pieces similarly on one side, so that if you don't cut it well enough, the water will come back.
and if the testicle jumps out of your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work on the white sac; then bring together the two leaves of the scrotum with a suture, and cure it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
and if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decoration of blood; then cut the scrotum to all the suspended parts, and extract the testicle, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two ramices; then cut the other part similarly to what you did with the first one, and dry the blood, and put a linen cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound.
and put another linen cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it, and place it over the two testicles, and cover it with doubled cloths, and tie it up to all the string that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths and stuff them with linen rags according to this shape and let them be sewn together in the belt of the breeches, and one of the ends will take up on the foundation just to the back, and the other at the finger-like projection; and the other end will go over the two shoulders, and all will be assembled into a knot in the buckle of the breech.
and at times medicine is made with this ramic of cautery in place of iron tailoring and it is that you take one subtle cultellaire cautery, and cut the skin over the scrotum, and be heated as we have said, so that the white scarabaeus beetle shell containing water is uncovered;
so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white scarabaeus beetle shell with needles, and scrape it off with a subtle hot cautery;
And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and take care that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more helpful; and beware of hemorrhage of blood, and beware as much as the works of iron.
and if nothing else opposes you, or abscesses or hemorrhage of blood or other thing, then cure what opposes you, according to what is said beforehand.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its unpleasantness, then offer perfumery, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs that we have said, the remedy is laid.
so sit the patient on a low stool; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the scrotum over the entire wide area, and make the perforation as long as the body; and let the holes be large, so that all the water can flow freely.
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow out, then cure it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow water to come out at the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a pin or the instrument used for draining the waters of dropsy, as we have described before; and enlarge the wound slightly, and know that the water will return, and be assembled after six months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, thus the patient's days will pass.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this remedy there are many fears, therefore it seems to me that it is better left unused.
and I will tell you the work and similar things about the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and this is due to many causes.
It is to know by bitter superfluity and ague, which spreads to the testicles, or from blows;
and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance is a grievous and piercing abscess, of a foul color, and at times comes from no artery, or from an inflamed vein.
When it is due to no artery, then it is known by the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it does not seem right that you touch it.
He who is made from inflamed vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touching with the fingers.
and can well make the incision on this appearance and on the other parts. and it is that you cut the skin of the testicles, then lift the egg upwards, and scrape away the white scarabaeus beetle shell, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already bound with these new characters, then it is necessary that you loosen the egg and cut the skin.
and if it is hard at the scarabaeus beetle shell or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension and cut it again.
And if the birth of the scar is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then dress the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling a berry, with the softening of the testicles. and if the patient grievously complains when he walks.
and the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the one before.
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised stool, then put the suspensory ligament of the testicles down to your fingers. to all the vessels that are close to the penis, and tighten the master cord, and stretch them forth.
then cut into the scrotum with a wide, sharp knife in the middle of the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape off each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it at the first point where the vein came out, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
then dress the wound as you would other wounds that open up a bowel, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the testicles.
for by this, no harm comes, and if all the vessels come forth, it is necessary to remove the testicles from all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the route of the scarabaeus beetle shell The effects of this remedy are by the section that comes from the scarabaeus beetle shell or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, therefore the intestines descend into that route to one of the testicles.
and this route is either of the scarabaeus beetle shell or of the extension from it, and comes in these two ways due to many causes: either from blows, jumping, braying, or lifting a heavy burden, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is due to the extension of the scarabaeus beetle shell are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal all the way to the bottom, because the scarabaeus beetle shell presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the abscess, which makes sudden pain come to the beginning, and there are diverse appearances of apostemes under the skin near, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body at the end of the abscess.
And sometimes the intestines come down with the intestine, and are retained there, and make the patient suffer great pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron cures one should beware, because of this one must avoid them.
And the manner of work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place within the wound if it can fit. then be placed on his neck between your hands and lift up his hips.
then stretch the skin above and cut out all the skin of the scrotum from the long part. then push inside the leaves of the skin according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the bone can come out.
then scrape off the abscess that is under the skin of the scrotum until the white abscess core is exposed from all sides.
then put your two fingers in the place where the scrotum is, between the white abscess core that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second abscess.
and draw out what is behind the testicle, and between the second abscess; and then move your right hand into the skin of the scrotum, and stretch the white abscess upward to your left hand, and lift up the testicle to all the abscess towards the side. and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle up high and loosen what is behind the ligament.
and search with your hands if the intestine is wrapped around or encircling the white abscess core, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly below.
then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the abscess, which is after the skin of the scrotum; after the testicle, then cut off the strings that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the abscess, which we have said is under the skin of the scrotum, with a strong ligament from two parts. then wrap the strings around each other and tie them together from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an abscess should not grow. and put the ligament above according to the first long ligament, two fingers of that one, and after these two ligaments leave the abscess which is under the skin of the scrotum one finger's width.
and after all the rest according to the rounded shape that the testicle bears; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the scrotum, as long as the wound closes and the bowels, just as we have said before.
then apply moist linen soaked in oil to the wounds and put it on the abscess, and then apply the ligament that we have said. And sometimes the white abscess core that we have said is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood decoration.
For this happens many times, and leave the ligament until it falls away by itself; and if it does not fall off soon, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
In this vein I never saw anyone who dared to perform the iron cure.
And the ancients say that it is done in this way as if the vein were a bunch of grapes, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting into them slightly below.
then cut in the middle and cure the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and then cure it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Sometimes comes a rupture in the groin, just as we have said, and opens up the flesh; and none of the intestines come down to the scrotum, and if some do come down, it is little, and repair all hours.
and yet if it remains too long in this place, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestines come down.
and this happens because of the extension of the abscess which is in the groin, just as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen the flesh and opens.
and the cure is done by cauterization, just as we have said before; and sometimes it is not cured with iron in this way:
and it is that the patient lies upon his back between your hands, then cut off the swollen flesh of the rupture from the wide part according to the measure of three fingers.
and then extract the abscess that is under the skin which ensues, and take the rag and put it on the wound appearing from the abscess.
and press it deep into the belly, then cut off the two wounds appearing from the abscess on top of the rag, and cut one and the other.
and then take out the top of the rag, and do not cut off the abscess or extend the testicle or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the rectum.
and then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the strings, have him and cure the wound, until it is completely healed.
The abscess is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more helpful in this wound, and closer to salvation.
(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the contents inside are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary when one wants to treat it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts off the soft skin on top of the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess skin from the softened skin at three or four seams; then cut between the seams, and cure it just like other wounds, until it is completely healed, and the thread bleeds.
(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Now, you should know that chastisement is ordained in our law, and because of this, I would have liked not to speak of it in this book; and it is only necessary for two purposes: one is that the mirrors may respond when someone asks them what to do about a wound, and how to cure it; and the other is because we often need to chastise certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
Of hermaphrodites
Of hermaphrodites there are according to two ways of men: the one is that between the two testicles it appears as much as the figure of nature in a woman, with hair and sometimes urinating. And another way is in women, having on the finger as much as a member and two testicles. And the cure for man and woman is that you cut off the adjacent parts and cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, the men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles have no cure.
Of the tenia
The tenia is a worm attached to the natural part as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have as many as one hand's worth, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you tie back the superfluity of the tenia with your hand or onyx, and cut it lightly; and do not go too far in cutting, lest bleeding come from it, then proceed to another cure until it is healed; and there is another worm that grows at the mouth of the uterus, and fills it, and perhaps jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they called it "cow's disease" in ancient times. It is necessary that you cut it off as we have said for the tenia, and cure it until it is healed.
Of the hare
The hare is when the woman's natural form is not clear, or if the womb is small; and it is caused by birth or disease that has come to be; or it is due to a worm attached, or subtle or thick abscess, and is done in the uterus, sides, or below, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps also having flowers; and knowledge of this is through examination of the belly. If the swelling is close by, then you should hasten to it or go there. If it is a subtle abscess, and it is close to two books, then hasten quickly: take your two hands and join them together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then the two books will be formed, until the subtle abscess has been lanced, and the swelling subsides; then take linen, moisten it in oil, and place it on the swelling, and have the woman stay at home each day, so that she cannot sweat. And if the abscess is hard and thick, you should cut it off with a spatula similar to a mirt leaf. If the swelling is of born flesh, then suspend it from an onyx and cut it; and use medicines to stop bleeding, such as henbane, dragon's blood, incense, and other remedies; then apply a wide bandage of flax so that the wound cannot heal; and thus it should be done long enough, and then apply a linen tent; then be cured by other cures until it is healed. And when born flesh comes in the uterus, you should cut it off according to this manner, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For at the enchanted aposteme that is in the uterus, one must not touch with fire.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that burst without warning, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division what their similarities and signs are, and I will say here those which receive a cure. I say that hemorrhoids and hardness, when they are pierced in the uterus and there is no feeling, except for heat by fire. Those which are at the mouth of the uterus can be felt, and those can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, and then extract the hardened part with tongs, and cut it off at its roots, and then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as henbane and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomaceous bark and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back. And if it stays, that is good. If not, apply leeches to the back and breasts until feeling heat; then take linen, moisten it in plantain or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the swelling. And when the abscess subsides, cure the swelling with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, and it must be cut off as I have said for hardness; and then cure it until it is healed.
Of abscesses of the uterus
Of abscesses of the uterus
Of childbirth
It is necessary first to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman hastening downwards, and desiring to give birth; then the child hastens to come out quickly; then learn that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under its head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, then it is necessary to press gently on her belly so that the child comes out soon; for when it descends above its head, then the secondine is with it, and the cord is freed from its superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, and comes forth from the body or from the shoulders, or it may convert on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
If the child comes out above its head in natural issue, and the woman labors grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have women hold her; and mix her nature with oil or fenugreek, and then give the midwife to drink between her breasts the little spatula-shaped mixture whose form is this: and cut the secondine, and tie it to her finger as long as the moistors that are inside come out; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to catheterize the woman with fenugreek mixed with oil of sesame; then make her take hold and estrange of condiment, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child is out. And if both hands come out, then it is necessary that you tie them gently piece by piece; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up; then remove the stool from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall down; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then tie the hands to the knife that is before mentioned, and extract the child, and tie it equally.
Of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up. and then turn it piece by piece until it is even;
then take one foot and stretch it piece by piece.
Can it jump as far as the thighs, then command her to take hold, and make her estrange with condiment; if it jumps further, if God wills.
And if it is not further as we have said, then turn it piece by piece until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is easily so.
And if it does not come further as we have said, then take muscillaige of aloes, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in one mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and outside with this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to the waist.
and when she is moistened below, then make her a collar of mirre, and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her estrange and hold her mouth and nose, and gently take hold of her belly, for the child is now jumping. Of the issue of the child between its knees When the child comes in this form, then put the midwife's hands piece by piece.
Of the issue of the child which comes forth with one arm hanging down It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and walk.
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and straighten out her legs well.
then administer the muscillaige that I have told you about.
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand; and help the child according to its natural shape, and make her estrange, and command her to take hold until the child comes out further.
Of the issue of the child on its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife take her hand, then turn it piece by piece, and help it gently.
and when it is even, then put on the natural muscillaige of aloes and oil, as we have said, then command her to move piece by piece.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and command her to take hold; and make her estrange. of the same manner for all the secondine
of the same manner for all the secondine When it comes out in this way to all the secondine, then cut the secondine at your finger, until the moistors are empty.
and if the child turns its face and neck upwards, then cut it from the chin, so that it is not retained, and the child dies.
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to take hold at times:
Of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens. Two are an unusual thing, and do not live unless piece by piece.
I know that they are multiplied, and are deprived by the sinew which divides them, which is connected to the chin.
and sometimes they come out naturally as one under, as we have said.
If they heal well, then follow the treatment as we have said, and be subtle in the handling, and quickly and lightly do what she does. and do thus as it is worth for salvation. of many children
of many children At times they are formed in the womb, that is to say, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of an infant according to the measurement of the wise and glorious.
and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, because by chance similar things happen to her; so do according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman after a stillborn or miscarried child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to manual labor; so it is necessary that you know whether the woman has a healthy constitution, and whether she has had an accident or fears death.
so it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and have her knees inclined downward, and her legs lifted.
and the servant should support her with two parts, or bind her to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child.
then wipe the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and mixtures. then fill the womb lightly, then take one lead or fill the lacunar openings that are suitable for this purpose.
and take heed if the child is apparelled to descend upon its head; if the lacunar openings are in his eyes or throat or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs.
and if the descent is on the feet, then take hold of or pinch and tie the surrounding ligaments.
and it is necessary that you hold the lacunar opening in your right hand, and place the cord between your left thumb and index finger, and fill your entire hand lightly, and insert the lacunar opening into one of those places which we have said, until it comes to be empty.
then insert it opposite another lacunar opening, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that the lacunar openings are opened up, and let the lacunar openings be held open, as is its form.
And if one part remains, then anoint the midwife's fingers with oil and fill that part, and treat the other part.
and if there remains none, then put this lacunar opening or another one higher up, and do so until it all comes out fully.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to constriction. so it is necessary that you envelop on a cloth, until it all comes out.
then wrap it in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the issue, or has a sharp-angled skull assembled. so it is necessary that you fill the spine-shaped bone between your thumbs, and make the head and extract the sharp angle. or you round it with the instrument called "almidach", by which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus do the same if the child has a large natural head. and then treat the bones with pincers.
and if the head springs forward and it is strained at the forehead, so that they are split, until the moles which are in the issue come forth.
and if she cannot come out, then cut her into pieces to the extent that you can.
and if it is inflated in the belly or under the ribs, so it is necessary that you make a hole until the moles run.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is also light.
And if it is narrow in the belly or at the ribs, so it is necessary that you extract it to one cloth wrapped around your hand. and make the belly or the ribs, until the moles which are there run.
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, so anoint the midwife's hand with oil right up to the mouth of the womb. then fill one or two lacunar openings, and treat it further.
and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not seem necessary to work. rather it seems necessary to administer wet and greasy things. and the administrator should apply ointments, and put them in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, then administer what we have said in the living child.
and if one cannot, then cut him into pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said in hot abscesses that come to the womb.
and if hemorrhages of blood come, then put it in restraining water, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb had borne a stillborn child, then she consulted another one on top of that, and rejected the stillbirth of the other one. After a long time, an abscess came to her mouth and swelled so much that it burst open, and began great trouble.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not find a way to heal the wound.
I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I was very astonished, because the womb has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a stillborn child.
I cleaned the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman lived a long time thus, and suddenly a small piece of bone fell from her.
and I do not recall this chapter except because, when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to take care of it.
of returning the joints to their place
Here comes the form of the prescriptor, in which we write books; and to two returns for two joints of two lines. However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and should be the mouth of the wood one and a half fingers wide, and the edge of the trees one finger, and as long as one and a half palms. and between the two lines should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
and these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the joint to open when one turns the two combs.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of wood, ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers. and should have two joints two adjustments, just as you see, one palm long and one and a half fingers wide.
and when you see the joint open with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one footstool, her feet stretched out and her legs apart. then put the two adjustments together into the joint, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs. then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the joint, until the patient does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted and have multiple forms; and when the surgeons have prepared them, the work is done more quickly and the height of men increases according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her urine, and then make her pass water with condiments, and hold your hands on the mouth and navel. and if she passes it because of this, it is well.
If this is not the case, then take a pot, make a perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the joint, such as chamomile, rue, anise, and centaury.
all these herbs or some of them should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put one end of the pot or perforation into the mouth of the joint.
and let it steep until the vapor comes inside the joint; then make her pass water, as we have said. If the secondine starts quickly. And if she remains after this treatment and is not cured, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or mastic oil of aloes, and then insert it into the natural orifice.
and the secondine will be found; and when she has found it, grasp and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the joint does not collapse during extraction. but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and left, and then draw it out; it will come out and become dislodged.
And if the mouth of the joint is constricted, we have said the treatment for passing water and fumigation with herbs.
and if she is not cured by all that we have said, then be careful not to pull too hard.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the joint, you tie to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with ointment of four-pharmacized balm.
so she will be helped and restored, and comes out cured; but however, when she has passed it, a bad odor comes up to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Therefore it is necessary to do fumigations that are suitable for this: no ancient has proved the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is this:
And it is like to see something that resembles a cord, and one puts the thin head into the natural orifice, and the wide ends above the fire.
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and let it steep until she is satiated, and then start another one.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle membrane. Therefore it is necessary for the patient to pierce that membrane at her own finger's width, and not make it too sharp or pointed, and be careful not to touch it.
then put a moist linen on wine and oil, then the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put a perforation of cloth in the wound, and let it stay for several days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And whenever this stopping of wound or abscess comes, it is necessary to cover that stopping: if it is a wound, then be cured as we have said with the cloth of wool.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulation, and grow as those that come from above the foundation to be removed or in the space between the two parts.
if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture as white as milk or subtle bone.
and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by this that there is or ejection or windiness when the patient makes an ejection, and by chance one of them jumps forward.
And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to half of the penis; and they reach just to the jointure of the thigh, and just to nothing of the knee.
And thus one knows a persistent fistula at the foundation, and not a non-persistent one. and it is that you put your two fingers or foundation on the fistula and put a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if it has tortuosity, then put a tent of fine cloth or one horsehair strand there until you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
and if you don't feel it, and it doesn't come out by perforation or windiness or urine, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; if the wound hastens to heal.
And when the fistula is pushed through to the bladder or to the urethral passage of urine, and the urine leaps forth, and cannot be sewn together by medicine.
If it is pierced right to the crotch, then the tent comes up to the place. if there is no tortuosity and the cause of pain around it, then it is that it will go away below, and none of the medicines or poultices by anointing are worth.
and in these pierced fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and the vanity of foolish surgeons who meddle with them.
In that which is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts his legs up to his crotch, and has his crotch inclined towards his belly. then put a linen tent or one of iron if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then it is necessary that you put your two fingers there.
then sense that the tent has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh or fat, then know that it is pierced. if one does not work on it, then one cannot heal it.
One says however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely.
and the aid one gives there is that one scrapes off the subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as was said before. and put it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near to the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that those charred things are burned, which are like a bird's feather.
and then cure it with moist tents in butter, until those charred things come out; then cure it with anointing ointment releasing and binding.
If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, otherwise it cannot be healed.
and if the tent goes in and does not penetrate right to the skin which is on the fundament, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula at that point where the covering of the key begins. then scrape off from the beginning of the fistula, and put in ahead of the tent, and then apply the cauterization after, until it comes to the head of the tent.
and the tent will be delivered and fall off; then remove those charred things that seem like a bird's feather, and none will remain.
And if the blood flows forth, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
For the cauterizations of fire assemble two good things: that is to say, the burning off of those charred things, and the drying up of blood and the removal of moisture.
then cure it with moist tents in butter or in crushed cheese, until the flesh yields below, and the charred things that are burned come out from below.
then cure the wound with anointing ointments binding and releasing hard flesh, and they are the dried medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
And if the fistula comes right to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then put your finger or fingers on the fundament, and feel what's inside.
If you feel the tent, and between two is the cloth or fat or char, where it is near to piercing, then there is no doubt except the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you scrape it right to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
and don't go too far inward, lest you scrape the dwelling that holds the fundament, and the evacuations come forth unwillingly. then cure it, as we have said;
then cure it, as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it then, since it has been scraped below the fundament, either by tent or by another appointed instrument. then remove that charred thing which is in the wound, as long as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are in this manner: and it is when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the fundament near the skin above. so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form: And I put one twisted thread in two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced on the edge of the fundament inside, then draw out the thread from that puncture, so that you put your finger or fingers on the fundament.
and pull the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for one day or two.
and restrain it some times, until the threads cut through those charred things that are between them and are falling apart.
then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too far inward.
For it does not behoove to make a hole so deep and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like spinous thing from which one makes the fistula is very rough and uneven, one side and the other. and on the other side not, because of that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Bleedings are in two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and shortly after blood flows. and if there is one or more, and they are gone from the foundation and to the head of the foundation; but those that are gone have little moisture,
and again a little bit of yellowish water or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the cure for those who have them inside the foundation is that you instruct the patient to stretch himself in order to air in chambers, as long as the foundations are released, and the sons appear. so hasten, and hold it with pincers or grasp it with your fingernail, then cut into its roots.
and if the ligaments cannot hold due to their moisture, then take them up with a cloth, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of camel hair. and extract them to your hands, then cut, and powder over some hot powders that are in place of a cauterization. or you cauterize them as is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then purge the patient with a bitter and sharp laxative to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly.
when the patients are seized, and if their sons are gone from the foundation, then the cure is gentle. and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you bring the suture in this way: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw the thread above and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is of the width; and restrain the thread tightly, then tie the thread, extract the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to secure the excess blood.
then put a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the foundation, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave him until he has voided, and when they are finished, then anoint them with ointment and other cures, until he is healed.
of the drying of the flesh or foundation Many times it happens that the flesh dries in the intestine, and through natural constriction, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you remove the skin above with a spatula or your fingernail, which does not allow it to become moist. then cure him until he is sound as is proper.
and if he cannot heal, then continue the scraping more strongly than before, until he is fully healed and scraped. then cure him until he is healed.
of the trembling Fomace is a small appearance of abscess under the body, and goes deep in.
and sometimes the pus bursts forth, and it is felt just like a dead tremor, and comes throughout the body, more in the arms than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a goose quill or a strong turkey feather, and put that quill on the abscess, until the circles surround the abscess entirely. then turn your hand around the entire quill until you cut all around the abscess, and put it deep inside, and extract the abscess from its roots.
And if you see fit, do so with a file of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and drawing above.
but not pierce, to keep the edges together and pressing And if you see fit, then cauterize the abscess, as is written in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of the purgative Sometimes one makes a purgative of silver or archaute, or of melted or hammered iron; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments, according to how they are presented.
Those therefore which are presented in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the purgative, small and great, is thus broad, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and it has an opening or the belly is bound, as you see, and the sides are pierced inward; and has on one side two holes, and on the other one.
and the belly or womb is where one puts medicines in a bestial bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
and has between each hole one piece of spacing, then put in those holes one strong thread twisted from a true cord of 10 or 12 times around, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, then tie with a strong thread to the instrument ahead, then purge; and that's the form of the circle:
And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purgative with oil or egg yolk or something similar, then tie it lightly.
then instruct the attendants to hold it with their two hands together, until it is fully visible, then extract the purgative, and lift the patient's legs to the appearance.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then tie it so tight as it can be; and if he sleeps one whole night, then it is a greater help.
And if you purge him in the disease of windiness of belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then continue purging until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then the purgative should be as subtle as for a child.
and that's the form of the subtle purgative on which the skin is strained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where or what kind of wounds are made, and how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, cutting with sword and knife, or with lance or club or staff or seat, or similar things.
wherever they are done according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with wounds of the head that are simple, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from a stone or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of abscess warmth: if it does so soon heal the head wound itself, even if it comes from the blood of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
and instruct the patient to fill themselves with wine and thick meats.
And if he does not heal, then let his meat be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
and put on the wound, if a warm abscess comes, a moist cloth in rose oil alone, or in wine that is used to cleanse.
and if there is no warm abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air, which I will tell you about a little later.
and if the air has moved it, then put some ointments on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is great like a cut from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, just as I will say about wounds of the belly, with suture.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and putrid, and holds together only by a little, then scrape it off; then treat the wound with medication, and replace hard flesh instead of skin. and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as cooked brains and wheat, also like pigeons, and similar things.
And if you find putrid skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then scrape off all the putridity, and throw it away, then treat it.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which is not cut, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then stop the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread. and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put on this powder which dries immediately as soon as air has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of quicklime, and grind the powder finely, and apply the wound, and press it firmly, until it is well closed and joins all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it remain unbound, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one does this with quicklime alone, whenever one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but the air has moved the wound.
And if the air has moved the wound, and it is still in that state, then do not put on this powder at all.
but put on some digestive ointments, or pigeons made of wheat flour, water, and honey, until it flows with pus. then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers.
and I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, with no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it's the nerves, then there is no other remedy but to leave the wound alone and not put anything restrictive, for it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soft, like lime dissolved in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cook it also in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then puncture or probe lower down.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes from it, then open it up, tie it off, and cauterize it as needed.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes. so cut the gullet on the windpipe of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape. and then bind it securely, and let it be for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then take it out. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot have, until the wound has rotted. and let it be dried and lightened at the opening.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound of lance or dagger
If it's a wound from a lance or dagger, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of infection that the patient will die from: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then do not put on the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not penetrate deeply. and return to the heart, and kill the patient. but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
and if you don't have oil, then put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture
and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; if it doesn't come with spasm, nor bad trembling of the heart, nor signs of alienation; and when you see good conditions, then know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with poultices and other treatments, until he is healed;
and if it cannot heal or work, then know that there is a fistula; and cure it as one should.
And if the wound is from an incision by sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then cure the one in front of that.
if it is large, by sewing; and if it is small, by powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and treat the flesh if it is deprived. and if they are not deprived, then let the wound rot, so that the extractions will be lighter.
and for other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
from bursting of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestines or the membranes of the intestines spring forth, by which their introduction occurs;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a great one,
because therefore one returns to stitches the intestines in, if one does not put them back piece by piece; because the intestines swell at once as soon as they feel cold, so they return to their original place.
and therefore is the middle wound better, because one returns the intestine to its place as with others two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch of other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and although they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes, and a gentle thing is to put back, this is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner: soak an sponge or one linen cloth in lukewarm water only, or you heat it up in water with squinat and cypress and spikenard, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is good that it is only for deflation.
And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestine with water or let it be cooked in ale and honey. because by this it is lightened the entrance to a small thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little opening in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is good that it is cutting, that one should not cut without a great necessity.
and that's the instruments for cutting:
so cut inside the curvature and do not cut too far, and see then the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes further, so put it back according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, because this is good.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts so make sure that the injured part is higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to arrange what I say about large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, do as seems proper to you,
and then take in your hands one miserable minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and that is the common manner of stitching,
and that is the common manner of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound. then leave from the head of the wound a good two fingerbreadths, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two cheeks of the skin with the two points of the siphac.
then strain it with a double thread around the needle from both sides, and bring together the two cheeks of the wound harmoniously,
and then leave another good two fingerbreadths, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to how many needles you need. until all the wound is restrained;
and are the needles medium-sized, between fine and coarse. because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing.
and then cut the cheeks of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during sleep, and put tents or cloths on the cheeks of the needles to hold them in place. and leave them until the wound is sewn up;
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one needle or two can suffice.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you bring together the two thongs of leather and the two thongs of silk together with a needle, where there is one strong middle thread; and when you have pierced all these thongs three together,
and when you have pierced all these thongs three together, then pull the needle through to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews cloth;
and put a space of about the thickness of a lesser digit between each stitching;
this stitching is for men,
and I stitched a wound that a man had in his belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's breadth wide, and his intestines were torn two palms' breadth wide,
and the wound was inside the belly. I brought back his intestines and it had been 24 hours since they had stopped,
and the wound was healed just in 15 days, and I cured him, and he was well.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where you could not find any, nor any medicine; and I applied cotton twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was well.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle and wet it on one side from the outside to the inside;
when it has pierced the thread directly in line, then bring the end of the silk or costeau to where you have inserted the needle;
and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the pelterers make the furs, and that you leave once the silk on one side and then take it up on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly,
is like what some people do, who bring together the two parts naturally, and apply one end of the silk to the other end, in this manner:
insert a needle near the end of the thread and make it pierce only that one; and leave the two ends of the silk; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside to the inside; and leave both ends of the silk;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside to the inside, in two other threads of silk that are on the other side;
and this is the second manner of stitching and the most common.
Galien says that this phrase, and some witness it,
one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and knows that when the rupture is inside the belly, it is the stitching more difficult than for other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and the iron has changed its color, then put back the intestine and the bowels; then place on top of it the powder mixed with charcoal,
then put back the intestine and the bowels; then place on top of it the powder mixed with charcoal, and if the iron has changed its color, then put on some ointment that is present until the wound heals; and tie up the thread, and make sure the silk and thread are sewn together; then cure the wound as you would with others, until it is well.
and if you don't have medicine, then apply some cotton cloth, and move it two times a day until he is well.
Because you don't need any other medicine for most wound conditions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause community with the principal members, then it is necessary that you anoint the linen lightly with oil of temperate heat or with rose oil, and place it around the wounds and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or burning in his bowels, and this often happens, then cleanse him with black wine, and especially if the burning comes just to the intestine;
and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it's because of the thickness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the intestine bursts from the wound, then put it back in place as the intestines are, while it is still fresh;
and if it is old and has become yellow or black, then it is necessary that you bind the place that is black, lest blood should come from there. because there are veins and arteries;
then sew what is between the ligament, and leave the two ends hanging from the part below the wound until the intestine is extracted, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is rent, and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men,
because I saw that one man was wounded in the belly with a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was emission and flatulence;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not stop subtletizing until he was well, and the wound was closed.
And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient might have pain in his belly; and there was no more harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner: take fresh herbs from great roots, then bind the lips of the wound, and when the herbs have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips,
then put another herb after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and cover the wound. This treatment if done in the intestine and does not cause harm to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal,
in this manner: take the end of this intestinal thread that is very frayed, and then tie to the end of this thread a thin twisted flax thread, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it off in a knot;
and this way of sewing with herbs is not far from the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the intestinal grooves, then there is no remedy or health, except subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula", and even when it is hollowed out and runs downward.
And a fistula is according to the natural concretion of hard and white flesh, or one that does not cause pain. and it is also hollowed out like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes it runs clear down below, and at other times it is thick. sometimes little, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and has no scar, is not far from one of the eight causes:
namely, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to form; or because there is too much fluid; or the pus is rotten and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region is slow to digest and slow to heal, and flows by natural tendency; or because of veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies in medicine, in the division.
And it is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for a fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that a fistula can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sacrum, or intestine, or bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing except labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the point that I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and if you see it well, take a tent of iron or bronze, if the fistula is straight, and then pierce;
and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a subtle tent of lead. for lead bends and adapts to the curvature;
and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well search it with tents, so that you can catheterize it through one of the holes,
for the moisture so flows from one hole to another, and purifies it;
then pierce the wound as best you can, which you know whether there is bone or nerve, and it is hollowed out by design;
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and where he feels it;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is away from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then bind it according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, then bind it according to what I have told you, and cut away the bad flesh and corrupted scars that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well hollowed out in its right place, then it is necessary that you bind it tightly, as much as you can, then I put moist tents of medicine in aqua, and tie them just to the top of the fistula,
then I put moist tents of medicine in aqua, and tie them just to the top of the fistula, until the medicine consumes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then I put ointments of fresh flesh, as much as is needed, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. If veins or nerves do not grieve or harm the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it all until the corruption is gone. then treat it with things of fresh flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed and runs downward as before, know that you are not yet at the end.
so uncover and pierce until you reach the bottom, and cut away all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep within, and you cannot come to it. so there is no other remedy except through the natural course of things;
and if there is a small piece of bone corrupted and you can extract it with pincers, If one stretches it to one suitable instrument for this purpose,
and if there are many of them, stretch all the others too, and do not leave even one;
and if moisture makes you unwilling, and there is no error or fear, so cut and dry and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something that will prevent putrefaction, and leave it so that the flesh is putrid around the bones,
and then the bones will come out more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as one from the leg or hip, so remove only the corruption until all the marrow is gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is great part of the corrupt flesh, and it comes just to the bone; so scrape and cut all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is sound.
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
until the matters came to the leg and it was swollen with a great abscess, and there was no reason to delay opening;
but the doctors because of their foolishness opened too much so that the abscess burst open, and there came out a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and many pus-filled sores developed that all went with foul discharge from the body;
and many doctors tried to cure it for two years, and there was no remedy in the art of medicine,
so that I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the medicines by which it was being treated, and what flowed from the sores with great abundance; and the flesh of the young man became red and had a citron-colored hue.
I inserted a probe into one of those sores, and then searched all the sores,
and I found that some came together in the middle of the leg from all parts.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the sores until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupt and perforated, and the corruption came right to the bone inside.
I removed what appeared to be corrupt from the bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for what I had taken out;
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but it would not heal.
and then I repeated, and discovered the bone as before,
and I found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then took it out, and was anxious to set the place right.
but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's length of the bone, and brought it to its full depth. then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and sound quickly,
and there was no need to continue the work except for the patient's weakness, which could not bear. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For by the evacuation it often bled, but he was completely healed,
For by the evacuation it often bled, but he was completely healed, and instead of the bone, a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary from top to bottom, neither going nor coming.
and stretch the top so that you remove the corrupt flesh below. and uncover the flesh on the place where you see it needs to be scraped, so that the scraping does not harm the flesh. and place a hot iron or a heated table under the bone to remove the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to scrape until you can see and feel the corruption, and then scrape again.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, so uncover all the flesh; then place a hot iron underneath,
and then scrape from one part to the other the corruption, and be careful not to cut too deep into the corruption, just as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupt joint, and scrape the bone on the other side where it contains;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut out;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in the toe of the foot, then it is very strong, but nonetheless you must ask about this corrosion, how it appears; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you;
and know that the incisors and scrapers for cutting these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for that reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument according to the appearance of the work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
of fire The head of the shoulder can become dislocated either due to a cause within or due to a cause outside;
and when you have medicated that corruption with medicinal treatment, and it does not benefit. so you must cut off that limb to the point where the corruption comes; so that the patient may escape either by death or by the greater malice of the defect of the member;
so that the patient may escape either by death or by the greater malice of the defect of the member; and the signs are such that the members become black, as if they had been burned by fire. and afterwards it puts forth after the darkness, then goes on to corrode member by member. and takes throughout the body; if you hasten to cover.
and if this is due to the blow of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones.
if the corrosion is at the head of the joint, if it copes, and does not give space for it to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then copes at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then copes at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it's deadly. and there is no remedy against death except the quantity of his virtue.
and so it happens when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then copes at the other joint.
and if it comes to the foot, then copes all the foot. and if it goes up the leg, then copes at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to let the patient die by exhaustion.
and the manner of coping or sewing the member is that you bind it above and below. and stretch one minister's bond downward, and another minister's bond upward. and you loosen the flesh that is between the two bonds to one spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered.
then you cope or sew, and put one linen wrap on each side, so that the seam does not touch the sound flesh. and another wound and abscess follows for the patient.
And if blood flows out while you are working, then cauterize the place hastily. or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in such pain:
he had a darkness that seemed like burning fire,
and that corrosion came first to his knee of the foot, until it corrupted all the foot.
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to wrap the foot, and was healed.
and long afterwards the corrosion returned to his wrist of the hand, and he came to me.
and I put on him things that cause a reaction after the purging of the body, and he could not stop the corrosion.
and he said that I should cut off his hand, but I did not want to, because I had hope of causing the matter to recur. and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would not die. for the virtues of the man were weak; and he lost all hope and returned to his land. and he hastened to wrap his hand, and was healed.
and I have not told this story except for the reason that one may need it to do another deed.
At no time does an abscess form in a well-nourished body, and stays so long that it causes a great gathering of pus. and then bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the body remains empty, just like a vessel. and the skin that is above is as subtle as one delicate veil. and do not go all the way to the bone, nor all the way to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain".
but if it is so long that it comes right to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula".
and the skin is like this: you cut off all around that skin, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a veil. and does not heal due to its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in depth. and the skin is full of flesh, so wash it with a cleansing agent thus:
look to see if the abscess is large, and the pus that flows from it has a foul smell. then wash with Egyptian medicine made thus: take equal parts of aloe, oil, and litharge, and mix them together in one vessel over the fire. until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey. and wash the abscess, and stop the fistula; and leave the medicine in for two hours, then draw it off while sweating.
do this many times, until the abscess is opened and the pus is removed;
and at no time is washed with ash water. when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them.
then let it flow, and wash with it, until you know the abscess is well opened.
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water; then wash with water and honey or add a small amount of litharge to it. or wash with honey and sweet wine, for the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing. and the wine makes the skin healthy.
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the abscess is well purged, then wash with that which causes flesh to grow in it.
and it is that you take defined plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine. or wash with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments.
and if the opening of the abscess is small, and the catheter of the syringe cannot enter it. so enlarge it slightly with a piece of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment. or balsam ointment, until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, so close it and leave just enough room for one layer or the catheter to enter.
and if the abscess that flows pus is above, so cut it or make it lower than where it is. Since For if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, so arrange it in such a way that the bowstring runs to its lowest point as is.
and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, so arrange it in such a way that the bow runs slightly downward and does not release anything from the bow. and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
and bind it with one linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then cover the strong place on the breast of the nipple about a poignard longer than the first one, then anoint it gently with another cloth according to the size of the nipple, and place it on the breast of the nipple to lighten the bow, and do not remove the great cloth except after a few days once.
and that which is on the breast of the nipple, removes often to remove the bow, and know what comes from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a way that you see the nature that bursts forth on the breast of the nipple, so know that the breasts are already healed and approaching health;
and then loosen it in the morning or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, so change another cloth and renew the anointing.
And if the breasts emit undigested bowels after many days, know that the breasts are not healed. And if subtle poisons continue for a long time, do not despair of health.
for health is approaching. For there are men who slowly let the flesh heal in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested bowels burst forth from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healed;
and if the breasts are slow to heal and are distended, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as defined by anointing, for it contains a great part of vinegar, and this is the final medicine;
take defined anointing, and mix it with rose oil, and rise from equal-portioned old wine in substance;
then cook it and use it; and this same thing makes cooked honey increased, when defined anointing is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire; and then glue it onto a cloth, and place it on the breast, and never administer it after an aristologist's long time, and roots of lily celestial, which is also like flour of vetches and centaury;
and roots of lily celestial, which is also like flour of vetches and centaury; and use it in simples or compounds: grind them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the wound is prolonged, and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is prolonged, and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has gone deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or hardens the members, or forms ligaments; so apply the treatment of fistula, as we have said before.
of the apostema of the armpit
Pannicula is an apostema that arises under the armpit of the arm-pit of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it is ignored and one does not take care, then a foul apostema comes forth, and runs and discharges bowels until it reaches the root of the armpit, and by chance may run all the way.
and comes to corrosion right up to the bone, so that it brings a stinking pain, and is the joints of the toe wide, and is the color flush.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, so it is necessary that you cut off all the superfluity that remains of the armpit, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the armpit is healthy;
and if the armpit approaches the flesh inside, and begins to prick and break, so it is necessary that you put a cloth under the armpit that pricks the flesh, and tie it at the top, and cut off that subtle and delicate flesh, and put on the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove all.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it off and take away, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the toe corrupting, then cut it off in one piece just as it is said before. then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is inflamed, and bound up, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut the armpit of the scapula in a diagonal direction above.
and take care that the cut does not come down to the flesh beneath the armpit, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The toes that arise on some men's hands by chance are all fleshy. and by chance there is one where it has bones, and sometimes there is an armpit,
and none of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of the toes. That which arises in any toe of the foot does not move. and that which arises at the joint of the toe, by chance moves;
the cutting of one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
That which arises at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: it's better to leave it as is.
In one who is born or will be at the end of nine months, it is necessary that you cauterize the skin first around just to the bone. then cauterize the bone with a suitable silk thread for this, then care for it until it is healed.
The wounds that come from having to assemble come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary that you cauterize that wound, so that it may be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or wet cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of plank, until the flesh is sewn, as it should be.
If a wound comes to any of its two with the palm, then cauterize that wound as it is necessary.
Note: This appears to be the start of a new section or paragraph, rather than a complete sentence.
Veins are great swollen vessels full of melancholic superfluities that come to many members of the body;
and more commonly occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
It is necessary therefore that you administer to him sometimes purging of gall, and then heal the wound with basil.
The iron cure is according to two manners: one is by cauterizing and then drawing out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the wound and draw it out entirely.
The incision is according to this manner: first, arise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned. then restrain the leg of the patient from above the knee to the part below the kneecap; then cauterize the wound in one place, or two places, or three places, with a broad incision,
then lift and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtues can endure.
and then tie it up, and command that he eat meat causing black gall.
and begin the evacuation and healing again when the wounds are full and bad for the patient.
The healing of it is according to this manner: rise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs. then put it in a bath, and arise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the wounds;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cauterize the place near the wound from the top of the kneecap to the part below the ankle;
then apply the skin to its original place, and scrape off the wound from each part, until it appears when you feel;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems also like a white cord;
then bind the strip below, until it is lifted from the skin, and then tie it to its original place lightly;
then cauterize in one other place, above three fingers; then scrape off the skin over the wound until it appears. then lift it to its place, just as you did, and tie it to another skin, just as you did first.
then make another incision, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cauterize at the heel of the foot.
then draw it out and lift to the second incision; then pull it from incision to incision, until it comes out entirely, then cauterize.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then put an awl into each strong doubled thread; and tie and draw it out, and put below one strip, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out. and beware that it does not cauterize, for if it does, then one cannot draw it out or lift it, and it comes to harm the patient.
and when you have drawn it all out, then put a wet wool cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it awry, but do not cauterize it; and draw it out as we have said before.
then it is necessary that you cut it awry, but do not cauterize it; and draw it out as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which one cauterizes the vein is curved, and does not cut off, so that it may cauterize the wound.
and is of great curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut off the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Note: This appears to be the start of a new section or paragraph, rather than a complete sentence.
This wound is located in the legs, in hot and dry places where there are no herbs or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
and by chance it may occur in another part than the legs, and this happens because of the corruption that comes from below the skin.
as if a serpent or worm were to come forth inside the body, and then be enclosed between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation, then the swelling changes color and the wound begins to emerge forth like a root of a plant.
When the swelling opens up, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two and a half hands' width, and tie it tightly.
and leave the plank on the leg, and every time it seems to be getting worse, wrap it around the plank and tie it tightly. and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining portion around the plank, and do not cauterize its root until it has come out entirely. for if you cauterize it, then it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and corruption at that place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little until the top, and that none remain in the body.
and sometimes this wound is such when it is treated with five or ten fingers' width. and one man came to me, whose it was, and it issued from ten fingers' width long, and when you cauterize it, then put in one strip or peg, and pierce it right down to the bottom.
So that all goes well; and let the matter inside be emptied, and bring to the place medicines in sufficient quantity for some day, then care for it as abscesses.
And at this vein, many times apply rainwater, and similarly when it opens in the joints of the foot or foot. and it comes out much pus, and where it jumps rainwater; then care for it as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "disease of oxen", because it often occurs in oxen,
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes all through the body rising and descending. and it can be felt as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out.
and is caused by some sort of corruption of humors, such as those that come from vermin and serpents and lice and ascarids or the belly.
and one doubts about its malice, for when it goes through the body and mounts to the head and comes to the eye. by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and pulled out, then one cannot prevent it from happening again unless it is taken out.
so then it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong thread tightly.
then cut on top and pull it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it. then cauterize it with fire above until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it destroys the eye, as we have said.
and if you see it coming to the head near the eye, then hold a small cloth under it tightly, then cut on top and pull it out;
and it is necessary to use the patient with purging medicine of the body for the bad humors carried.
and beware of foods that promote corruption.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakkirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen this which I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and soon after, I saw it rise also like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, just like sharp silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little later it ran all through the body, until it came to the other arm.
then she told me that it was running around the body again, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed how she moved like that from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. However, I had seen many who had moved well and had their pain from one place to another, but never had I seen it, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered, and therefore this windiness appeared constrained;
and do not appear according to this reason in those who are sweet and have moist bodies and responded veins.
And when you see this disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then bind above and below quickly, and then cut on top until that constrained windiness comes out. and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
then use remedies that stop windiness, such as fetid pills and viper pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
The diversity of them is that there are some with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth. and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with fragments; and that which strikes in some member strikes in two ways: or it enters the main principal member,
such as brain, heart, liver, kidneys, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it strikes then in any part of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many conditions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and springs out the sac that is above the brain. It is when there is blindness and numbness and confusion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile. and by chance it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and by chance affects speech and voice. and bursts forth from the moist white wound resembling pustules, and springs out also like a bruise on flesh.
and if you see this sign, then hold back from curing, and pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and by chance the arrow becomes still like a pustule, and in it flows black blood, and comes with coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then you should not doubt that death is present.
And the sign of the arrow when it strikes the kidneys is that without foam or bubbles it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and they sigh deeply and seek cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the cover of the breastbone, it is between the little ribs; and pours out great gall and great pain and sighs; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if an arrow shoots or falls on the stomach, by chance some undigested thing from the wound may jump out of the flesh.
And if an arrow falls on the belly, and no fragment of the arrow passes through the intestine route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow falls in the bladder, and the urine leaps out and flows away, and the patient feels very painful: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the nape and the heel and the knee and the leg and similar members, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because of which you should act similarly.
It happened to one man whose arrow fell on the nose in the root of the night: I tried to remove it and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen in the fat of the eye under the eyebrow fold. and the arrow was stuck, and I could not pull it out except for the tip towards the tree. and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all of very light iron without ears; the wound was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I loosened the beard, and extracted it carefully until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I pulled out an arrow from one man whose had fallen in his belly, and I thought he was dying;
and then after 30 days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see one man whose an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound is closed above;
and the arrow remains inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural functions.
And if you see one other man whose an arrow has fallen on his face, and the wound is closed;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
And I pulled out an arrow from one of the king's princes, which had fallen near his nose, and was slightly declining towards the right side; and the arrow was stuck very tightly.
I was summoned to the treatment after it had been fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for it with great subtlety and did not feel it; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear. I thought that it was from the point of the arrow
I put on the area an ointment attracting and digestive, because the swelling did not occur; and the swelling of the arrow appeared.
and the swelling of the arrow appeared. I put on the ointment for many days, and the wound was resolved above, and the patient remained thus for a long time,
until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me. I put on the wound a medication of corrosive water for many days, until it was open.
and I tried to remove it, and felt the head of the arrow which was sticking in its place; then I inserted it into the opening of the wound by means of that corrosive water, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and passed well through the boundaries for three months,
and then it broke free from the wound and I inserted pincers on both sides and pulled, but it could not come out;
then I did not cease to extract and manipulate it with various instruments until I caught it one day with well-made pincers; according to the shape that will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the doctor judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your treatment according to what I do not say, for books cannot take it all.
but wise masters can well enough grasp small things and that which is present and lacking; nine works, and nine instruments, to the understanding of strange events that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of members where they are stuck unless it is by two methods: or through the path where they enter, or from the other side;
and that which jumps out on the side where it enters is an arrow entering fleshy parts and jumps out sometimes now.
And if it does not jump now, then leave it until the flesh is loosened around, and the exit is cleared.
and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it thus for some days, and move each day;
and then it jumps out, and if it does not jump, then pierce all around with a very fine point, until the flesh around is expanded, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is placed back into its position within the body so that it cannot be seen, then one must search for it throughout the entire tent. and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut until the wound is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow that hold it in place,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow that hold it in place, then remove the flesh that is stuck to both parts of the wound as far as you can; and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out; and be careful that you do not break the arrow, lest you pull it out more painfully.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the next day and pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding makes you contrary, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and put your mind to how you can pull out the arrow without danger;
or quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and put the patient in the shape he was in when the arrow hit him; for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot, then set him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or it reveals something about him, or the skin is swollen in the area where one can see or feel it accordingly;
then cut above, until the tongs can take hold, and then pull it out; if it jumps forward now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then resume the extraction until it comes out fully;
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it in with all force;
and if the head breaks off and you see that it needs to be administered again, then administer with one instrument sharp; so that the point of the arrow enters the edge of the instrument; and then push further;
and if the arrow is broken, then use one instrument with an entering point to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow hits the thigh or hip or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is close, and you can cut above, then cut.
and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the tongs used to pull out arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look at this shape:
And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of common veins of the body Of the veins through which one is healed, there are 31, and on the head there are 16.
that is to say: two jugular veins which are behind the ears, which are called the "herbeches"; and two arteries that are in two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and two jugular veins that are in the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip above the mouth, and these are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins through which one is commonly healed are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the shoulder, and people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side. and people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the femur. and it is the one through which one heals, which appears clearly above the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the ulnar and radial veins, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the crease of the right knee, and the second saphenous vein that is at the ankle of the left side; and the vein called "nisse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The healing of the veins that are after the ears helps with catarrhs of old and migraines; and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a strap. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent parts of the head: which then come to your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, then press down.
then take the lancet, and push it under the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand along all the vein above. and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two thumbs' breadth across, and make the blood flow out until you see;
then tie it up and bind, so that it is healed.
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The humor of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth old migraines, and puffy, and accustomed to obthalmia, and at the core of aged tears in the eyes;
and the qualities of the blood are such as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below thy thumb, and then signs to cut in;
then lift the key on top of the vein above thy thumb's index, and thrust the lancet below, and lift the vein up, and cut it, as you have done with the two other veins, and make flow of blood according to your necessity;
then free the patient, and put thy thumb on top of the vein for an hour, then put a cloth on it;
and then bind it tightly, and let it be until it is healed; and we have spoken of their incision and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The humor of the forehead vein is worth as much as the cephalic humor in ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for rousing.
and it is that the patient stretches his neck in twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then free the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed, and never once anoint with a broad bandage.
However, it is not necessary that the bandages be too thin; and the healing should cross, for the bone is near, and by chance breaks the bandages when they are too fine.
The humor of the two veins that are in the two temples is helpful to the eyes, and to the itch, and to the rousing, and to the oriol in the eye, and for diseases of the face;
and it is that the qualities of their humor are such that the patient stretches his neck in twisting without any bond, just as before;
then let it be, and let the humor of the crossbeams be a little bit long, a little bit wide, for there is no fat.
And if the bandages are fine, by chance they break; then make flow of blood, until you need it, and then bind on cloth, and bind it well.
The humor of the navel vein is worth for ague, and for unseasoned sode, and for diseases of the face, as in migraines and rousing that comes to the face, and likewise when it is ancient;
and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his navel to thy left hand, and take a thin bandage long, and thrust it between the two nostrils, in the space that is between them. for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too far in front, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, for it is soon restored;
The humor of the two jugular veins is helpful for the constriction of the spleen, and for the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for epilepsy, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and swelling.
and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient stretches his neck below one and the other, as we have said; and let the master stand on top of the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat,
then let it be done with the vein long a little bit widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is necessary.
then do it on the other side in the other vein, then release the bond, and bind the veins moderately. so that the patient does not choke; and let it be done until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the Humor of the Liver The humor of the veins of the lips above is helpful for ulcers in the mouth, and for the corruption of gums, and for cracks in the lips, and around.
and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient sits before you, and stretches his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and you recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest one from each side, and do it also with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
Of the Humor beneath the Tongue The humor of the veins that are beneath the tongue is helpful after the humor of the cephalic vein, and it's for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks down on each side to find a black vein:
then cut one and the other, and do not go too far in front, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the back which are commonly bled are bled according to two manners:
or by piercing with a broad mirtin bandage, or with an olive-green thin one as the back's trenches are called "anesil"; and they are broad and thin according to the breadth and constriction of the veins. The form of the mirtin bandage is very well-known, and it is broad as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are quite full of thick and apparent blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and that is the form of the olive-green bandage:
and it is more subtle and finely pointed, and it is for bleeding the fine veins, or where there is fine yellowish blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the breast, and in the stomach.
and it is fitting for the surgeon to bleed, and to beware of the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and blood comes forth, then it is fitting to stanch it, as I said. and he should not be grasping at the flame, but cutting like a silkworm.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it is fitting that you should manipulate it, and change another. or you want to make an incision on it, or you bleed in place of it the vein in the arm: it opens clearly. and cut into the flame like a silkworm, as we have said.
And if you know the location of the vein, then it is fitting also that you manipulate the arm, so that you touch the location as long as you recognize the pulse; then mark the location with a nod, and then bind the arm, and cut into the vein like a silkworm.
and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the location swollen, for it is of the artery: withdraw then.
And if you see it issuing upwards as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: hasten then, and put your finger on length, then remove your finger if the blood stanched, for many times this has happened;
if you bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be above fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the blood is not stanched, and it flows out, and medical help is not present, then cut into the artery if it opens up, for the head of it retreats; and stop the bleeding.
And take a slice of fustic, and make it thin, and take one half and bind it on well up to the other day.
if the blood is stanched, that is good; if not, then cure him, as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stanching is not grievous in more positions because of the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The vein of the basilica in the middle so helps that it treats blood from above the head and below the body. because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is fitting for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he goes too far in depth, and he finds the nerve. and it swells and the wound is grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then it is fitting that you should make incisions with the instrument like a silkworm; and withdraw the nerve as far as your power allows.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision long.
The vein of the cephalic so helps that it treats blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is fitting to bleed at the olive or myrtle vein, for it is the most safe of all veins, for it has no nerve or artery below.
However, it is fitting to seek out the lighter location, and do not cause any harm if it does not work the first time, and one renews. and by chance the locations swell in some men, when one fails the first time, but it does not cause harm. The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
The first thing you should know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not ordained for anything except to preserve health.
and to prevent illnesses from coming; and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are on the neck: that is to say, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic. and one should bleed at the beginning of quartans to gain, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
The bleeding that is ordained for illnesses has no fixed hour or time, but whenever need arises by day or by night, in all hours and at all times.
and it is not fitting to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is carrying more than four months up to the seventh month. Nor should one bleed those who have passed 60 years of age.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, then it is fitting that they should cleanse their intestines with a light clyster. if he has many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not draw out from the intestines the superfluities which are harmful to the principal members.
nor should one bleed someone who is too full of meat, or drunk, as long as it remains so, nor those who are dropsical.
and beware of bleeding after colic passion, and vomiting, and purging the stomach, and frequent lying with a woman, and travel, watching, and fasting, and all that comes from the virtue or by something of the arm or body.
then subtilize the humors, if the blood is thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then take a bath, unless something hinders it, to subtilize the blood.
and make an incision in the vein of the navel around the third hour, as we have said;
and keep that day from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
and be light-hearted and joyful, and let the bleeding be higher than the one who is being bled, and apply a compress to the arm two or three times.
then manipulate the ligament above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
and then apply a compress to the location with your hands, until the veins swell and one can feel them.
then moisten the bleeding with a small amount of old oil, and then place your left hand's thumb on that vein below the location where one wants to bleed. The vein does not flow and fails to bleed when cut. For there are veins that flow like strings at the surgeon, and those that are full of windiness. so when you put on the flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus you are among those.
and if the vein is too narrow, it is too tight a wound, therefore it is necessary that surgeons be advised in these matters.
And if the vein opens at first, that's good; if not, then it should be reopened a little below or above quickly, if the swelling is not excessive.
And if the swelling is excessive and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm. perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter the bath, then resume the treatment if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then trust in that same opening to let out all the flame correctly.
and work a little quickly, while the swelling is occurring; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the swelling growing, do not reopen the wound, and put on a little bit of oil, because it lightens the body's blood, and is good in this swelling, the oil that the linen wraps.
and thus administer the oil-soaked cloth in each wound that you treat veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing makes triple and double vision when you put it on the swelling; then subtly the blood flows out and separates when it becomes too big.
And if a large abscess comes forth, which often happens, especially when it is not treated right away or the opening of the vein is small. so hurry and put on the swelling a moist sponge in water and a little hot oil, and hold it for an hour.
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if there remains at the swelling after some days any blackness or greenish color, then it does not harm. and if you see, put on something of aloe or myrrh mixed with calamine, paste-like or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance of the wound at the basilica; then put your hand on it, and if you find the swelling soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance. Therefore, do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance the artery is cut; but make a dry poultice to harden the swelling, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity of virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for him who is full and fat, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and the incisions be wide.
and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and have him heal little by little and often, and one should heal him by cutting across, not piercing.
and this manner of healing is safe from bleeding and numbness of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
And for him whose body is weakened by the healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in juice of green apples; if he is feverish, treat the blood three times or four.
And if he has a cold complexion, moisten his bread with murmured syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickweed, and well-scented syrup.
And if he pukes after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of charcoal and subtle scented syrup.
and use the other things we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to stretch out his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
And if he wants to stretch out his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or in 9 hours.
And if he wants to heal from another part, then he should heal on the second day or third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already fevered, and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening until it reaches the pelvis. then you will fulfill all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come instead of the pelvis. and this often happens when the surgeon is negligent;
and it is not necessary when you see that the arm should be loosened, and blood should flow out the second time, and the opening is closed, unless you press strongly upon it. unless he is bent, let him stretch out his arm quickly, for that would be bad;
but let him leave it until he heals the second time; or you can put at the tip of the flame until the blood that is frozen at the vein's opening flows out. and put on a little bit of oil mixed with water, and press on it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it tightly until the abscess is calmed down.
And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, let him heal in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein inside the arm is healed in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the scab becomes red.
then it should be bound loosely, so that the vein appears well, and then he should heal now across, not longwise or widthwise.
and let the opening be wide, and let it heal well near the joint of the hand, and if there is still blood that cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, then do not put your hand in hot water, for it will get worse in winter than in summer;
and the blood of this vein is more preserved than all other veins, for it has no artery or nerve.
The blood of the wrist vein on the right hand is worth to all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
strain your hand and put it in hot water, until the vein is emptied, if you can see it; and if the blood flows across, and you cut from top to bottom, then nothing hurts;
and do not go too far inward, for the nerves are below all the fatty flesh,
and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have let the blood flow as much as is needed, then put oil and a ligature on the vein to close it quickly, and do this for each one.
The blood of the wrist vein on the left hand is worth to the disease of mice, and do it just like I told you for the right.
The blood of the saphenous vein is worth to all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the uterus, and retention of urine, and disease of the kidneys, and of the old thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its blood is that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks. and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and many veins go above the foot.
then let it flow through the larger vein or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
And if you let it flow above the foot, then be wary of the nerves that are below, and let the blood flow across as if cutting; and let there be no swelling.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the bleeding fails the first time, then try again the second time above a little bit, for the flesh is salty; nor doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do it equally with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its blood is worth to the pain in the groin, when it's for hot blood.
And the quality of its blood is that the patient enters or bathes and stretches above the ankle 4 fingers in twisting,
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then let the blood flow in all ways you can, and crossing. and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very responsive to many people.
and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very responsive to many people. And if you do not open it, then let the blood flow through any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be wary of the nerves.
and let the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
(I'm assuming this is a new text to translate)
Ventouses are made of horns, or of clay, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by piercing and attracting blood, or without piercing.
And this ventosation that is done without piercing is in two ways: either it is all-consuming, or not consuming at all;
and two others in two sides of the neck; and the ventous below the chin; and the ventous on both shoulders; and the ventous above the knees; and the ventous in both arms; and the ventous in both legs; and the ventous in both ankles; and the ventosation does not treat of blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh,
and therefore one should not weaken it at all, just as one does not bleed a vein. and it is not fitting that she be administered, whether all-consuming or not consuming at all, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body has been emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for habits, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and there are some who suffer from repletion and redness on their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are some who suffer from a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit up blood; and there are some who imagine, and see through bloody pus, and hurt, and death, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The bleeding of the nose also helps in the alleviation of headache... that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body.
and this bleeding is in place of the bleeding of the cerebral vein,
and it is not fitting for someone who has a cold complexion to bleed, or who has catarrh, for this would cause them great harm.
and therefore it is not fitting for elderly people to bleed, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And one who often recovers from this becomes forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the ventous a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The bleeding in the neck is in place of the bleeding of the head and of the basilar vein, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the stomach, and for the rupture of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion;
and it is necessary to apply a little pressure, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause forgetfulness or constriction of the stomach and heart.
The bleedings on both sides of the neck are useful for headaches, and for obtalmia and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth,
and it is in place of the bleeding of the basilar vein; and it is necessary that you command the servant to stretch out his hand when he puts it, so that he does not touch the artery, nor let the blood flow down.
The bleedings below the chin are useful for mouth diseases and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the bleedings of both lips.
The bleedings on the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The bleedings of the sides are as effective as those of three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and command the servant not to pierce too deeply in front, for the flesh is thin and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
The ventous on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the ventous be large and made of clay, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it would cause great wounds.
The ventouses on the legs are cleansing in appearance, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urine, and restore flowers; and they are in place of the two shins and two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring about numbness in many dispositions.
The manner of applying the ventous is that you apply it first empty, and then suck in a temperate manner, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then pierce, and remove the ventouses, and take heed to the disposition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to prick only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to make fine the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is extremely thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we are only satisfied with one attempt.
And if we want a lot of blood, we often recommence; and if the blood is thick, we pierce to the depth, and then it is that the heart is pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard, and who have wide pores, that you anoint the places of the ventouses with oil that is appetizing and dissolving: if it's in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
and if it's in winter, with oil of wormwood, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
And if the person being treated has soft skin and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil.
but it is necessary to wash after the vaporization of rose water, or cold water, or water of wormwood, or water of citron melon, or water of porcelain, or similar.
And he who has much moisture, if he rises easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have great surpluses rise with old wine, or water of sage, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not necessary to wash with a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after the vaporization.
and it is necessary that he washes when he must be vaporized and when he is being vaporized. And beware of those who are curing themselves are choleric, and the skin is too red and inflamed; so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green apples and endive and lettuce easily, and similar things;
and honeyed plums, and mutton, and moist meat.
And those who have a cold complexion, if they take syrup of honey, and aromatic wine that is between old and new, and honeyed plums, and honeyed plums, and small birds and quail.
and the day when he will be vaporized, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before the vaporization, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the skin be refined, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The poultices that are applied without causing pain are those that are applied to the liver, and on the back of the neck, and on gouty joints, and on the belly and navel and kidneys and buttocks, because these members do not tolerate being struck or pounded.
and one only does this to attract blood from member to member, as we put it on the breasts when the baby is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put poultices on the belly and navel to reduce the swelling of the member.
and it removes the pain when there is inflammation or piercing, and by its attracting virtue, it happens to remove the inflammation, or dislodge the piercing from its place.
and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and back of the neck when there is retained vaporization.
and these poultices are administered empty to suck only so much; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes flat and cold water.
such as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the poultice with warm water only, or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
And it should be two fingerbreadths in width and half a palm deep, and have on the border around the middle one small pit, just as if to hold an awl.
and it should be of earth, soft before so that it does not wound the patient when applied to the member;
and have in the middle a rod of crossing earth or iron, to put a candle in place.
and they should be great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and for thin ones than for fat ones.
And one should thus place this poultice on the member:
take the candle of wax or a linen thread, and place it inside the poultice across the rod that is inside the poultice. so that the light is at the bottom of the poultice, so it does not burn the patient.
and then place it on the member, and the two edges should be on the pit that we said, so that when one wants to, the steam goes away, and one removes the poultice.
and take again the linen thread just as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
In the poultice then which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, it has only water and no rod or pit, and is applied only when it is full of water, and is placed on the member alone.
and this is the form:
Syrups are administered only in members where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts. and in bare bones, such as the joints or nipples, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find syrups that are in sweet and pure waters without adulteration, then take them;
and put them in a vessel of sweet water, until they are well known and have nothing in their bellies. and then be bled by vein and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the syrups;
and when they are full and sweet, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put it there, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, then lift the joint easily, and then with water, quite well, and then stretch it;
and if the joint becomes too sore after the application of the syrups, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and place it on it, until the swelling subsides.
and if the swelling is greatly increased, then apply a poultice of vitriol dissolved, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it subsides.
or you put half a handful of peeled broad beans on the joint, and leave them until they have absorbed into the joint, it will now subside.
and if you need more of it, then take other syrups.
and if the syrups do not wish to be taken, then wipe the joint with fresh blood, or drive an awl into it until the swelling goes away. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will absorb.
and when you see that they are discharging, then powder on a little bit of aloes and saffron dissolved, or ashes, so they will now sweeten.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fracture and dislocation.
Listen, dear son, that the foolish mirror sees nothing in this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor read a letter.
and because of this reason is estranged the science in our land, for I never found any good.
and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habituation of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of instruments that are presented, just as I did in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, summarizing the words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remaining on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and learn it from others.
I say that when breakage or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, unless something else entirely takes over, such as weakness of body, or childhood, or old age.
or if the weather is not very cold or too hot; and mild choleric diseases, that is to say, cold fits, and flesh of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor indulge in fatty meats, and do not overfill with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain about aposteme hot or spreading matter to a member; then restore the patient to their original good governance which they have used.
And when the broken bones begin to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that make thick nourishment, or if they have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and pork belly, and beef, and fresh fish, and good wine, and similar things. For with thick nourishment the breaks are repaired more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of old people and decrepit ones cannot be well taken up or soldered according to their nature because of the weariness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but don't worry, reset the broken bone with one thick splint that sets and joins the member together, so long as it strengthens to what it was before; and don't let it fail in its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish it with thick foods, such as we have said.
And know that broken bones are diverse in many ways.
For the breakage of the head is one thing, and the breakage of the breast or leg another, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking. For there are breaks that occur with twisting, and others with bending, just like the cutting off of a quill to write.
For there are breaks that occur with twisting, and others with bending, just like the cutting off of a quill to write. And if it is a break with wound, and a break with a small crack in one piece.
And each kind has its own device, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings into its place;
and is known the break of the bone by what the joint is twisted, and appears well by the absence, and sounds under the pressure of the hand.
and when there is no twisting nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
but it may well have twisting, or crack, or small break. So do not move him with your hand, but put on the medicines that come later, and then strain him gently now.
And know that the breaks that occur in twisting, and are the two parts dislocated, it is necessary now to bring them back into equal alignment, so that cold apostemes may not come.
and if hot apostemes come, then leave him alone for a day, until the apostemes are appeased; then set him back in alignment with the joint that you can do gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this one is more gentle than the restorations of those who have pieces; then strain him, as it is necessary afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is small members, or with two strings, or one string and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are disarranged, then reset by all means the additions in their places at the joint that you can, and take care that through your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then dress it beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who bring about hot apostemes and contractions in the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in place, then chastise well the patient so that he does not move it, neither while watching nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it into such a condition that it feels no pain.
For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it into such a condition that it feels no pain. and take care that it is set correctly, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small members, such as fingers and toes and similar ones: then it is necessary to envelop them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: then it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and strong linen cloth, for the broad cloths enfold all the great member and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no flaw.
then wrap it with light cloth bandages, three turns or four according to the member, and restrain your hand slightly at all the linen, then go above the break and restrain less, so that the break will move away a little from the break;
and soften the linen a little by little, until you take up a great part of the healthy joint, then take another bandage and wrap it around again above the broken joint;
Then go to the part below the break, and strain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then put between the stitches strips of linen or cloths, until it is completely even, then bind all together with one bandage, and then place well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing for the abscess hot, which removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days;
Then strain on top of the splints, and be made of half a long willow branch that has been split open, or of boxwood from which one makes hinges, or of palm tree strips, and be in accordance with this shape:
But it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the break be a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
and be also as long as it is needed for the limb, whether small or large;
Then strain on top of the splints just as you did in the first lesson, then bind above with a thread smoothly, as in the first lesson above the break;
The tighter it is up there, the looser down here; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of fine linen.
For if the thread is thick, like I've seen the works of fools who make their bandages from twisted linen cords, and that's a great error, for the binding cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have between each splint less than two inches of space.
And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after straining in their joints, then put beneath them strips of linen or shorn wool, so that he does not get hurt.
When the wound is with the break, and the ligaments are torn, I will say its treatment hereafter.
And know that it does not need to strain all broken limbs with splints on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it does not need to put splints except after five or seven days, or more according to your security about hot abscess happening.
and behold here the manner of ancient ointments to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common manner of the ointment restoring the break in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Another manner of ointment restoring the break and dislocation and twist: take 10 parts of absinthe, laudanum, and aloe, and 5 parts of gum arabic and myrrh; mix with 8 parts of aloes, and grind into powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, then use this ointment, for it is of good composition, and will quickly restore broken bones, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of ointment that is worth for twisting: take myrrh and gallnut, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 8 parts; aloe juice, 6 parts; Armenian balsam, 10 parts, and grind well, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer.
Another manner of ointment for joints and bones that are out of their places, and soothes the pain that follows, and is used to shape the bone and break: take new wool, and soak it in olive oil and warm water, and put on the joint. These ointments do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly remove pains.
Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig and leaves of terrestrial poplar, and grind together, and make an ointment.
Another manner of ointment for the restoration of bone break and to ease the remaining abscess. Take root of gallnut, chamomile, violets' flowers, and wheat flour, each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another manner of ointment stronger than the first one, when abscess persists in restoring the member. Take roots of gallnut, and flax seeds, balm, melilot, and sanicle, and violets' flowers and chamomile's, each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything except a wax and oil mixture, and nothing more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, things slightly warm and dry, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of ointment that is worth for lesion and pain: take myrrh and human hair or bird feathers, and gallnut, and mix them equally, and grind into a powder, and make an ointment and bind it.
And then loosen the bandage a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, do not loosen the bandage for many days.
And if pain comes to the joint, or pruritus, with no rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen the bandage, and remove the ointment now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge it into water, and lift up the joint, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind with a nut, until you are sure of hot abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member subside, and let the pain be removed, then resume the subtle binding, and a little ointment, and do not strain it so strongly as before; and bind subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is gone and red, and pain and swelling are all removed, and you need to apply ointment and binding again, then do so, just as you did initially.
If it does not come to the member what we have said, then do not release it except after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, as one sees, until the bone is set, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh on.
Then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come. Then take hot water and bathe it, every time you release it, and do so each day, and slacken the bandage a little.
By this work, the nourishment is cut off from the member, and I hasten to correct what foolish doctors do, who leave the member twisted: that's bad, and it's a perilous job, and I see no other way than to tire oneself out and work correctly.
of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breakings and various forms, and the causes are destined;
for there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone takes away all the bone up to the sacrum which is below the bone, as happens in hack or fist; and for this reason it is called this manner of breaking "hack".
Or the sword cuts through the bone above, without piercing it, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakings is great or small.
And if there is an enclosed percussion, or splitting or cracking of the collarbone, or falling onto stone, or falling on top of stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent breaking which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound is reunited with the bone as fine as a hair, and the splitting is small, and for this reason it is called this breaking "capillary";
and if the wound is made or caused by piercing with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and the bone splinters as blacksmiths do when they heat up their forges; so the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have or have had moist bones, as in children's skulls.
and happens with all these ways of breaking where small pieces are separated like that, and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all ways of breakings by the pulling away above them, and the inquiry made by probing, and through the corrupt flesh that is on.
The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then the black breaking appears.
In the treatment of the breaking, take note of the patient's accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar conditions in many dispositions, then it cannot be cured without a doubt.
And if you see no unbelievable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day of the moon that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, lest the skin below the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
And if the breaking of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the part that is split in this way: and it is that you take hold of the patient's wounded head, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as gently as you can.
and if bleeding of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess appears, then give what is needed, and it is that you fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and be assured of bleeding of blood; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work: one manner is that you cut in a narrow trimming before, and this is the form:
And then put in another trimming larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have various trimmings of different lengths, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and in working lightly, that you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and rough, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer trimmings with tapers, not too deep lest they go through the bone of the skull, and should have above the point a margin or a circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes in its own place to the edge of the bone, so that you have tapers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tapers:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one taper on the bone and turn it to your right as long as you know the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another place a little later, and do this all around, then cut off the edges of the bone which are between the pits, and make it more subtly than you can, lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacrum.
And when you have the bone pierced and trimmed, it is necessary that you take the remaining edge of the bone to all one other instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more taut and more subtle than the other incisor.
and if there remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with liniments and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which the Gauls say, who is more sound; and he binds it very tightly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the breaking appears moles; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, whose form is:
And do not cut one way only, and the part being cut is in two sides, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly scrape all around the bone, and take good care of the skin underneath.
If it is applied to the bone, then lightly scrape away, because one scrapes well without harm, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the skin, and the bone is scraped away only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and scrape off the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
Then scrape with great scrapers, and after with more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other subtle cuttings and breakages, it is necessary that you bring cause according to its direction; and this is not something that can be easily learned by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another piece of linen doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not further inflame the wound, then apply above one more layer of linen, and do not strain it too tightly except until it only covers the wound.
and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed down, then loosen it and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and apply medicines again without biting.
and watch so that the wound is soon clean, and do not leave any ointment there, nor allow bowels to gather beneath the skin of the brain, for when bowels assemble above the skin of the brain, they will flow and burst forth, and great harm will come to the patient; for when one places something biting on the wound, it will harden above.
Therefore, take heed if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, which is doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing worse comes forth except through the medicine that one has put on, and that such virtue exists, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one piece of cloth, and place it on the wound. Then apply the treatment in the manner of treatments that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one only by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, except it causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your little finger or pertus to the neck, and insert that break into your finger's index, and push it gently back into its natural place until the neck returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and watch that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot be brought back to its place by the finger, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the top of a small rod.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it in the same way, and hurry to restore it as soon as possible, if you can.
if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed down, then bind a cloth around the neck, trying pieces of linen, if the break is in one part.
Or you bind another piece from the other side, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the pores of the neck.
And certain restorers say that the tents should be soaked in butter, and changed every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they are soaked in a concoction of egg white, and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage has been toughened.
And sometimes one binds an oyster shell to the neck instead of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and keeps the break together, and blows on the patient's breath between; then do what you see.
And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working there, then put a poultice or damp cotton in rose oil, or in a small quantity of daguanion.
And if an abscess does not come, then put a poultice in the back, made from wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place it on light cloths, and do not bind the neck.
and if the break in the neck is small and has been broken into small pieces, then pull it out with suitable instruments for this purpose, then sew the opening, and apply cures that bring forth flesh and bind together, just as with poultices and ointments suitable for this.
and if there is no wound within the neck, then apply the treatment of tents, and put leaden cauls on it, until he is healed.
(The text continues with a new topic: "On the dislocation of the jawbone")
When the jawbone is dislocated below, and there is no wound beyond, and the break is only as far as the coronoid process, and it is not broken in two, except for the coronoid process, then one can tell this lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part of the jawbone, that you place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left side of the mandible, then place your index finger from the right hand, and gently push the break back into its original position using the other hand.
And if the break of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you apply an extension of two parts, until it becomes equal.
And if the teeth are moved or dislocated, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a poultice, and put on it a double cloth; and put on the cloth a large strap well made, or a piece of leather equal to the jawbone, long and wide according to its shape, and tie it as tightly as you can, and command the patient to rest, and give him light foods.
If thou seest that the figure changeth, then loose it on the third day, and then put back to point what hath changed; and put upon a plaster, with powder of mill with abundance of egg or farina of wheat, after thou hast removed the cerote; and put upon a light linen plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the disposition of the patient changeth not, leave it thus until he be healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess breaks out, then apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, remove no part of the bone that has been taken out; but rather, with suitable instruments, extract it carefully.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by fire as needed.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then cover the wound, if it is large, and put on one of the plasters suitable for this, to stop bleeding, until he be healed.
of the forceps The forceps breaks many times before the shoulder, and the break is in three manners: either it is broken and separated into two parts, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the aid that feels the forceps broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then set the break evenly with your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or deformity.
And if you need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded sphere made of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your need; and stretch and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you set the break evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps to the outside because it is deeply embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatreil, and puts a pillow under the shoulder; and have your assistants press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
And then direct the break to your hands, and if you find it debris-covered, then it is necessary that you cut through it; and pull out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then use one of the cutting instruments you have; but put this instrument under the forceps to protect the surrounding tissue.
and resembles a spoon, and is not at all rough, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, with one being wide and the other being narrow, just like the edge of the wound that you made when you broke the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then cover the wound, and if the edge is small or you doubt that it is a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloth and tents according to its size.
And if an abscess breaks out, then soak one cloth in rose oil and azime and wine, and put it on.
The dressing of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of mill powder and abundance of egg, and put light cloths on top, and place a sphere under the armpit, if you need to. Then take a very wide band of palm width, then put one double cloth on top of the cloths and plaster; then take a thin roll of three fingers' length and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band is hanging. and place the roll on top of the break, and turn the band around the neck and under the armpit healthy, and under the armpit patient; and reset each part, and when you see that the linen holds the break well and you clearly see that the roll does not move above the broken bone, then leave it for each day, and when the linens slacken, then restrain it.
and make the patient sit on his backside, and place under the armpit when he sleeps a small pillow to lift the aid upwards; thus it will ease the break of the forceps by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie unless bad accidents occur, until 20 days.
then reapply the plaster if you see that it is needed, and restrain and leave it thus until he be restored; and she is restored in the most within 28 days, and less to some men.
of the break of the shoulder
Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes wide and does not meet, and there is no swelling except by touch; then prepare according to the figure of the break, and reset according to its natural form in all ways you can; then put on top of the wound powder of mill with abundance of egg, and light cloths, and put on one double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle roll, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are knots under the roll anywhere on the shoulder, then use those knots to tie up with linen cloths so that the roll stays evenly; and then restrain it tightly with a large band, so that the roll does not move from its place, and check the band each day; and every time it becomes loose, then restrain it again, and put the roll back in its original position if it has moved away from its place, and have the patient sit on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is complete, then loosen it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that gets loose easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and points under the key, then do so, and extract it, and do what we have said about breaking off an abscess.
of the break of the chest
The chest is sometimes broken inwards, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often to the outside. And when it is broken inwardly, then declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, lacks air, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the knots in the broken bone, and it is felt to be so.
And the restoration is that the patient sits on their backside, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly places it evenly in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plaster and cloths above the subtle roll with salt or other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the band around again, and restrain it well, and reward each hour with linen, and if it becomes loose, then restrain it again; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the wound, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and remove the plaster, and address what has come from the ways of cures; then reset the plaster, and restrain until he is healed.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs does not come except in stout men after the back and at the top inside, and do not bend except because they are pliable; and one knows this well through examination by touch.
And the remedy is that you put equal pressure on the break, just as it should be. And then apply an ointment, and hold it with a small stone, if you need to.
And if the breaking of ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and piercing, just as from a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and he swears oaths, and vomits and spews great abundance of blood, and this is a grievous health, and the ancients have attributed great skill to it.
And if one says that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push back the break outwardly.
We do not do so, unless a hot abscess comes to be. And if it has come, then let it heal.
And some of us say that one puts poultices on the place, to draw strongly, and this seems like reason; however, there is doubt whether the poultice attracts the superfluities to the place due to the weakness.
And some of us say that one should cover the place with a wet cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put equal pressure around, then be cured through the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone that pierces the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut on top of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath one instrument to ward off the syphilis; and then one must file down the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with ointments until he is healed. And if abscesses come, then place wet cloths in rose oil on top of the abscess; and cover the area; and care for the abscess as necessary, and be cautious over the ribcage where it is, until he is healed.
of the breaking of the neck
Sometimes the break occurs at the bone of the neck, and then it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands soft, swollen, and dead, and cannot move nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they become numb and feel well when one tightens and pokes them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies care.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are soft, and if the accidents are in the hands, and on top of the back there is windiness and vomiting without willing it; and when one has vomited on their stomach, there is vomiting without willing it. And when he is treated on his back and wants to settle, but cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not bother with its cure.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is easier.
And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, by putting rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine, until it is calmed; then put a comforting and drying ointment on top, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed. And if some bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to cover on the joint; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then cure with ointment releasing flesh, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", then put your handkerchief from your left hand into the other hand to your power, then put the ointment and stone on top, if you need it; then hold it steady, and if there are dislocated bones, then set them, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the hip bone
Not often does the hip bone break, and if it breaks, then there is not much diminution at the top; and it becomes long, and declines downwardly, and comes to the patient with pain in the place, and piercing, and swelling up what has broken.
And the remedy is that you stretch out your hand to it, so that you are above the break; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then put equal pressure on that break, until it returns to its natural figure.
And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break becomes apparent to you. And when you have put it back in place, then apply an ointment, and then put a wooden or bone instrument on top, and steady the break so that it does not move; and fill the area below the ribs with something, until the sides are equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them, until the hot abscess is calmed, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and steady it as needed, unless there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the cut and the head of the arm, and if it breaks, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take a wooden stick of mulberry wood, in this shape:
And tie the two heads with two bandages, and bend them upwards, and seat the patient on a chair; then throw his broken arm onto the stick, until it comes to the elbow, and has in the middle a curve of wood, then bend it upon some heavy thing or have the assistant stretch it down; then place the break even with your hands together, until the break returns as needed.
And the other way is that one should bind the patient to his bedstead, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two attendants to hold each what is on the bedside table in their hands, and the other to stretch each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then bind one line under the bedside table, and another above it, and have each attendant stretch to their part. And if the bedside table is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary to put one line midway under the armpit, and the other towards the neck, under the bedside table; and also if the bedside table is towards the neck, then you must put one line slightly, without labor, until the bedside table is even above and below, and then bind it, so that there are no abscesses.
And if abscesses do come, then do not bind it at all until seven days, and put a moist cloth on it in a sheltered place and with rosate oil, until the abscess is appeased; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put an ointment on the bedside table, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put a cloth around it, and bind on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, as long as nothing is defending it, or if the bone is not loosened.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put a larger and stronger splint on the bedside table, with two to three inches of space between each splint, and have each splint be so large that it passes over the bedside table three inches from each side; then bind on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the bedside table, more firmly and less distant.
And if you see the seat of the splints and the binding, as we have said, in the time when you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it alone until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days at the bandage, lest inflammation or swelling come to the place, or the numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If so, address it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; and put under the bedstead a soft linen pillow, and look every hour of the day or night to see that the shape of the broken member does not change or become loosened; if so, address it by the power of medicine, and give him food as we have previously set forth, in such a way that the food is for the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, let it be substantial. And it is customary that the bedstead and leg should be rewrapped every 40 days altogether; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medicines of ointments to bring it back into place. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, then wait one day or two months before loosening.
Of the breakage of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicles", because one is small and is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large and is the one that is below, towards the little toe; by chance, break only the large fossicle, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small fossicle is broken, the restoration and healing are light; and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing and more grievous than when they are both broken together. If only the small fossicle is broken, then you must slightly stretch it and make it equal.
And if it is the large fossicle, then you must bind more tightly; and stretch it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and have the patient crossed over himself, with a cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then have one attendant stretch the arm to the part below his hand, or to one line, and another attendant to the other above. And then put it back into place, according to its best form.
And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is none that are loose and can be grasped by the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint of wood and bone, as we have said before.
And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there are hot abscesses, then apply a cloth made of roset oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft; and bind the cloth subtly on top, until the hot abscess is appeased. Then remove the cerote, and put an ointment made with mill powder and abundant egg yolks on it; then place the splints, and let the splint of the break be a little stronger and wider than the others; and know that it should have 6-8 splints or more in different positions: either the break is in one bone or two; and bind more tightly above the break than elsewhere, always lessening the distance, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths on top of the break be soft and moist, not hard or dry; and let the thread that binds it be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and bandage after some days. And if some bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water, until those itches are appeased; and let the member not too tightly rest. And then resume the binding, and if the bandage is worn out and the bone loose, and similar things, then address them.
And if you take care that numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and let it rest thus for some days, until numbness comes to it and then bind.
And if none of the things we have said do not come to the patient, then do not remove the bandage until after 20 days or so, and then let him put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even; and take care of movement and gesture, and sleep on his back; and know that this break is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the temperaments and complexions of the virtues.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers it often happens to break, and there is no more than it bends many times.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit straight in front of himself evenly; then he puts his hand on the extended cloth, stretches the broken bones, and makes them equal to the mirrors, until they are well joined; and applies an ointment and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then it is applied with a straw according to the quantity of the injury; and it should be enveloped in one fold of linen.
And if the break is around the belly of the finger, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken finger; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the bandage be as smooth as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
And if the break is at the tip, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another underneath in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it entirely around the hand, and stop the swelling between the fingers.
And if the break comes to any of our fingers, if it's the middle one, make it equal, as is necessary; and bind it with the finger, and if you see that it needs a small straight bandage to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is on other fingers, such as the index or another, make it equal, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie all together in one holding, whichever is better, or place a bandage above, like a poultice; and take care in restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and help those that come, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one tie above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each of his assistants to his equal part; and it is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, it should be one of the ties towards the armpit, and the other ties below the break. And also if it is near the knee, and then it should be the tie beside the knee, and be extended downward; then put the mirrors to make the bone equal to its natural figure, and then apply the ointment, and bind it, if hot abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap above the break with a bandage of double cloth in two or three layers, and leave the superfluous parts; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, beside the knee below, and let the end of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the thigh the bandage, then put on the break bandages, and put one bandage on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make equal the binding; then begin to bind strongly three or four turns around the break; and when you go up above the break, and less bind it; then attend to the two knots of the thread that you have inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three bandages that are above, then return down below to the head of the thread, until you come beside the foot; and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless there comes an abscess or swelling or any similar thing.
And if there is a complication, then release it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grip, then it is necessary to sew, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to split the skin, and draw out the fragments; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And no time is the thigh broken in such a way that one puts bandages on it, as in the aid and arm; although, in the restoration made in this way, the patient does not complain.
And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the various conditions of temperaments.
of the rupture of the knee
Know that in the rupture of the knee there is often breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or a hole, and has to be treated for all wounds, and without wound, and this is well known.
And the restoration is such that one makes equal what is out of joint in his fingers, until it is assembled as much as one can; then apply an ointment, and put on a round bandage if you need to, and bind it as it is necessary, then return all the dispositions that we have said for other breaks, such as hot abscesses and any similar thing; and give each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "tibia" and the other "fibula"; and it has all the same breakage as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is done equally as that of the arm, and all the works are thus.
And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
And if the thin bone is broken, then bend forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and bend down. Then apply an extension, and make it equal, and tie the bandages evenly; but nonetheless, it is necessary to see if the break is ugly, and there are multiple pieces, that the extension be less and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of leather that go around the leg from one side to the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in two layers a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some people put a stick along the length of the leg, made of leather, and set the leg to prevent movement, and properly do what is needed in the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is hot abscess or any other accident; and care for it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
Of the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and one must take care, and there is only a slight wound in more than one disposition.
And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones mounting one on top of another, then set the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they were going to walk, and now put your foot on their joint where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return to their places; then apply plaster and bandages, and under the foot of the patient a small tablet at two full cups, then strain the foot correctly, and when you have wrapped it in cloths, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days are passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the toes broken, then set them in place, just as we have said for the fingers; then put on each broken toe a splint according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then put under the foot that tablet which I mentioned, and strain it correctly; and if there are two or three or more broken toes, put on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and strain the tablet under the foot; and let it be so that what is above the top of the tablet is outside the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, when we have spoken; and each accident should be treated according to what is needed.
of the breaking of the bone of the finger
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit with an enlarged pillow, then bend her towards the back part, and have it held from behind; then fill the natural cavity with cotton, and put in as much as one stook; then lift up the woman, and gently raise the back piece by piece, and then the cotton jumps out until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the stook; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or so: the break will be restored, and if you see, take a vetch bladder, and tie a cord around the anus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is emptied inside: the nature will return to the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, then set it in place just as we have said for the thumb; and these breakages are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into practice and intends my book. For the breaks indicate the right path to restoration: heed this accordingly.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose gizzard and put it inside; then wrap cloths around it, and let it be for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of breaking with a wound
It is necessary for one who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great or small, like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they should be healed now, so that the healings which we have said bear witness.
And if the wound heals, but the breakage remains, and you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the breakage in the same hour or day, unless abscesses do not come forth.
And if abscesses come forth, then leave the restoration alone until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
And if the extension is not suitable for you to put in place with your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them, according to what they have need of in each cure of breakage; and be rough and a little big, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be flat in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a "palainche", for which reason the curved nails should be placed on top of the apparent bone; and fill it once, until it revives, and be even one against the other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you file the top of the bone, until the instruments have power over it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then file it with a suitable instrument, or knife or rasp, to your power; and then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small scrapings.
And when the bone is restored, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do what is necessary to get it back to its place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly apply it; and do not put on the wound ointment or any other thing with oil, lest you bring about putrefaction and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and file away the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; for many foolish doctors have done this, and have brought about death or decay in the patient on occasion; and be the remedies more gentle and soothing than those for other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come from it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then do not put on any poultices; but wrap around, instead of poultices, hard cloths and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days bowels loosening up to the wound, then remove everything you had put on it with all wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmac and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member two times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is set and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bow can run down easily.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but goes back down, know that there are small bones, for which it is necessary that you search the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose fragments that cause such pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, like the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the great limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it has purged; by chance it will fall off after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of boils that come on the sweat glands
We often see after the healing of an incision, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to behold the shape of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Take heed therefore if the swelling is fresh: then administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, aloe, and similar others, either one of these things or all together, and boil them with stiptic wine or with abundant egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and strain it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and start another, until the swellings are removed; or you strain it over a piece of cloth well made; for the properties of the cloth are that they remove all the swellings from the members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above, and make the superfluity apparent; or you give it to any scraper, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored, and after the member remains weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member; or because of excess inflammation; or because of excessive movements, not in its proper hour; or because it has a lack of blood in its body, thus it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and keep the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and ease to him; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and removes excess moisture often with lukewarm water, until the nourishment runs to the member; and restore it to its natural figure.
of the twisted member after healing
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member all over again; many foolish men have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then they should be removed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be cooked, such as yarrow leaves, roots, and melilotus, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, like well-made daquylon, and take the sap of yarrow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take figs that are rich in grease, and grind them with henbane, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And at no time is the swelling removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with many moist things. And be administering movements to the member every hour.
And if the twisting is hardened and calcified, like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut just to the bone, at the incision, subtlety lightly; and put caution and study into the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary now to bring it back into place carefully.
For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, if one resets it with pains at the joint; therefore it is not necessary to move it to its proper place when it is swollen: many times this brings shame and other pains;
however, when this happens, make the patient whole, then leave him, until the abscesses are appeased; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as the remedy comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
of the jawbone
Sometimes it happens that the jawbones are dislocated downward, and the dislocation of both is in two manners: or they are a little removed from their place and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by gentle means.
And if she is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not hesitate.
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and put the probe's pouch from one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands are apart to make equal; and command the patient to relax his jawbones and move them all around.
And the attendants put it in its place, until it returns to its natural position.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jawbones are together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not hesitate in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well with gentle softening, then put on moist cloths in a wax made from rose oil and beeswax, and tie it lightly with soft strings.
et the patient sleeps on his back, and his knees being between two cushions, in such a way that he does not stir to the right or left, nor does he exert himself at all to make it better, but takes light food, until the pains are gone, and the jawbones are quiet.
and then gently moisten what he wishes lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth when eating or drinking, until the jawbones are well quieted and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and accustomed sweats come, and perhaps dissolution of the bowels, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and many times the person who has it dies within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of it and the breastbone, and is sometimes dislocated to the rear, and one can well perceive this.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, stretches out his arms; and then presses the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the poultice and bandage, and restrain.
and the head of the shoulder which is towards the back cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate at all, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the poultice and bandage, and restrain, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
and similarly bring back the head of the spine when it has become dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: namely, one way is when it dislocates downwards towards the armpit; and the second way is towards the breastbone; and perhaps dislocates upwards, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for they jump out quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps out slightly and returns slightly.
And perhaps happens to some men a blow or breaking, and the shoulder becomes swollen with an abscess hot, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit, touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an ox; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck nor move with any movements.
and also if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touching.
and this way of dislocation is not to be reduced when it is new or if the patient is feeble.
And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts his fists under the armpit, and lifts the jointure with force up to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it up high, then puts it back down; so it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within three days after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should arise slowly mollifying and soothing, just like a decoction of alethae and fenugrec and millefoil in water, and be administered.
Then the patient should be placed on his back, and a piece of woolen cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, should be put under the armpit; then the minister should place their heel on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the patient's hand.
and another minister should hold the patient's head, so that it does not move down; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see that it is reduced in this way:
and that you make sure one man who is taller than the patient is present; and stands straight towards the side, and pushes his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lifts the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another minister should pull the patient's hand down towards their stomach. And if the patient is too light, then make him carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation will come back now.
And we also restore it in another way: and is that one long iron rod is stuck in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is as high as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small. then it is put under the patient, but so that he has wrapped a soft cloth on top, and the patient's arm is stretched down from the other side firmly, and the jointure will come back to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one iron rod of two arms and three fingers in width, which has the head bent so that it can enter easily under the armpit, according to this form:
then tie it on top of the bent head of the stick with a soft cloth so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and stretch one's arm over the long iron rod, and tie the assistant to the iron rod, and lift one's arm up to the top of the hand, then put one's arm on top of a small shield from a wide basket, and let one's hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the jointure will return now.
And when it is so, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the armpit a woolen sphere, then put the poultice wrapped with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all of the shoulder and around, then restrain it under the armpit gently, and turn the bandage over the poultice, and encircle the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he drinks little, until the limbs are comforted, for he will heal sooner; and then drink more after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and is not softened, he is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated from its place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, then you must apply cauterizations to three pores, as described in the treatise on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and it happens after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift your arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the chest and breasts or the back is caused by sudden impulse and stretching of arms, and another treatment should be applied; and cure until it is healed.
And if after healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take baths many times until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the hip
Know that the joint of the hip is displaced a little bit, and then returns a little bit; and it is displaced from all sides, just as well in front as behind, and the dislocation is not restored, because one can see it clearly and feel it clearly; and displace according to each figure. And when you join the diseased hip to the sound one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is distorted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as apostemes come to it, for if apostemes came to it, it would be grievous to reset; and in any case it cannot be completely reset from top to bottom, especially when it is at the back; and it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and in any case death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you stretch out its hand to your two hands; and its arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the hip around, above, and below, and push the joint back into place with its folds together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and brings back the hip that is displaced.
And if it doesn't want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers should stretch out the arm, and hold it for two ministers, so that it doesn't move at all; then turn the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a double fold long and wide.
and when the mirror has joined the joint to its hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and then push the joint firmly until it returns.
and when it is at the place, then put on dry plaster with some egg white, and strain firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels swelling after the setting of the joint, and it becomes inflamed, then bathe it and rub it gently, and press until it is relieved; or you put a layer of sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter into the bath. and when he bathes, then gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on, and then enter into the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that it helps, then apply warm moist vetch with butter, and strain it on; it will return to its natural state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated and the return is light, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place hastily, in the same hour that it is dislocated, whether the swelling be present or an apostema hot come.
And the restoration is that you put the diseased hand on a board, and stretch out the fingers of the ministers, and place it even, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and push it until it returns.
Moreover, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a board for extension and restoration. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the board, and the mirror puts its hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If not, then apply soothing plasters to calm the hot apostemes, and leave it thus without reapplying.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted.
and nothing else is wrong with the patient except that his hands are softened, and he cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other reason for it except to strain by applying cauterization in such cases, and perhaps there is nothing else.
And when the hands are in place, then put on the plaster as we have said, and strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, then soak it in hot water and rub it gently until he is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are displaced on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist.
then stretch out the fingers and push the dislocation back into its place until it returns, then support the tip of the finger and guide it towards the part where it was separated.
and leave it for two days, and then put it back in place that day; and bind the joint with a thread, as we have said, and release it each day, and guide it to move, and rebind the joint; and do this often until it is straight.
and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until he is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
Loosening of the spine's curvature
When the curvature of the back or neck is loosened, or there are multiple loosenings, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations come forth without intention, nor can it be held, and many times certain members become softened, or the two knees, or both arms, or one.
And many times the curvature bends into four parts; that which bends at the back is called "humpbacking".
The treatment is to correct it if humpbacking has come from childhood: otherwise, there will be no treatment or recovery at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment say with great words, but there is no great benefit in all.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
I say that in the humpbacking that comes forward at the chest, there is no intellect or sanity;
and also that which comes straightly in both sides, and one can only cure the farthest one that comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place even, and have a strain below him, so he does not hurt himself.
then place one iron rod on the head firmly in the earth, and another at the feet, and tie a band around the hips of the patient, and another around the knees, and ankles, and shins.
and two ministers know the bands, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron rods.
and be well closed, the rods as we have said, and the operator put his palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover with this treatment, take a board three arm-lengths long, and carve an opening below the appearance, and have the patient lie on their side, and place the head of the board below the appearance, then put the middle of the board on the spine. and the operator puts their feet on the other head of the board, and presses well, until it recovers its shape; and if you see, then do so to the corner that turns towards your hand.
And it is that you place two iron rods at the head of the patient, one arm's length apart, and have between each rod, above and below, a palm's breadth in length.
and have in each rod one perforation, where the corner turns, and be the rods firmly planted in the earth, so that they do not move; and between each two rods have one turning rod, on which the band turns, and have in each of the two turning rods two small rods, one palm's breadth long, to turn the corner.
and then tie the band that is between the hips to the corner towards the head, and the other band towards the feet to the other corner, and each of the ministers turns their corner to all the band, and the master places the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg white, and then stop it up, and then apply the plaster from a tablet three fingerbreadths long, which should straighten out the curvature of the back and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a band, as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient until he is cured.
and if nothing comes to the end of the cure, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the plaster that we have said above; and sometimes one should administer a piece of bread.
and sometimes the appearance comes in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, so one should not have any assumption: by chance it would bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come forth except through dislocation alone, nor does it come forth as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is loosened according to three parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more so within than without, and less loosened before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double their knee over. and it is the place that is below inflamed abscess hot, because the head of the knee comes loose.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in the back is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well straightened according to its completion; however, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot at first, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the knee is at the level below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you correct if the dislocation is ancient, and it remains according to its disposition, so there is no treatment; and one should not have any assumption.
And in that whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three manners of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint, and straighten it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for further treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you have a strong minister appear, and straighten the leg strongly with two hands, or with one band that is tied above the knee. and the other minister stretches his hand up in this way that he places his hands under his hips, then tightens it with a soft band on the knee; and another takes hold of the head of the band.
and they all stretch up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common to all three forms, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its appearance. When the dislocation is at the shoulder blade, then you should instruct the patient to lie on their side with good posture, then place the strap above the root of the hipbone, and the part that is below the armpit, then pull the strap upwards towards the armpit and the shoulderblade;
Then take another attendant's arms and embrace the thick part of the patient's hipbone, and extend it far away strongly: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot compress it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the patient's two feet together with a soft strap on the two heels, and on the two knees, and have the patient's affected leg extended two fingers more than the other.
Then be suspended on the head of a beam, and be above the ground two arms long; then instruct one attendant to embrace the patient's hipbone, and have another attendant holding with the patient, who will embrace it strongly, for the joints return now quickly.
And when the dislocation is far away, then have the patient lie down, as we have said in the one with gilboesite, and stretch one strap on the patient's affected leg properly, and also on the hip.
Then put two hot irons, one at the head and one at the hips, and then insert one iron between the patient's hipbones in the shape. and have damp cloths planted around, so that the patient does not get hurt, then stretch each attendant towards him, and the surgeon puts his hand equally on the patient's affected joint.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put him on the table and press him thus as we have said in gilboesite, and have the patient lie down on his side with good posture.
And when the dislocation is before, then it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I said; and have the surgeon place his hand on the armpit of the patient's affected side, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is far away, then it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards, nor lift up towards the earth, but rather that he be as if his hip were dislocated far away, as we have said about the position on the two hips. and be on his face, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
and it will be done when the patient stretches out his legs and they are even; then adjust the hipbones, and put on the plaster, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if it rests for three or four days, then loosen it, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, then strain, as before, and leave it alone for three days; then loosen it, and let him go about pleasantly, until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and forward, and backward; and it does not dislocate ahead.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their hipbone, and if it does not bend to its hipbone, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take their knee with your palms and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another attendant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends well into its hipbone slightly.
and put the plaster on, and make the leg fit into the hipbone, and keep them together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not trouble the patient to walk, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not right, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes strained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
the remedy is gentle, and one must stretch it gently with their hands when it is strained only.
And when it is completely dislocated, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and have one attendant hold the leg on top of the ankle.
then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and press the foot firmly upwards.
and do this twice, as we have said, by pressing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then begin the work again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, then have the patient sit on their back on the ground, and place one strap firmly in the ground between their hipbones, and bind cloths around, so that the patient does not get hurt.
then have the attendants hold the hipbone, and another attendant stretch the foot to their hands or to one strap, which they will bind on top of the ankle. then stretch each attendant equally, and the straps be thus between the patient's hipbones to retain the patient when one is stretching.
then have the surgeon place his hand equally on the joint, and another attendant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is back in place, then put on the plaster and bandages on top, and strain strongly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the straps are not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the straps become loose, then strain; then loosen it on the third day or fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for four days. and if he walks before that term is reached, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess appears there, then it is necessary to pacify it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
you must
When the two bones are dislocated, then they should be gently stretched without labor, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one plain seat or on a table completely straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it recedes.
and when it is equal and there appears nothing, then place a board under the heel of the foot at two joints, then strain firmly, and let it remain three days, then release it; and make him rest until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one tries to restore it, often happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are pitiful and merciful and slow, rather than hasty;
and use at the beginning soothing things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, in such a way that the abscess appears.
and when the member is at place, then administer soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it behooves, with dry ointments.
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
and take care to enter into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth moving you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of thy arm and body. Amen
