You, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest of the science of medicine together with its contents, and I have finished it through his explanations and through his declarations. And it has come to me in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is alien to everything else, so the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains except for the small descriptions in old books that have been handled by the hands. And from this has come the error and vanity, and are shut off the intentions, and the science is alienated.
Or it seems to me that I will revitalize it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abridgment; and I will bring together the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for them, as is necessary.
And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for him who deals with this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the proportions of the members, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and the arrangement and movements and rest positions, and the place of their origin.
And therefore Hippocrates says that a name with a name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not familiar with what has been said before, beware lest he fall into error and kill men; thus I have often seen many of those who deal with this science abandon their science and sense experimentation.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut out an abscess on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in an old man's bladder and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder and the old man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took in charge the leg of a duke from our land which was broken, and with the breakage had an open wound; and the doctor, full of ignorance, forced the break to be set on top of the wound without any binding, and did not leave even a little bit of cloth between them, and so left it until the leg became completely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to relieve the leg; and when I loosened it so he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But in all cases the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the whole member was lost.
And I saw another doctor who opened up an infected abscess and then inflamed it through the evil influence of his lordship.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, most dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many situations; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms in good faith, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrifying diseases to suffer from bad health; and lay aside your doubts and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on yourself a bad disease unless you are called a foolish doctor."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medical cauterizations, and it is the chapter organized from head to foot; and about the forms of instruments, and surgical dressings, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bandages and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torquing, and similar things; and it is organized from head to foot, with the forms of instruments.
Therefore that we may remember the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest and most subtle speech and secret responses; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I suffice little for their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where it has material, except for two complexions: namely, hot and dry temperament with material, and cold and dry temperament with material.
In hot and dry temperament with material, some people have decided and said that cauterization is great help; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use to a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with heat or dryness; and those who say the opposite say that cauterization makes great help to hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true some times through experimentation.
And in any case, do not meddle with things except for him who has experimented and knows by long use the book of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the surprises and the hope of the time; as for other complexions, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cauterization.
And know, son, that fire cauterization is part of the secrets of cures, and of greater benevolence than cauterization with burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is cooking the one that is being cauterized, and does not harm another member if not by name.
Burning medicines come from one member to another, and cause disease in the afflicted member, leading to grievous suffering, and by chance, killing the patient.
Fire, due to its highness and the goodness of its substance, does not do that unless there is excessiveness.
And I have found this for you through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is answered by fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, as philosophers say in demonstrating; accept it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is removed by the aid of cauterization; and similarly if cauterizations are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a greater evil to come to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so, but it is not as they suppose, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, but rather it surpasses medicine in its haste to be effective, and in the virtue of its work and lordship.
And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place where the disease occurs, and there are excesses gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the right time when there are few excesses and moisture, as with dens cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this is rare.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intention is wrong, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works. So it is clear that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this for no reason, but because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the site of the cautery does not cause rotting, but it is not true, for I have tested it, and found that it is true in some people; and cauterizations with gold are more effective than those of iron, just as they said.
And yet, when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is red-hot by the color of the gold, and it has soon cooled down; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
And so we use fire cauterization because we have made it appear suitable to our work.
Now I have ended this chapter up to here, so that the way may be more easy to find.
of olive cauterization
These cauterizations are good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and due to abundance of dreams and pains in the teeth and throat, and also all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient should be purged by soluble medicine, clearing the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can tolerate; and then do reapply the medicine to the patient's head.
And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the weight scale; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let it come to rest where your middle finger will be, so that it bleeds inwardly and then apply the cautery called "olivare", which is its form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make your hand move downward and outward in a small circular motion; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the mark if you see the bone about one inch deep; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you do as I have told you; after that, take one handful of gauze, wet and soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply a moist poultice in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more; and therefore it is of greater aid.
And some of them said that one should cauterize until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
And others say that one should cauterize until it is so hot that the bone is softened as wide as a thimble that women put in their purses, so that the humors can flow out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one must cure and soothe.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every way, except that they may be suitable for some people who have a way of trembling with fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them alone; because the bone is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we observe in other members; and similarly when the patient's skull is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and gentle for me, and I work with this principle alone in order to bring about salvation.
of ancient pain from the head
When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, then the patient should use yeeris and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head, oils, and emplasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have said before, it does not count.
Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply the cautery beneath that cautery which we have said above.
After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place which is called "vasselz"; and it is one spot where one puts poultices; and lift your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of this later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those by which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and that's the form.
of the head's cautery When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease spreads up to the eye, and the head is purged by worldly medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases have been tried, and none of it profits: then he makes cauteries according to two methods, namely by medicinal fire and fire.
The medicinal fire cautery is when you take an almond, remove the skin and crush it into a small amount for two horns, then make a temple incision where the pain stays in such a way that you can place the crushed almond under the skin; and when it is placed, tie it tight and hold it so for 12 hours; then untie it and treat the wound with oil of garlic for 2 or 3 days; then apply a poultice soaked in butter until purulence occurs.
After the wound has healed; and if you see that it is necessary to apply some burning medicines that I have written or do not know how to treat.
The fire cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery so that it has the following form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made to the shape of a bell or it has one piece of cork, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that the half of the iron's edge is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let out an abundance of blood.
After that, put cotton on top of the seal, and place it on the wound for 3 days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then cure the wound with oil so that it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", do it all at once, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not ancient.
of headache
When you treat headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauterizations from medicine and fire do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then apply it to the painful spot a line of half an inch long, and lift your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cover the artery and do not come up to the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerves have regard only for movement and spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially in someone who does not know what he is doing, and who is not experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how one stays blood loss when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on extracting the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of earache from cold
When earache comes from cold and one has tried medicinal solutions and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which has the following form:
After, prick all around the afflicted ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot; and make 10 pricks around each ear; afterwards, cure the wound until it is healed.
of mouth torture
Torture that must be cured by fire is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterization for similar cases that come from scorching and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this similar torture that moves from phlegm and idleness and purging of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little outside the temple, and the third in the seam of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears to be sound, and make the cautery on the head of the ear above a small piece below the horn of the head, and one in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery until the half of the iron's edge is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And this is similar to the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after, cure the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the "vasselz" spot as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured as we have said before.
from lethargy
To this illness it is necessary to give the patient great years and pills made of common things for the brain; afterwards, make the patient's head entirely bare, and place on the back of their head a poultice of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and this is the method of the cautery: if he does it just as I have said.
If he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, make him three cauterizations on the head going down to the neck, with a space of two days between each one; and cure him as the others, and if you see any swelling or inflammation, make another cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is well; and let the cautery be called "olivare", just as I have said before.
from the chill of the head It is necessary that the head be cleaned with years and what we have said before; afterwards, make the patient's head bare, then do a cautery on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the burn is burned off, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure him until he is well, and that cautery which is called "olivare" which we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to clean the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure this, make him gargle and chew on something that cleans the brain often with good meats; afterwards, make his head bare in the middle, and do one cauterization according to what we have said before, and one cauterization on the navel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be an olive cauterization according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make one subtle cauterization in this manner:
When due to melancholy the excesses or moistures are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then make those cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what is said before in the section.
After making the patient's head bare; afterwards, make one linen cloth well-made, like a circle, and place it on the head; and have the patient sit crossed-legged, and be held firmly from all sides; afterwards, present the liniment, and melt some butter of ancient herbs; and heat it over temperate fire, so that the doves can bear to drink it; afterwards, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool down; and make this treatment for the patient once a week with good governance, until he is well.
Or if you see that the cauterization is making many points all over the cautery. This manner of cauterizing moistens the brain equally; and then put on a wet cotton cloth in butter and goose fat.
of the ache of the eyes When ache comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and keep watch over all moistures, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
After that, command the patient to bare their head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of the ache is to both eyes together, or to one eye only; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and take care of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision, how to stop it; and never make a cauterization or incision under the two bones behind.
of the body of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or below the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, phlegmatic excesses, then do the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the ache descending to the eyes: one cauterization on the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or incisions under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize sagitally above the eyebrow with every little cauterization.
of the body of tears within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give the patient three night's worth of cooked chicken; afterwards, make his head bare, and do a cauterization on the middle of the olive cauterization; and do two cauterizations of the "clavilis" type on the eyebrows, one little bit below the hairline; and take care not to cut the artery. And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cauterization which is called "olivare". Here is its form:
And if you see that it makes two cauterizations on the eyebrows as long as the eyebrow is; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points to the eye Never is it the case that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the opposite direction, and point to the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Or cauterization by fire commands the patient to leave the hairs as long and equal as they are; and if they start pointing in their natural direction, then restrain his eyes so that they do not move until they have grown.
When they grow and are even, then the patient should apply to the skin; afterwards, sign above the eyes on paper a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put a moist cotton cloth in egg white and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery where there is the form:
After cauterizing on the figure you signed piece by piece several times, until the skin is burned away; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burn is removed; after apply ointment treatment until they are healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened then restart the cautery on that same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and do not prick the eyes.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment copy of the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coal, each half an ounce, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so it does not cool down, then spread the mixture on the form you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on paper over the eyes; and if the patient holds only one eye, work on one eye, and if both equally; and put a moist cotton cloth in egg white under the eye; and the patient's head should be in its natural state and place your two fingers showing above the medicine, and press gently each time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for it feels like burning as with fire. When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine from your hand. And when the burning sensation has passed, then lift the cloth and see if you see the paper raised as if it had been lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if so, it is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are even and your eyes are in order; then put on a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burned skin is gone, after applying ointment treatment called "dyafenis" and others, until they are healed.
And if you must be careful with your work by great vigilance that the medicine does not affect the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on that same place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after applying ointment treatment until it is healed; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this you should make your constructions; and do not take as true the right way for him whose study is in this art.
(The text switches to a new topic)
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make it a fire cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and hold the servant's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or leave his head; after, place moistened cotton in an egg white or persimmon juice on the eye; after this, heat the cauterizer which is thus: and shape it to the head as a vulture's feather, together with its quill being the cauterizer; if you see, it should be pointed from one head to another, and if you see, it should be like a tent; but in any case, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and remove the discharge, and dry it; and if it is closed, do so, and draw out the bowstring; after put hot cauterizer on top, and hold your hand to the cauterizer at the part above the eye, lest your hands do foolish things; and place the cauterizer in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cauterizer just to the bone, it would be well. If not, then start the cauterization again once or twice more if needed, and leave it for three days; after that, put moistened cotton in butter, and treat the wound with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat according to what comes in your chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no ancient said. Understand the fistula, and open it up; after put in the opening one subtle camphor which has this shape: and make it in the quantity of three pints; and hold your hand with camphor firmly, and do not let the patient move until the pomade has melted and reached his eye; and it is necessary to put moistened cotton on the eye; the pomade so closes the opening of the fistula, and brings forth marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to perforate the eye, and bring back the fistula to its place in the eye according to what is needed in its own proper position.
cracks on the lips Many times happen cracks on the lips which are called "piles", and similarly on children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizer according to this shape:
And put it hastily in those cracks until it comes to a point; after, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth; and it has purged and rotted and become a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after, cut open or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at the point of it, and at the back; and do thus once or twice, after the cure as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the patient's head in your hand; after heat the cauterizer which will take this shape as follows, placing it over the tooth like a cord; and put hot cauterizer inside hastily, and hold until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and start the cauterization again according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let it stay for an hour and then draw out.
And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When the pain of the teeth comes from cold or there is cold air or heat, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two ways: a cauterization in butter and a fire cauterization.
The cauterization in butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and melt the end of it in an iron or copper spoon; after take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and soak it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth hastily and hold until it cools down; and do this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth; and if you see that wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and then apply a hot iron until the fire reaches the apex of the tooth.
The cauterization together with fire is such that you take a cord of iron or copper, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heat the cauterizer, which will take this shape as follows, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter during the application of that cauterization, and then rinse with water; and this is the shape of the cauterizer:
When the scrofulas are of cold water and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then heat the cauterizer which has this shape as follows, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from one part to the other; and put the hot cauterizer on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the point of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then make a cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply moistened cotton in butter until the swelling is removed; after treat the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Quant the moistors overcome on the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines; after which make a fire cautery at the root of the throat, but take care not to come too close to the throat and burn only a little bit. After which make another fire cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and cure the wound so as we have said before until it is healed.
Of the throat When all and every disease of the body are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor heat, and it is an old disease, then make two cauteries on the flank in the hollows; and one other cautery between the breasts; and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make a fire cautery on the point of all the points that are called "points" of which the form is described before in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to 30 or around. After that, cure the wound according to what is said before, and make three cauterizations at the joints according to this form:
And because of that, the cauterizations are lighter, because you do them in three places at once.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first re-set the dislocation. After that, be careful to the patient on their back and side; after lift up the key that is inside the title as with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then reheat the cautery which has two handles of oak, according to this form:
and cauterize the key until it pierces up to the side, and come the figure of the cautery together four times; and because of this is made a cautery with the cautery that has three handles, for which are six figures of cauterization; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three handles:
And sometimes it is added on top of one nerve for which there are eight cauterizations.
After put on top of the cautery powdered broth with oil; after make the patient rest, and let not the limbs be disturbed for a long time until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, something happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavile cautery, or many cauterizations in piercing. For the joint has been refilled, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient has been healed.
of the pleurisy cautery
The ancients said that one must make pleurisy cauterizations with roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the biggest you can find, and let it be dry, and as big and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and heat it at the fire, and make one cautery between the flank and the neck, and two small cauterizations a little lower down in the part that is under the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little bit; and one cautery in the breast, and one other on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the two sides of the breast after the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it openly as when you are sniffing.
And some ancient said that one must use a cautery like a razor, and heat it up and put it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and soon after, there is no more pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or an ulcer comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then add three methods of cautery that are all good.
One method is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on their back.
And another method of cautery is that you reheat the cautery with two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the key that is near the mouse, or the patient's hip comes towards the left side, and let be the elevations which you lift up the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After that, put the two handles into flames until the key is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and so there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery with three handles. After that, cure it when it has gained purity after a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is not good for dropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauterizations be well close to the edge of the key.
After that, let the cauterization remain open to drain impurities for a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will come together with the aid of God.
The form of the cauterization for the belly is the clavile that we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-like, according to what is mentioned here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellowish pus, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular bones; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn. And do not go too deep into the flesh, otherwise the yellowish pus will spread, and let the cauterizations be according to this form:
Aprés fait two fire cauterizations on each leg, one at the tip of the cutaneous fold and the other below the kneecap in front and behind the leg; let the cauteries be long without healing until the pus is gone; then cure the other cures we have mentioned.
Of the dwelling place
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestine are impaired, and cannot be cured by any means of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, then make one great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the cauterization of the circle; and four cauterizations around the anus subtle each like a small nail, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cauterization on the navel, and one cauterization on each rib, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and corrupted by cold and moist gross humors, and are cured as we have said before in divisions, and it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind the almond-shaped piece and in triangular fashion, and one cauterization below the anus. Two others;
And if you think that the stomach is chilled and the meat not cooked, and one sees the face inflamed, then make a great cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and one more on the spleen at each cauterization like a small nail; and let the cauterization remain long. After that, cure the place until it is healed.
Of the swelling which is called "Thelul"
When you cope with Thelul, if it seems to be a flaccid cauterization, then apply the cauterized part to the swelling that has been copped; and let it remain as long as the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, so that the blood may not flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after curing with ointments that are beneficial until they are healed; and if you apply a great cauterization on the armpit, it will have greater aid.
Of an unhealed wound
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When a fistula comes to someone, and it is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupt moistures, then you must prove a subtle tent and guard that you know the depth of the tent. Afterward, apply the cauterized part which seems like a flaccid one, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cauterization until the corrupted flesh is burned away, once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then beware of those places, and do not make any fires except in a charred place, and think it is not yet purged; after curing the place until it is healed, if the place is sealed and the matters are removed long ago, then know that the place is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is torn and corrupts the bone at its foundation; and thus as one of those things we will say in its place.
Of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the kidneys and great flatulence, and does not take shape like a woman's, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization on the kidneys from one side and the other, at the cauterized part like a small nail that we have said before; and if we were to cauterize in the middle, there would be three cauterizations in a line, and they will cause greater aid.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cauterization on the back part of the bladder, where the hairs of the navel begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and let each cauterization be as long as the nail of a thumb; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizations be like small nails according to the form said before.
Of the kidneys When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not let anything conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the anus, as we said about the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations be like small nails, as we said.
Of the hip
When viscous moistures descend to the buttock of the hip, and because of this the patient moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found that the lump of the department vein is there, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the buttock of the hip with a cauterization resembling a circle, and sign in front of the lump around the buttock as it turns, so that the buttock is within the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those for the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations on the olivary region, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the kidneys; and cure until it is healed.
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the buttock of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured according to what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient with pills made from fetid substances, or other good-smelling pills.
After that, make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization is done in many ways, one of which is: you should make three triangular cauterizations on the buttock of the hip, according to this form, and make good depth and width, and have between each cauterization a space the thickness of a thumb, and let it be an olivary cauterization; sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are four, according to this form:
And if you see, apply the cauterize to the fire circle that we have mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in this way that the circle contains all the hip and all the hairs of the wound are burned.
And this is the way one does in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations on each side where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle three fingers to the left; and let the cauterization be cutaneous, and let the hairs of the wound be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or almost there, make a cauterization where they feel the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, make another one; and if he knows that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, make a cauterization at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cauterization above the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet as well, and was pierced and corrupted all the feet. After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Here is the translation:
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery because of the fear of his gaze, and if we see little who uses it; and yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured, and where it applies.
from the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, either from falling or percussion or excessive blood evacuation, or from something cold and spread out, none of these similarities are worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be rid of fetid pills or similar things, and have them applied to the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked with ink, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the "point" cautery; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations at the middle nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow space between their vertebrae when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the lower part of the back and in no other spine.
When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize at the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
And the cautery should prick each part of the spine equally. And if you see fit, then cauterize around the spine at the piercing cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another. After cure, leave it as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in gibbosity which is near a nerve's spasming.
from the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold matter and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make the fire of cauterization around the jointure of the foot, and let it be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at the entire point which is called "point". And if the pains come to just the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauterizations for each part, at all the olive-shaped cauteries; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand too far away until the sparks of fire are burned.
And if the pains descend to just the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains any pain in the shoulders, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to just the hips or just the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good governance for the patient and administer medicines. For if you do good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
from the itching of the scabies
When itching comes in the armpits, and the boils descend to the groin and it is newly so, then it is necessary that when you see it being cured, that he does not scratch that day; and that he uses things which loosen the bowels, so that the faeces descend from his belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are repaired, and then rekindle at your two hands, and mark with ink below the itching on the bone of the wrist, and at all one sign which is similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery according to this form:
until it is white and he gives off sweet smells. Then rekindle the boils to their place; and command him to hold his hand up so they do not return backwards; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion underneath him and two servants on his hips, and one other on the belly that holds his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then rekindle again another time until you reach the bone. And be careful subtly so that the boil does not burst when you are doing the cautery; nor should you burn him; and that by this the patient will not die or suffer from another evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to their measure; afterwards cure the wound of the cautery with butter for three days until the scarring is removed; afterwards cure other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sewn up; and it is necessary that his nourishments be taken away long enough so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
And afterwards, when he wants to get up after forty days, have a well-made bandage put on him, and keep it for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and high laughter; and when he has done this instruction, then is he entirely healed. And I will say after this in his chapter the cure by cutting. from the itching of the belly
When itches come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cautery at the third point according to its quantity, and let the spark of fire be burned; afterwards cure according to what we have said; and some of the old ones have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at three angles according to this form:
but mark the first sign with ink and make a line across the width above the itch, and another below it, and have your hand inside all the way to the nail-shaped cautery. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
from old pain in any member When pain comes in any member, or from falling or striking, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the "point" cautery, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twists and pains. If he is healed from the first cauterization, that's good; if not, begin another cauterization on top of it, for such a habit is that it should be changed in the member that is closest to it, therefore you must make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
A wound
The wounds are helped sometimes by a fire cautery with great help, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will penetrate the whole patient, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. inside the head to the ninth, and the other towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and .ii. on the two horns, and .i. behind on the back of the neck; and leave your hand there until the cautery comes up to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
And if the wound is spread out everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize those cauteries on the head that we have said, and one on the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crupie and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are on the backside, lest you burn them; and at times make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I make a cautery, the greater the aid and the greater the benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as those who are healthy do, because their body is already quite corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of iron. After that, cure with a mixture of flour and honey and other cures until he is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then one makes cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauteries be a little way into the flesh of the bone; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And at times make a cautery and on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and nonetheless no one intervenes if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease called "ulbaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine does not do anything, then cauterize it with one cautery, a little deep, according to the quantity of the flesh of the bone, until the whitish color is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with a mixture of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colt and blood of alder, each in equal parts; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
the cure for chancre by cautery
When chancre comes at the beginning and you see it growing, then cauterize it with a cautery that appears as one circle, all around the tour of the chancre. And yet wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem to me good, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen once; and more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of swelling that cannot be cured
When some person has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity that it makes, or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the weather; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries in piercing; after that leave it so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery until it has the shape:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced through the bone, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this manner that the course of the corruption is alleviated. After that cure until he is perfectly healed.
the cure by fire with iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a wasting away of the member, for it wastes away the members just like fire burns dry straw. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand both heat and cautery, then make small and great iron cauterizers according to what is needed at the site where the disease is; after that, cauterize from all sides until you have removed all the corruption, so that nothing remains but what is healthy. And then let it rest for three days, and apply a poultice with oil on top of the cauterized areas as long as the fiery scabs are present, and all the corruption has been removed. After that, cure with ointments producing flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then start again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. And this wasting away is sometimes cured with medicine instead of fire cautery in a place; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
of corns that come to the feet
Very often it happens that on the feet outside there arises a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large excrescence that wounds the foot. And the cauteries for this disease are done in two manners. That's to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat one cautery just like a vulture's feather, and make it from good iron according to its size so that it can penetrate the excrescence from all sides, and have subtle margins; after that, put it all hot on the excrescence, and turn your hand entirely around the excrescence until it comes to the root of the excrescence; and then let it be thus for three days until it begins to emit corruption; then apply a poultice made from wild mallow leaves, crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the excrescence will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with ointments producing flesh until it is healed.
Et si ils sont convertit par défauts du corps, et maintes fois advient en mains et en pieds, si convient que tu y amenistres cautère d'eau chaude; et est en telle manière: pren une cane d'arain ou de fer, ou une pene de voutuel, et met sus le clou et l'alotelul, c'est à savoir pourrez verrues; et met la cane sus si qu'elle porprigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d'eau chaude, et retiens bien ta main, et presse ta main en tournant si que li marge de la cane vienne à la racine du clou, et puisse trouver l'eau chaude voie parfond jusque'à la racine; et souffre le malade un poc la mordication de l'eau chaude une heure; puis le laisse ensi, et il se déracinera tous à tout ses racines. Ensi fai un après autre, tant que tu aurasiches toz ces qui sont au corps, puis les cures des oignemens qui engendrent char.
And the shaking cure is this: take a small piece of bread and butter it, then give it to the patient to eat, and as soon as they have eaten it, they will stop shaking.
When some shake due to cold or numbness, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one on the belly, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cauterization; so the shaking will cease, and the patient's health will hasten from the cold disease.
Of foul pustules: take a piece of linen cloth and soak it in warm water, then apply it to the affected area, keeping it there until the pus is drawn out; afterwards, dry the wound with another piece of linen.
Sometimes boils or foul pustules appear due to corruption within the body, coming from gross and putrid matter. It is necessary at first when they appear that you make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, whereby the point is seized by fire, or of long aristologe root, or a lenticular cauterization. And sometimes you should cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further ahead, but are broken down the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut: take a piece of cloth or linen and apply it to the wound, binding it tightly with a string or thread, so that the bleeding may stop; then, if there is still some bleeding, you should make a cauterization on the edge of the wound with hot iron, in order to seal the artery. Many times there occurs great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a member, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and press hard until the blood is stilled under your fingers, and no more flows; then take a few small or large cauterizations, all red with fire, and take one, great or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is severed, and place it on that vein where you are holding your fingers, and hold the cauterization there until the blood is staunched.
And if it starts bleeding again when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization has cooled, then take another one of the hot cauterizations hastilly.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is staunched; and take care that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it is not already treated, or by a tight bandage with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and restrained in due order.
Whoever applies binding tightly with cloths or puts hot things on, or similar things, will not benefit if it is not done skillfully.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a surgeon or medicine available, then he should place his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press hard until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but wet it with cold water often enough that it is very cold, so that the blood is congealed and thickened and staunched; and make enquires ahead for what he needs in terms of cauterizations and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization or hot medicine, and the uses, causes, and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go on with this chapter in the same way so that one may more easily find what they seek.
And therefore, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and for that reason it is necessary to be on greater guard.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to take foolish risks. For many types of people come into cures. Some come with such a grave illness that they will soon die from the severity of their disease and the great harm it causes; and one must have fear of these things. And from these comes one who gives you his sense and says: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and hold; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your patients for whose salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear friend, May God give you a good understanding and direction, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy breath of His hand, Amen.
And now I have completed this chapter as I outlined it by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I outlined from head to foot, so that you may more easily find what you need.
The full-blooded water chief
Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife strains too tightly on the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a known cause or not.
And I have never seen this illness occur except in children, and all those that I have seen died from it; and for this reason it seems to me that one should hasten the work less in such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be borne; and it swelled so much that it seemed dead, and this swelling is gathered beneath the bone above the forehead, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a slit in the head as wide as two fingers; and be just as long as two nostrils, until the moisture runs; and look at the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscesses are larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs that the commissures of the head are opened on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this is not responded to: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture forth. After that, close the cuts with bandages and powders, and put wine and oil in it, and leave it thus for five days; then remove it, and cure the wound with tenting and anointings, and let the head drain equally, and then let the patient eat dry meat of a little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Cut then at the place where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and the vein according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and come forth a stream of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of rheum
When it happens to someone a disease which is called "cough" in the sides or at the breast, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is the fire cauterization with what one will cut off the two arteries.
It is necessary, when you see them cut off, that the patient makes his head go back; then he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient takes his neck all the way to one cloth; then look where the vein bends, and the places on both sides are after the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the places with anointing; then cut off one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the wound comes down to the bone, and it is by the width of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in the same way as two fingers pass through.
And when the vein is cut, then blood sprays high continuously forth.
And if the artery does not open to the sense, it is necessary that you measure the length of the space with three fingers, then mark with anointing and cut down to the bone; and what is needed for the blood to be let forth is .vi. c/, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the forehead, cut off what abscesses will not come there, then drain the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When old migraine comes, and sharp cough, due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and old forgotten habits and similar things, and it is not helped by medical treatments or any remedies, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes his hair on temples go back, and feels for the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is hardly responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then the patient stretches his neck with certain cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and applies hot water to the place until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then cut it in an upward direction at the pincer-like folds, and carefully separate the threads that are under each part; and if the artery is thin, then bend it at the tip of the thread, then cut off that part according to the length of two fingers. For if it is not cut, then the blood will not flow out entirely.
And treat the blood of .vi. c/ up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double thread of strong silk, so that no pus forms before the wound is sewn shut and bleeding stops; then cut off the excess flesh that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the area with a cauterizing knife down to the bone until the skin is cut; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and has a warm complexion.
For fire cauterization is aid to finish off the moisture; that's why it is of greater help for moisture. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and places a tent well made on top; and when one removes them, there should be care taken to apply dry medicines that produce flesh, and tents, until he is healed; and if there is no chance of getting hold of the artery so far as you are working, then hasten to cauterize with fire, or fill the wound with vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have what is present, then put a cloth on the wound so that the blood congeals, and rub the wound with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as needed; and what is most important and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this fire-cutting instrument in two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to keep their heat longer. Because when the instruments are too tight, they retain less heat. And it should have between the two knives a space of a finger's breadth, and then when you have signed off on both sides, and you place the hot iron on so that it reaches to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not sewn with this cautery from head to foot; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that is done there, and you see the face of the patient growing red, and feeling a burning sensation in the forehead as if it were trembling; and so oil are held tight and moist, such that the hairs of paper are fallen, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, thus it is necessary for this cure.
And they called it the "cure contused" in old times, and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease on the forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions be as two does all across the forehead downwards until nearly to the nape, and the other two at the two jawbones above the papers, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are at the two jawbones above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two mandibles, and each wound should be the quantity of three fingers across the joints.
from the incision that is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape out all the flesh that is between the two cuts up to the syphac which is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this sponge.
and bind in the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting on the other, and this is the form: And put the edge cutting towards the fat to the flesh, and the dull edge towards the bone, and bind it until it comes to the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to where the flesh appears; and then make another cut in the middle incision down to the other one; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the joint for the blood taken away; then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put wet cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar on top, and take care that apostemes do not come forth; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great plantain water, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until they are healed.
of the eyes' humors
When someone comes with a great and accustomed cataract, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakening the sight, and the papers burned; and the hairs falling off, and the forehead in great pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these events that those matters and the cataract do not come forth except from many veins, and the true cure that is there, is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to lift his forehead, then make a great incision across the forehead, and another one of similar width. One inch. And begin from the temple on the left side to the right temple, and be the incision down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at mealtimes; and when the bone is exposed, then stop all the blood with a sponge, and then dry between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton there, and tent it with linen; then bind it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to let apostemes form hot; when it is bound, then it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that excite flesh.
In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to excite flesh throughout.
of earwax removal
All that falls out of the ears is one of the three things: either grains, or beasts, or pebbles of stone or similar things such as iron; or seeds, like jasmine, fennel, peas; or flowing things, like water and vinegar and similar things.
When something like a pebble or other thing that doesn't belong in the ear falls out of the ear and doesn't grow there, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the pebble, then distill a small amount of purple oil or sesame oil, and make an extraction; and let it sweat with condiments, and block up the nostrils when the sweating comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear above. Many times this cure has succeeded in this way; and if it doesn't succeed, then make an extraction with fine pincers, which is the form:
If it jumps out at the pincers, that's good; if not, then make an extraction with a fine needle of small double-edged scissors; and if it doesn't jump out in this way, then make a cord of thread and bind the head of the cord or the ear canal tightly, and stop up what is around the cord with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the cord; then treat it forcefully, for many times it has succeeded as we have said; and if it does not succeed in this way, then take glue made from the nests of birds, and put in some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and wrap a small amount of cotton around it; then press the glue on the pebble or whatever it is, and treat it. And if it doesn't jump out of all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear so that an aposteme does not form there and cause spasms; and the manner of the cutting is that you first heal the patient's cephalic part, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty or bony dependent part; and be the incision like a moon, as long as you come to the pebble, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and the treatment until it is healed. And if it is swollen and inflamed, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one quarter of a teaspoon held subtly according to this form:
and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then strain it through subtle pincers and a squeezer, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
Then it is good that the patient uses condiment first and fills the ear with old cotton. And let a cloth be placed on top of that same ear where the water is. If it jumps out for this reason, it's good. If not, then take many pieces according to the length you should hold them and make them light and heat them in the fire; and put one or two perforations in the patient's ear, and lift up from the other side with your fingers and strike another piece on top of the piece that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this piece by piece until the water comes out entirely, and thus it will jump out entirely; and if you see, then take one reed, and push one end into the ear, and the other end imprint with fire until the thickest part of the reed is burned; then refast another section with other reeds until the water comes out entirely, as we have said in the piece.
In the extraction of the best, if it is small and like a mouse or similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, administer an extraction with pincers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of vermin from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear to the sun: if you see no worms, then extract them with subtle pincers; and if you do not see any, take a cane according to this form:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle end into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then squeeze firmly all along the cane; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stop around the cane with cotton as I have said in the piece; and if they do not jump out entirely as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the elimination of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to this form as you see:
And it should be a thick layer of silver or tin below in one small perforation, and above for distilling; and to press inside the distillation with one instrument made of well-made tin for this purpose, and if you see take one scraper and wrap it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and all that you have of your medicines in the cane, and the cane be in the ear; then put it inside the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled out or nearly so from the ear; and when the patient feels inside, and let the distillation be one point heated over fire thus as you will distill into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the Stuffing of the Ears
No child is born without a perforation in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the stuffing of a wound or a piece of bone inside the ear, and these stuffings sometimes come all the way into the ear, so that you cannot see it; and sometimes there occurs one point going beyond the perforation, and you can see it well.
That which comes all the way in, if you cannot see it, is of grievous inflammation in many dispositions, and as for that which you can see, then you must put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see a visible opilation, then work with all this quarter of the form:
And be cautious and gentle in front and behind, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opilation is of bone or flesh of the ear, then take it with subtle pincers, and remove it lightly, until all the flesh is completely removed.
And if the opilation is all the way in the ear, then take one subtle scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you feel the opilation that causes the patient to groan at the sound, then perforate lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten in Egyptian balm.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another wet tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
Of the Flesh of Paper
This substance that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch with tweezers and pincers, and remove a quarter of its roots; then put on the white vitriol broth.
And if any of it peels off, then cauterize the lenticular cautery with a subtle fire, and after the incision, the cauterized area becomes inflamed; and many times they repair, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the Gout
Many times, in the eyes, things come that seem like gout in their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the symptoms are such: be careful if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it's a light thing to know; then do the same on the large part, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with pincers and remove. If you can't remove without piercing the paper, don't harm the patient; and if the tear is great, then assemble with a seam, and cure until it's healed; and if it's small, don't make any force, because the ointment restores it soon and repairs flesh.
Et if the pus is descending from within the ear towards the upper part, then turn it back with a paper, and let the pus collect in one or two squeezes, and press gently on both sides; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, this does not matter; and when the pus is squeezed out, then apply oil of salted water, and treat the area where the abscess forms until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is formed in the sheets of paper above, and this happens more often with children than with nobody else, and it causes much trouble to their eyes, and they come to the cathartic in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep, and their papers are beneath their eyelids moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the area around the eyes with your fingers and feel the exinach flowing out between them.
And the manner of working is that the patient puts their head in your hand; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then place it on top of it; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make a medium-sized incision in the moisture up to the spatula, cutting a groove of a width not greater than the wound one makes when opening a vein; and make the skin smooth all the way down until you reach the exinach; and in multiple dispositions comes the exinach from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then pull it out in one piece of cloth wrapped between your fingers to the end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to put it into the incision, lest you reach all the way up to the eye and damage it.
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then widen the incision slightly until it appears; then pull it out as we said before; then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place them on the area, and strain with bandages.
And if there are such people who boil and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains; then treat it until they are healed. And if an abscess comes to the affected area hot, then treat it with poultices soothing until they are healed.
of hairs of paper
When hairs grow on paper other than the natural kind, and are inflamed, they cause harm to the eyes and bring about mannerisms of diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the papers and conjunctivitis, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to three manners: either by fire cautery together or by medicinal water as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your hand; then turn the paper from the eye to your right hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert an awl into all one thread above; and let it be above the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow, and draw up one thread above all the paper, and turn it at the razor; then make a cut in the part beneath the paper, beneath the unnatural hairs, to the spatula, from the great tear to the small; then pull out one thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then sign on the paper a figure of an engraving, as the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see the paper will be divided in all.
And if there is someone who needs to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the way up to the spatula on both lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear to the small; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then insert an awl into one of the two angles of the key; then scrape it all off; then assemble the two lips with a stitching using a needle on all one thread of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the surplus threads stick to the two eyelids at all things that stick, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, and leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching anything constraining, because the paper revives with the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is troublesome (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as the leaf of myrtle, just as we have described, with three awls separated according to the shape that is here:
then cut what rises above in small equal forces, according to the shape that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, then take an awl with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread at the great tear, and a third thread at the small tear, and assemble between your fingers the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, just as we have described, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment with canes is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make an incision within according to what I said, and then make two canes by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises above the paper from the oil, and strain the two canes from both parts together; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and become black and hard, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, then he will apply more force, and heal until he is sound; and when the wound is closed, and the paper is lifted, and they can no longer prick the hairs; and this is the shape of the .ij. canines that you will do according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
The works are such that you take a fine needle, and put in one thread of soft and subtle silk; then assemble the threads and tie them together subtly, and make the length of the threads one palm's length; then order another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the end of the thread; then place the patient's head on your shoulder; and be under the sun so that the works are revealed, for this is a subtle and delicate work; then insert the needle into the root of the hair next to the natural hair, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you pull it out above the natural hair; then extract the hair until it reaches up to the edge of the paper with the natural hair.
And if the paper is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the paper down to the end of all the thread that you have ordered, until the paper comes out from below and you see it by the vision of your eye; then you will pull the paper and the thread, and close the eyes and let it be for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the skin heals; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair of the natural beard, and lift it up with that one which you leave, until it is lengthened and then raise it.
From the greasiness of the eye.
When this disease called "aleacrati" or the greasiness comes into the eye, there are two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cutting or cauterization, and similar things.
And the manner of the work in it is that you cut open the wound, and release the lips from it, and put inside a linen cloth, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use anything in its treatment that dries or constricts. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than the first one; but I advise using things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or althea, and flaxseed cooked, and ointments made from daquilon dissolved in some oil, and wrap it with a cloth, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to ensure it does not harden in the form it was before; and this work that we have said is nothing other than the remedy for this disease, lest it returns to its former form.
About the skin that comes into the eye.
This disease that is below and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and incision and cauterization and similar things; and the manner of the work in it is that you take a needle with two threads, and insert it into the skin, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the threads come out in two pieces of skin; then cut the skin above all the needle, and apply a spatula one large.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a file and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts on either side of the paper inside; and let the pieces of skin from the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision you have made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has no name "one Greek"; then remove that skin, according to the amount it extends below, from what follows the paper; then join the two damaged parts with a thread of linen; then apply the treatment we have said for soothing medicines and cloths, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from incision or stitching or cauterization, then it is necessary to make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then separate between the two leaves of a cloth, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an apparatus for every possible way that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
from the suddenness of the paper
When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is swollen with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural works, then it is necessary to put the point of a file under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the subtle spatula, which is not too tight nor too loose, so that the patient cannot tolerate the spatula being too tight or burning the eye; and make your incision, from which you will cut off that assembled piece, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all that assembled piece is healed, and sometimes in the eye a salty water forms, and it is raised with sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen cloth, and place wet wool on top of the eye in abundance of urine; and after three days use vinegar and similar things until it is healed.
About the inflammation of the eye.
Know that the inflammation is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard suppurating boil, and another which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and cooked with pincers, cannot be overcome; and both begin to grow gradually from the great eye, and increase little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient places their head in your hands, then opens their eyes; and lifts the paper to yours hand, then coils the inflammation with pincers of small double-ness, and stretches it up; then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or buffalo, and one strong thread on it; and double the point of the needle a little bit, and insert it into the inflammation, and pierce it to the entire length of the needle, and bind the inflammation with one thread and stretch it up, and cut off at the entire root of the eye that surrounds the prunele and the silk to the hair just to the head, then cut off what remains in the root of the eye to the subtle spatula and small forces; and leave the natural skin or eye as it was, so that through the incision the body does not produce tears habitually; and sometimes it stops at the onyx alone, and at the thread, as we have said; then one cuts off all the soft spatula of which this is the form.
Et garde que the spasm doth not touch the flesh and break it, and that the prunelet be not pierced; and after the incision, pour in the oil a little bit of broiled silk, and make a poultice of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure what is needed until he is healed.
And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle, and the unguents cannot enter, this appearance of a nail is often treated with medicines; and it comes out like I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the patient's oil, and take the poultice lightly and gently according to this form:
And raise the nail slightly above, and if you see that it does not shrink and the reason is near, then distill from your mouth into the oil a poultice made of litharge, red powder, and broiled silk, and stop the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as an abscess grows hot, then pour in the milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the skin on the patient's arm hurts in the oil by great injury, then suspend it with an unguent, and cut off a part but not all, lest there be a flow of tears; then distill into the oil red powder made of litharge.
of the skin that grows on the prunelet
Some men's skin grows sometimes a red skin, and covers the prunelet and restrains it above the papillae and turns away from the rear, and seems like a baluster rose; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you oil the eyes, and coil all that skin with unguents suitable for this, and sustain it by force; then cut off the first skin, and go all cutting to the razor until the end, and take care not to bleed the oil at the work; and let the incision of the poultice be as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small forces that one takes away the sebum, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the skin is removed, then apply the oil of broiled silk or distill red powder and similar corrosive medicines into the oil, and put a cotton cloth with egg white on top so that it is secure from hot abscess; and if there is nothing left, and the wound swells up to you, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the hot abscess with soothing things; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do for all skins removed in the oil by this appearance.
But it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each oil according to natural and accidental means through iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that this member suffers from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Sebel are red veins that are covered on the oil, and tolerate the eye's work and weaken the oil always. It is necessary then that you first look at the oil in which the sebel is, if it is bad, and there is no other disease except the sebel; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then suspend those veins with all the unguent according to your wisdom, and be the unguents subtle double according to this form:
And let there be two unguents by degree in one body according to this form:
Then coil the unguents with gentle forces, and dry out the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins removed from the oil; and take care not to bleed the oil at any points of the poultices, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil green and red powder to corrupt what remains of the sebum.
And if you are unable to coil all of this in that hour, then make a poultice on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and you are sure of no hot abscess; then continue according to this manner which is before until he is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the pus from the eye
The doctor is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and medicine with hot water as I have said before, and it is not healed, then it is a sign in him that you must cut open the abscess where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then raise it with all the instrument according to this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron in one piece, and be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is reduced; and do this some times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
if the wound is sealed, and skin has grown, and the body of the bowels is sealed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemized, and bad accidents do not come, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other sign than to bring back the fistula to the pit of the navel according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time by iron and medicines, and when it is uncovered take one force according to this form, and be the key of iron at three angles, and the handle be worn down to the head as you see here:
then put it on the bone near the armhole, and withdraw your hand from the oil a little, then turn the whole force so that it pierces the bone and lets the patient feel through the vein if he holds his hand on his navel; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when the skin grows and hardens the surface, then the matter goes to the navel; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the discharge from the eye
When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction from the nose or diminishment, it is necessary that you restrain the patient; then soothe the eyes; then apply leeches or hot iron to heal; then put on oil, made from aloes and aloe, and incense and sarcocolle, and then bind the eyes with bandages and drapes; and the manner of the drapes is that you take soft drapes, four each time, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then bind it firmly over a cloth bandage, and repeat the leeches to heal without causing harm; then remove the leeches and let the oil be restrained day and night, and if the bandages become worn out, it is necessary that you restrain them tightly; then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eyes repairing themselves, that is good; if not, then repeat the treatment with bandages, drapes, and leeches until the patient is healed.
rupture of the vitreous humor
When a disruption comes to the vitreous humor, then it opens up and appears like a grain of resin, and it's astonishing to see; then if you see it cover, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below up to the point above, then push another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cut the leash of the double thread and tie a part of the vitreous humor around, and bind it well, then pull out the needle and put on oil soaked in egg whites in abundance; and let it be so that the fibers choose with the vitreous humor, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes have a great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes from the bottom of the eye, and remove the moisture of the albugine and descend the eyes, and enter into it as soon as possible; then restrain it until it is healed.
from the bottom of the eye
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the conjunctiva that is assembled in the eye, resembling water flowing down, and it's not actually water; and the manner of its appearance is such that you sit the patient on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your two hands, and lift it up until you see the conjunctiva come up to your eyes; then insert it, and do not let it descend and be dislodged by the light, and have the patient see things as they normally would; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the conjunctiva is not prepared as we have said. Then sit the patient between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make a hole in the cornea .i. pot through the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the conjunctiva emerges; and when it has emerged, then distill hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled with honey, and have it treated by another treatment until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye
We have the likenesses of waters in division, and what is needed to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and tie the healthy eye very tightly; then put the paper on the oil in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then place the point of the instrument under the cornea by the thickness of a hair on the inner corner of the eye, at the part of the lesser eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces in the inner corner of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the distance from the prunele to the end of the nourishment; and this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument just above where the water is, then press down on one path after another. If the water now descends, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his own eye.
After a little rest, and if the water rises the second time, put pressure with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently remove almagda by turning your hand little by little; then put in the eye a little bit of gemstone oil, and leave it there. Then put on top of the oil estoupes or linen soaked in rose oil and egg whites, and tie with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, put on a crown made from abundant egg whites.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce the conjunctiva alone, and do not go too far into it, but make a subtle hole, then put in almagda, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a bed suitable for sleeping on his back in a dark room; and be still from all movements, and take light food, and do not move your head left or right, and tie him according to his disposition for three days; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put the bandage back on by the seventh day; and it is not necessary to do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but rather you must delay it, because the water rises quickly.
If an abscess comes to be, then you must release the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then release the vision and put on a bandage made of linen for covering some days, and be still in that same dark house. And then come out of the house little by little, and convert to your condition; and know that no disciples should interfere with this case.
And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in his land he did a great wound, by which water flowed, but yet I never saw any such thing in our land nor did I ever read about it in old books; and by chance this is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the shapes of almagda, because he who does not know them sees them; and they are of earth properly.
And the heads of these are of the same subtlety, and the ends in three corners are rough.
of the flesh on the knee
Sometimes flesh grows on the knee, and it is diverse, of which some seem like scorpions to many people; and if there are such ones where the flesh is inflamed with a reddish color, or soft with a pale color. Then, in that one of these fleshes which is soft and not inflamed, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and let him spit on those fleshes, and heat them up; then, as much as you can sustain by the subtle point of a knife from one side, until you see that flesh is entirely removed.
And if there remains any thing that cannot be cut, then open it with all one of the subtle instruments lightly, until nothing remains; and if it is not inflamed, or if the abscess has opened, then apply the cautery as it is needed; and if it are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize so much that the blood is staunched and all the fleshes are removed, then spit on the knee, or on the water, or with wine.
If the knee opens and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is flesh grown in the bone above, whereby instruments do not come to cut: then you must put one linen thread of a moderate thickness, well oiled by hand, with about an inch or less between each knot; and put the patient's head on the thread at his own power, and pull it gently until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times do this with children at school, and it is a light matter for one who wishes to do so; then hold the end that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and know one after the other as we are on the thread. Do this until you see that the knots have corrupted that flesh; then pull the thread, remove the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the knee just as before; do this three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put the knee in a cloth bandage for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, whereby one distills oils and medicines on the knee.
And it is of silver or earth, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and the instruments be full to purge the head; and have one handle at the head to hold when heating the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the knee
Many times a disease called "telul" grows on the head of the knee, and it becomes great and large, so that it is a visible thing to look at; and therefore you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all the flesh, then put hot cautery or medicine on top; and if you delay cutting it until it becomes great, take heed lest it become hard, of reddish color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of reddish color, and you see that you can cut it all off, then empty the patient's head and cut without fear, and cure the wound with drying and binding things.
when the knee is cut and cleansed
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these worked cartilages, it is of little profit, more so than in some people. It is therefore necessary to do as follows with anyone who has this, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together by a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if the lips are already split on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their flesh until they bleed, then join the two lips together by a suture, and bind tight, and sprinkle on top powders of dragon's blood and incense; and put on the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster suitable, and let it be for as long as it pleases itself, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of the abscesses of the lips
Many people have within their lips abscesses that are hard and resemble grains of millet, small and large; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut each one in two, and take each part as a pincer and cut into each part; then apply the leech after the incision with vinegar and broom, until the blood is staunched; and then remove the leech, and cure the wound with drying things until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times a growth appears on the gums that the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the blood flow or the pus; then put on top vinegar and broom, or other drying and desiccating powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times occurs, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of the sore
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as far as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; therefore it is necessary that you sit the patient in your hands, and their tears be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and so do with the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other stains, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; but if not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which we remove the teeth has different forms than he who removes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary to delay pulling until as long as you can, for this should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance that one does not have an excuse to remove. Then when the patient is constrained to pull out, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth's tenderness. Many times the pain would overcome the patient, and they thought it was a saintly tooth, and would pull out the good tooth; and yet the pain does not depart at all from them until the bad one is pulled out, for we have already tried this on holy ones; and when you are well certain of the tooth's tenderness, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in every crevice very carefully to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your thumb or use fine forceps at the first notch and notch, so that it is well extracted, then secure the forceps; and the patient's hand should be in your holy place between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently on each side, and then move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and bruised, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the perforations are; and if you strain subtly with the forceps, so that it does not break when straining; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take care that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and the tooth will return to the patient through the malice of the root causing even greater pain than the first. And take care that you do not act like the ignorant sages who by their haste and boldness break some time the cart, and bring no benefit at all as we have recounted; but they sometimes bring great diseases through the roots that remain, or because the cart is broken, just as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with vinegar or oil and seaweed; and if blood comes out, which often happens, fill the wound with vitriol broth; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments with which one extracts teeth first should be long-pointed and having large handles, so that they do not double back when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And should be made of large limbs so that they do not bend when pulling out, and should be well-made iron, and should have teeth to hold in place.
of the root of the tooth When the root remains at the pulling, it is necessary that you put a damp cotton cloth with butter on top of the wound for one or two days, until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the patient's hand seems like a gentle beak; and they should also be made inside as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the cartilage completely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", that is to say, a pincer, by which it is the form:
And should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by this, it is good; if not, then use all the instruments, by which the forms come after:
And if you help with this instrument that has two horns, it is the form:
and other instruments that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems great forceps, it is the form:
And it should be this instrument so that it cannot break; and knows that many tooth instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise and subtle masters find for themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases and if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, or it may happen that way, so he searches for instruments as I have said, and helps with gestures, this is the form: And should be big and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then restore the wound with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then set it right with all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body and its shape is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is new after the original tooth and is not in its proper place, and cannot be shaped or filed: then scrape; and if it is together with the tooth, take this instrument which has the form of a small beak, and made of very sharp iron at the end:
And the edge is worn away and away in a few days due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a special file such as this form:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth gradually, little by little, over a few days, so that it does not move until it is shaped; then smooth out at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it is necessary to file off the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth decay
When the teeth in front decay, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without spitting it out, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, but this does not work; then they must be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and putrid, but gold never changes; and let the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are out of alignment, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then place your fingers between the unhealthy teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the surface to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and gently, until it does not move; and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the threads of the thread with a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and re-point between the healthy tooth and the unhealthy tooth, and place it so that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it in this way as long as it can remain, and if it comes loose or breaks, tighten it with another thread; if it remains and serves in this way for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two unhealthy ones, as you see:
Et when the tooth falls out, then it is put back into its place, gradually and bit by bit, as we have said; and one should not intervene unless one is wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a whale's bone is formed, and it is placed in the gap where the defect is, and it is strained on thus as we have said, and remains and serves for such a long time.
to bind the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue either by nature or due to the healing of an injury; and the work is such that you must operate on the patient's mouth, with their head in your lap, and lift up the tongue. Then bind the nervous ligament from the wide one, until the tongue is dislocated from its dwelling, and if there is hardness or stiffness, and it is due to a wound, then apply an unguent and bind the ligament; and take care that the incision is not too deep, lest the artery beneath be injured. And when you have done this, then lift up the tongue with a rose-colored cloth or a cold cloth, and put under the tongue a linen tent; and let the patient wear it every night, so the wound cannot suture. If blood comes out, apply vitriol powder to the wound; and if the blood flows, cauterize it with a slow fire cautery, which is good for that; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
and if you see it is yellow or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards blennorhea, and there is moisture, then apply an unguent, and make a small poultice with a subtle spatula, and deliver it on both sides; and if the blood flows to your operation, apply vitriol powder until it subsides, then return to your operation as long as you are treating thoroughly; then lift up the tongue with a cloth of silk or linen, and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
of abscesses in the throat
Sometimes there comes into the throat swellings which are called "godath", and one properly calls them ".ij. amandres". And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small sense and yellow color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the evacuation of blood; but let it remain until it becomes dull, and then you will divide it, or it would break on its own; and if it is of white color and red, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to bind, but look first if the abscesses are at rest and are appeased. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with their head in your lap, and operate on the mouth and take the serjeants between your hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, so that it takes its shape; and be of silver or subtle brass, just like scissors:
And then press the tongue under all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the unguent and stick it into the swelling, and treat it thoroughly above what you can; and do not touch anything with cloth, then bind it to the instrument, so that it takes its shape, as if it were a force; and although the head is curved, one way or the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron wire or awl:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then bind it with pincers, so that it takes its shape:
And it should be cauterized on one side and the other; and when you have cauterized one of the swellings, then cauterize the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and cold water, and a cloth of silk, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with hot water, or cooked apple peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is subsided; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat besides the .ij. amandres, then cauterize them thus as the .ij. amandres are cauterized.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside the throat, which is to say one abscess of small sense; and I had already well closed all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two rains through the two holes of the neck. I hastened then at once, and applied an unguent to one side, then treated it thoroughly, and took out a great portion of pus; then re-treated the other side through the other hole of the neck, and operated on the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards applied the unguent to these abscesses, and bound part of it, and only a small amount of blood flowed out; and thus the conduit of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recrossed again and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I bound it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained; and I left these parts, and only know what God made of them after me.
of the uve (uveitis)
When the uve swells up and is long and inflamed, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and when it is below the fat and rounded, it is called "uve". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscesses are appeased, and she is subtle, then it is necessary to bind it; and the one who is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or yellow or black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision on it. For there is great peril for the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its swelling and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue to the instrument which we have made a reminder of earlier; then apply the unguent to the uve, and treat it below, and bind it with one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the .ij. amandres. And it is necessary not to bind more than the superfluous part that is outside the natural term; for if you bind too much, you will cause pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .ij. amandres, and cure it until she is healed. And if the patient has fear of binding, then it is necessary to use trickery for the cauterization of the sense that fears; and the manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts their head in your lap, and then presses their tongue to the instrument which we have said in the chapter on cautery, and confesses with hot water, so that she is not too thick nor too clear; and use the mechanism of this instrument, so that it takes its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d'une cuillier, et met l'estruement a tout la medicine sus l'uve; and let the hair on the head be long or trimmed as one places medicine, just like those of a quiver, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the swelling; and the patient should lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth with the medicine inside, so it does not descend to the throat, and then bleed; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the swelling, for half an hour, until you see it take shape and the medicine's blistering be appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton on the cane above, until the cotton covers the swelling; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. If you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, then start again, and after the cautery, wrap around the swelling with a cotton cloth soaked in oil, and clean all that surrounds the medicine; and be cleansed with cold water, and be cured of gargling until it is healed.
This cure is safer than the incision, not to mention the cautery; if it is cured with fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and I put a little bit of oil, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument carved according to this manner: And it should be made of silver or lead, and one of the keys should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the swelling through the tube, until the swelling is mortified; after, repeat this often, until the swelling dries, and be sure not to do this at the beginning of the aposteme's heat, for many things happen then; and don't do it too soon before the aposteme's heat declines. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put a quill-shaped eggshell inside the patient's head, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh on the mouth, and this is good care together with salvation.
Many times it appears at the throat as a bone or fish spine, or nothing; so it is necessary that you try to see what you can and press the tongue onto the instrument in the sun, until you see the thing move; and that which does not appear and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit while the food is cooked in their stomach; by chance if the thing is forced out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a fragment of dry bread; and tie the sponge to a thread, then pass it through; and when it comes up, it will be absorbed, then you will pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take a lead instrument according to this form:
And the instrument should be curved at the top so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all life leave him, nor insert the bone inside; and be careful that the patient inserts the instrument, for this is how the thing is forced out or is released; if they push it down, or pull it back out along the entire instrument, until it is fully out.
Of the spittle of the throat
There is no medicine for spittle, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, after you press their tongue onto the instrument that I told you. And if you see the spittle, pull it out slowly along a small string or fine tongs like those suitable for this purpose. And if this does not work, take a carved tube and insert it into the patient's throat, then put the tip of the tube into the patient's mouth and make it so many times. And if the patient is bothered by water all day, then take a full view of cold water, open their mouth, and pour it out without swallowing, and move it often with your hand; and as soon as the spittle feels the water, let it go.
And if it does not go as we said, then subfumigate the patient with asefetide, at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the swelling; do this many times, for it will come out without effort. And the manner of fumigation is to take a pot where there are hot coals, and have the pos covered by a perforated cloth, and in that hole be the keys of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and the patient puts their head of the tube into their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the spittle; and now the spittle will go away, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer from thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and thus there is need for it to come out through this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the spittle is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs to help it enter the throat; and it has a resemblance to a surgeon's beak, and has an asperity of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
the chapters on abscesses
There are many similarities of abscesses, according to what memory brings forth from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two manners in which one is similar itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are at the bone or in the flesh. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the bone jointed are different from those that come to joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if one has an abscess that should not be pierced until the swelling is less according to its completion; and there are some that need to be pierced when they are hard and do not die according to their completion, such as those that occur at joints. For when abscesses come at joints, and one leaves it until it is all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, causing contraction in that member.
Et covient que tu saiches l'oure de la perforation de l'aposteme qui est meur selonc l'acomplissement, and that is when the pain is assuaged, and the departures of fever, and the diminishing of pain and redness, and the debating and adjusting of the head of the aposteme, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit where it will depend on the location of the aposteme, and where it appears to move; and the perforation should be long enough in the body, and if the apostemes are at hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no inflammation.
In those that are inflamed, according to the affected member. And when apostemes are in a charnut location, so move that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, the body would be lengthened with venom from it, and filled with much waste; and by chance harden the lips and bottom parts of it. And for some apostemes that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need. And it is necessary that you make small perforations for small apostemes, and large perforations for great apostemes, and many incisions according to the likeness of the greatness of the aposteme; and if there are such apostemes where it is necessary to cut out the core, and cover; when it has become as one flagon, and is exhausted, then make as you do with babies: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those from which one cuts like the foliage of myrtle, like apostemes of anger; and if there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar covering.
Those who do not have a head, like a soft superficial aposteme, it is necessary that you pierce thoroughly; and it is necessary when the apostemes are great, and they have gathered much pus, and you pierce, so as to draw out only some of the pus in that hour, then stop the aposteme until the next day, then draw out nothing more above; do this many times with great care, until all the pus comes out; especially if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carrying child, or small children, or old decrepit men. For the spirits sometimes quiver with the issue of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware. Therefore, exercise great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your aposteme, then dress the wound, and see if the wound from the aposteme is small; and if it is a plain cut, then apply tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a great apostemes, and there are many perforations, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together; and if you have cut out part of the skin from the aposteme, and you have covered it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove it, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs at your work, then apply cold and soft water, and a wet cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times. And if the bleeding persists, then apply governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is winter, and the flesh or apostemes are very nervous, it is necessary that you put on wet tents and cloths soaked in hot wine and oil; and if it is summer, and the flesh is fatty, then apply wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the aposteme and dress it and care for it, as necessary, until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of apostemes: for I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of apostemes, and see here the chapter.
None (it seems that there is no text to translate)
Where the core of the head comes from small apostemes, and are like us who are in nets, just as a spider is in its web, and there are many likenesses. There are some that are fat and such that have moisture like poultices; and if there are those which are hard and stony to cut into, and where the artery does not make contrary. And the works of the incision are that you test all one instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes hereafter, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then drain it above the long part. And when the moisture is exhausted, then scrape without leaving anything but the skin that contained that moisture, for it will return again if you leave anything; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound, and let it be until the next day; and this will happen to those who are left from the night. And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that there is no longer any moisture at night; then cure the wound with ointment in a way that is suitable, until it is healed. And if the apostemes hold one fat nut, then cut it according to this form, from the long part; and throw out your needles, and scrape off all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the pus where it lies; and if the artery makes contrary, do what I told you afterwards. And similarly with the aposteme if it is stony, and of cutting and curing as I told you.
And the incision above the stony and moist aposteme is lighter, for it contains less blood. And if there are some of these apostemes that have no moisture at all, such as one aposteme I cut from the head of an old woman; and I found the aposteme to be like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if one had done anything with it, one would have made just as much of a wound as with a stone. In other apostemes coming from the head, except for those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the incision should be always at its most dependent place, in order to allow the pus to issue forth; and the cure should be done as necessary.
None (it seems that there is no text to translate)
Many times these apostemes occur at the neck and below the shoulders, and sometimes in the armpits, and occasionally elsewhere on the body, and they are many and intertwined with each other. And each scrophule is properly located within its own skin, just like the nodules and apostemes of the head, as we have said; and there are many likenesses to these scrophules. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and refuse to obey health. Therefore, when you see one with a good disposition for cutting, and it has the color of the skin, and is quiet on all sides and not inflamed at the neck or artery or vein, and is not deep; then it is necessary that you cut above it, and scrape off each part, and leave the two lips of the wound to be treated with poultices, if you need them, as we have said in apostemes of the head; and treat it little by little, and make sure you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor should it be a spatula that is too long or cuts too much, lest your hand escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l'artere, and if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound vitriol powder or some powders that remain blood and restrain the wound; and let it stay until the abscess is appeased and the wound is softened and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look at your indication if there are any small scrophules remaining, cut them off and remove them. And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrophule, then do not cut that scrophule at its root, but tie it with a double thread, and let it fall without harm; then apply the wound with old Egyptian cotton soaked in oil, then cure.
And if you cut out the whole scrophule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, then since there will be no remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrophule. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root, and pull forth, and sew as we have said. Those scrophules that hold superflity, pierce where it appears to decay; and pierce in such a way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then administer tents with oil and similar things, so that what remains of corruption is corrupted; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment pouring out flesh, until it is healed.
None! It seems you just provided a single word: "de squinance". If you'd like to provide more text or ask me to translate something else, feel free to do so!
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the incision in the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not make use of it by doing so, because all the veins and the swollen parts of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the armpit, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to escape the peril that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglote, we should cut it below three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the size of the incision of the syphilis, not in the cartilage.
and that one is suitable for the cutting of the epiglote, since there is no flesh and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is timid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire length, then cuts the leather so that it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the syphilis, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the pus from the channel which jumps forth through the torn part, and by the defect of the voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed about which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew it all around without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one does not do this just yet, until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the defect leads on. Then cut out the epiglote because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the malady of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they command to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young woman take one knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the armpit;
and I was called to cure her, and found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor guided it away from the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was well.
and there was no harm to the young woman except that she lost her voice, and returned afterwards to her usual state.
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglote there should be no fear.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish-yellow color, and it is very common in women.
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not necessary to work fiercely except in the one who is small, and probe and search through all the intervening parts. if you find it as hard as a lump of fat, and is not able to move in any way, then cut it, just as one cuts flesh, and treat it with all the care necessary if there is no abscess. and search thoroughly, and heal it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
of the flesh
Many kinds of flesh are, which I will say all the similarities;
and it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between flesh and abscess.
I say that an abscess is warm and feverish, until the boils have passed, and the corruption is completed; then the fever and warmth subside.
With the flesh there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains a pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a greenish-yellow liquid, and becomes swollen.
and are according to two appearances, either fat or moist, and of various colors as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the flesh, that you first probe and examine it with all the instruments called "entromissoires", according to what its form will come or whether it is a cyst which is afterwards.
The manner of inquiring into abscesses is that you take the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers slowly, slowly, until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the instrument, and take care in case it breaks off.
If moisture comes forth, regardless of its color, then do as I said for other abscesses.
And if after the instrument no moisture comes forth, know that it is fat, then do it in a cross shape, and take hold of pincers, and scrape it lightly from each part, and keep the coat where you find it to be intact with the help of the needle.
And if you cannot remove it whole, then remove it in pieces so that there is nothing left.
For if anything remains, then the abscess will come back many times.
And if a small part remains and the blood grieves you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put on soothing things hot to the abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the abscess is great, then cut off the two lips of the wound, and cure it with what is left of flesh.
And if the vein is against you or another obstacle makes you hasten and use the lead of vitriol mixed with water, and let it lie for two or three days until the wound purrs, and cease the flowing of blood; then return to the operation on what remains of the needle.
Behold the forms of the instrument instruments, and they are three in manner: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are three quadrants which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, for encircling abscesses of fistula.
And they are also like the needles with which one sews suture, and they are of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most tried and proved to be black for encircling the swellings of fistula.
And they are three in manner: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the onyxes are many in likenesses, as you see here: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are onyxes which have two swellings of three kinds.
And there are onyxes which have three swellings, and they are also of three kinds; and there are onyxes which have two swellings, and onyxes with only one swelling, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these with which one works are cutting, and there are some that do not cut very far except from one side, from which one scrapes the abscess, because it is not necessary to cut the vein or the nerve.
And these instruments are wrapped in cloth, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses.
And they are three in manner: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see.
And one does not use them much except in a place that is well-closed, such as joints, and arms, and shoulders, and at angles, and in similar places.
And sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scraper of fistula, according to this form, with which one stops blood.
And one puts it sometimes in the place where the veins come together and the arteries, and sometimes they are bent according to this great form.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like a woman's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must be treated according to this form of the line b up to 7g. Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine that brings forth flesh, then stitch together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the breast sags down and is marred by its size just like it is in women, then do it in two seams above, by two similar incisions. So that one is joined to the other at the end of each one, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and put in what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the hemorrhaging of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive oil. and let it stay until the remaining flesh and fat are consumed, then cure it until it is healed.
(No translation needed, this appears to be the title of a section or chapter in the text)
These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulas or boils with ridges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture therefore need to be cut according to this form, from line b to line g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and let it stay until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with oil suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is similar to a scrofula, then do it as we have said in incisions for scrofulas, and if the wound discharges pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
(No translation needed, this appears to be the title of a section or chapter in the text)
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is swollen, many abscesses come forth, and it also happens that the vein becomes inflamed and abscessed.
and if one knows this way when it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it at your fingers, you will feel one strangeness; and when it is because of the vein, then it seems to be pushing forth in appearance.
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and all the more so when it is located under the armpits and inguinal regions and at the neck and many other places, and it is very large. It is then necessary to prepare the iron treatment, and he who is at the head should also prepare it, and in him who has an aneurysm bursting above the skin of the long one.
It is then necessary to prepare the iron treatment, and he who is at the head should also prepare it, and in him who has an aneurysm bursting above the skin of the long one. then perform the incision on the nodes, and depart beautifully the artery from the tendons, until it is uncovered.
then insert a needle below the one, and make it pierce until the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then prick the place that is between the two ties of an introducer until the blood vessel opens which is there, and release the abscess.
then administer the treatment as instructed by Bowe, until the tie falls. then treat with ointment what is suitable for this, until he is healed.
and if the abscess is for the sake of letting blood, then it is necessary that you stain with your hand as much of the abscess as will reach to all the skin. then insert the needle below the place that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and there be one double thread, so that you pull it to the other side. then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or join one of the two parts to the two heads of the thread.
and if you doubt that the threads do not come out firm, then rebite another needle all along one thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
then cover the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cover the superfluity of the blood and leave what is tied.
then put on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also just as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come on the nerves when they are fatigued or from too great labor, and similar things.
And this often happens in the joints and the elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it exists in many dispositions without pain.
and when one exerts oneself strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the very depth of the body, but rather below the skin.
and it spreads well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: by chance there would be contraction.
and the one who is on the head or on the forehead, make the skin to blister. If the abscess is small, then hold it with pincers and cover it at its root;
and if it is large, then suspend it on the needle, and scrape it, then cut it and assemble the wound to the seam, and apply treatment until he is healed.
of great hives hanging down Sometimes it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere on the body, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large swellings; and there are some small ones and very large ones.
and I have seen one man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open and oozed moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work of the incision is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthritic area is white and moist and has a subtle root.
so that you cut it open wide at the scabbiness, and be present with the cautery by fire. For when cutting comes too great a flow of blood, and if the patient's blood vessel is swollen, then hasten to apply the cauterizer;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a well-made linen thread and bind the arthritic area as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the linen thread until the arthritic area is cut open, and choose by him without great labor; and if the roots are large, then fear to cut open as well for the belly, but you can still cut off half.
then cauterize it so that it does not recur; then treat the wound, and take care that you do not cut open the arthritic area which is of bad color and poor sense and regards milk.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after this.
when the wound is over
If the appearance of the wound comes from a cauterization of a cut or a syphilitic ulcer, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it often does in other ulcers, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from inflammation;
and if it is from the ulcer of syphilis and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with diverse exits. And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on the belly so that it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance to the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press on it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is from blood, then it appears by these signs as the abscess great and hard, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
and if it is from inflammation, then it is sore when touched, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or inflammation. So it is necessary that you leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to hold his belly firm and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the belly. then he commands you to place it gently between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed on all sides. then stretch half of the abscess above to the great incision;
then work on the half of the abscess stretched above the knot, and put your right index finger, and pierce the intestine. if you find it stuck to the knot, then loosen it, and push the intestine forward from the belly.
and if you find the bowel, take hold of it with the incision, and cut away the superfluity.
and if the artery makes you resistant or the vein, then go around nicely, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two fine threads on them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place be as long as it can open up, and cut out the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and open, then cure it as is necessary, and clean the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and open, then cure it as is necessary, and clean the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as is necessary, and sew up the wound.
of the sore
We have said in the division about the similarities of sore, and how one should work it with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure by fire; and say that the sore should be left to itself in the marrow, and great caution is needed in the cure. And the old ones say that when sores are in a place or can be reached as if they were in the very bones, and in the hips, and in similar places, you must entirely remove it when it starts; and when it is large and old, do not approach it, for I never saw one cured; nor has anyone before me.
And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile at some point; then make him healthy if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient one good place to do the work; then take your needles or sore and clean it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood run freely and press well the place with your hand or something, and if the flow of blood makes you resistant to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize as long as the blood is flowing; then cure with another cure until he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is only eclites; and one should not touch iron on these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as inflammation of the belly and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong virtue, and he only has dropsy without any other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work thus: lift the patient straight up onto your hands, and have him press his belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the abdomen; then take the spine-shaped instrument according to this form: And be cutting from two parts. at a point, and yet not so deep that it can come just to the intestine when you put it in, and not be able to hurt it.
then look if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if it's necessary, then cut into the belly three fingers' breadth below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly three fingers' breadth; and if it's due to a tumor, then it should be on the right side, and it's not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities don't run to that weak place.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and bind it, and lift your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the flesh as in shearing at the quantity of an inch or less; then pierce the flesh until the spatumile comes to the eight vein, and that is the place of the water, then treat it further, and put this instrument which has the form: And it resembles a silver chain, and is made of light iron or archaic, and has a small hole in the lower part; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another; and are cut off like a feather, and that is the form of the incision which the writers cut with a pen.
at the top of it is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then descend now on top of the instrument; empty it then one-third or two-thirds, for if you empty more than what's needed at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls asleep, or approaches death.
but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the purpose that stops the hole which is on the flesh, as I have said, that you pierce in this manner; then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from these things, and draw out a small quantity of water.
do this for a few days, and take care not to drain out too much water at once. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then the cure of burial or sand will be needed, and by excessive sweating or bathing in hot water and sun, and he should abstain from drinking; and treat with desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis No child is born who does not have a foreskin on the penis, or it is small, or it is not in its place. If this is so, then one should pierce at all times .i. spatumile very subtle according to this form: then put on the foreskin .i. fine cloth of linen, and bind and keep it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to do urine, then take off the cloth, and do urine, and then put it back; and by chance there is no harm, for the urine that comes out does not disturb the closure. Those whose foreskin is small should be treated with the cloth of linen, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their foreskin in its place are afflicted, for no one is born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot discharge because the matter cannot reach the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and then lifts the head of the penis and cuts it similarly to the shape of a feather, so that the foreskin can open in its place, as it should; and take care of the bleeding which comes many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and cure the wound until he is healed.
of the pustules of the penis These blisters often come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you should take them with a very fine needle, cut and scrape all of them away, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure with divine ointment until he is healed. And if the blister is malignant, with foul color and discharge, it is necessary to apply a cautery. When you have cut it away, and the blister is on the penis, and has part within the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the blister which is inside first; and when it is healed, then cure the outside part. For if you cure them together, the head of the penis will not be sure to avoid being pierced, and there will be more corruption and blackness in his penis and groin; so it is necessary to cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made from the rind of pomegranates and beeswax, and then cure with other remedies until he is healed.
And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizes in two dispositions together: that is to say, at the bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a linen strip into the opening of the penis and make the patient urinate through it; and when the skin around the foreskin is roughened at the head of the penis which have not been circumcised, or it has due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary to cut away with a hair-like instrument until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis be released from all parts.
and if this is a grievous thing to do, it is necessary that you cut away with a very fine instrument some spot from the head of the penis and skin; then carefully remove between two, and put in a thin cloth of linen soaked in cold water, so that it does not become rough again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the removal of continuity as are other wounds; however, when we do this work at our own will and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the easiest for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not instruct their children in circumcision, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and physicians who perform circumcision around a piece of linen, with forceps, and all in one new cloth; it was necessary to cut through because there are two skins, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
And then it is necessary to cut again, and there is double pain, and the point of the member is not assured by the mundification; and at the mundification of the wound by chance the iron escapes, and the work is spoiled, and many times it happens that they do not need mundification and I have seen this.
Of the mundification which is done with forceps throughout all the ligament of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forceps cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in one place and another; but the thread should be very thin around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything more than simply wrapping the thread around the penis, and then make him sit down in all the ways that you can. then make it sit between your hands all straight, and point the forceps between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow gently with a key, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then mundify well the filth that is gathered there, then tie the signet of a double thread, then tie below one piece to another ligament; and hold it with two thumbs through the second loop in the pouch and the right index finger, and cut between the two threads, then lift the key quickly and pull the head of the penis.
then make it sit between your hands all straight, and point the forceps between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow gently with a key, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then mundify well the filth that is gathered there, then tie the signet of a double thread, then tie below one piece to another ligament; and hold it with two thumbs through the second loop in the pouch and the right index finger, and cut between the two threads, then lift the key quickly and pull the head of the penis. then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on and on a cloth glued with a yolk of cooked egg tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rosed oil, and leave it there until the next day, and then cure with another remedy until he is healed.
The form of the forceps for mundification is this: the two jaws should be held and should be cutting, and should be the same size as each other.
the error of the mundification is when the iron within flows into the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the ligament makes an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it lasts for three days, and what is below the penis becomes inflamed, then let it be so until the abscess is pacified, and then scrape it lightly; then cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, it will not harm anything.
Treat then the wound of sudden powder that we have spoken about in dealing with powders, and if one cuts too much beyond measure, and it goes above, so as not to harm; treat it then as we have said, until it is healed.
Retention of urine.
Retention of urine is caused by constriction of the kidney, or blood clotted, or bowel obstruction, or childbirth, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone or the curvature of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent forward at the knees; and his feet should be placed on the back, and he should stretch out his belly from above down to the back, and have the patient straighten himself as much as he can; and then the curvature of the bladder is constrained by the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which has this form: and be made of subtle silver hair, like a bird's feather; and be the cane one palm and a half long, and be subtle at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie it to the head of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the siringue; and cut off the excess of the wool and put it just up to the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and hen's egg, and have the patient sit on a stool, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and dry water.
Then put the siringue lightly on the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the mouth; then insert the siringue before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient's sensation coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or guide is twisted; then pull out the thread all along the wool piece and piece, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull it out and make the urine flow.
and repeat the siringue until the bladder is emptied, and have the patient eased.
of the diseases of the bladder.
When fluxes or blood come into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see waters and medicines dripping, then make use of all the instruments called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the lips are pierced so that the medicine can be such that it stops well the penis without addition, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and insert when needed.
and when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw on the drawing tube that is inside; if you will draw out the moisture with the syringe, then pull back strongly on the drawing tube inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus it is:
And it is of silver or horn, and the head is higher up; then below lies one piece of skin or the seam falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture into it that you see catheterizing the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the one end of the moisture on the fire; then insert the head of the syringe into the penis, then strain your hand onto the bladder with all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone.
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the reins, and all signs, and which stone one should work on in size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder in children happens more often than in grown-ups, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hairy, and greases the patient's penis, and makes him go many times, and then becomes inflamed; and many of these stones fall to the ground; and children's healing is much lighter until they are three years old, and it is very grievous in old age, and it is in middle-age men, between youth and old age; and the cure is more gentle for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purge the patient by catheterization, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders the quest for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and throw him down and move him to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from high up; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is entirely declaiming downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in place, then hasten now to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't fall when touched all over, then moisten your two middle fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your two median fingers, if the patient is young and complete; and insert them into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your fingers, then bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your fingers and push it out where you see cutting.
And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out with his right hand the fingers above, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the fingers in the part where you are doing the cutting; then put the spatula copant, which is the form.
And make between those who is between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but at the left side of the naughtiness; and be straight on the stone, and your feet should be there or at the foundation, and be the size of the cross so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
By chance the pressure should be on the foot that is at the foundation, so it jumps out without much effort; and know that there are stones or rocks with angles and edges: if it is rough to come out; and there are others that are smooth, similar to a glass, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
To that stone which has angles and edges, make the shape larger; and if it doesn't jump, then you must strain above with the pincers which are like a file at the head, to strain the stone so it doesn't escape; or you put beneath .i. subtle instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then open .i. small hole in the pertus, and if the stone is decorticated, then strain it with vitriol;
And if there are more stones, then put the largest one first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then draw it out, and the small ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, you must make it smaller, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately in such a way that the flesh cannot cohere; but nevertheless strive to draw it out, or to break it up with pincers, until you have drawn it out by pieces.
And when you have completed your work, then anoint the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and strain it, and place a damp cloth on top in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not release the tie until three days.
And when you release him, then arise the patient very well from oil and water, then anoint him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if hot apostemes come to the wound and ulcers, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and are retained by this way so that urine is not released with it: then put your hand into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and destroy it.
Then lift the wound with vinegar and oil and seaweed, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two hips, and gather the medicines on the bed.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed inside, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I say, that you repeatedly cut it, or be excused from cutting because of this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Take one iron rod according to this form and be fixed at three angles in one fire:
Then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the rod into the penis lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the rod in your hand at the stone point by point, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the penis. So it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
And if you cannot do this because of something that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the penis meet the stone between the two ties, then pull it out, and release the tie, and purify the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
Of women's stones
It often happens that stones are imprisoned in women, and if it ever does, then the cure is grievous, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who bares herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman who knows this art by hand; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply situated than the stone of man, therefore it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you take a wise woman who knows, and at great cost find one, and if you cannot find one, then seek out .i. chaste subtle mirror; and the present one a well-informed midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command about the examination of the stone;
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her hand on the foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then constrains it under her hand, and recommends that she puts her hand on the foundation with the patient, and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the crease, where the flesh appears, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her hand above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first.
Then put the right hand in the incision, if you feel the stone so far along the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; so learn the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the blood flows, then put vitriol powder on the wound, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men, to help you in your work.
And if the blood flows, and it's from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the wound and strain of tents and bandages, and do not continue with this, and leave the stone alone and do not try to move it, lest the patient die; then care for the wound.
And when the heat of blood is appeased, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone is exhausted.
of fleshy hernia
Wet white sac is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white siphac, which is below the skin of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "siphac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it's the skin of the testicle between the white siphac that we have said; and this does not happen unless it is so.
And the generation of this wetness is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and spreads this matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it declines to yellowish, or it is without red, or black, or white like water, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is the white siphac that we have said, then it is the abscesses that return, about as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it is the abscesses that return with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white siphac, one feels it well; then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, examine all around the quadrangular outline, from which its form appears as before. Accordingly, what comes after the outline, judge what is inside.
Accordingly, what comes after the outline, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be made whole according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then bind a cloth on his back, on something about a foot high, and place many cloths under him.
then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right side, and stretch the rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles;
then take the spatula left, and cut through the skin of the testicles from its long part until just below the navel, and make your incision all straight down to the white siphac, and scrape it subtly according to our power.
then pierce the white siphac with an aqueduct to one large opening, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers, and stretch the white siphac upwards; and do not touch the skin of the testicles, but only the siphac itself; cut it into pieces or as is, on its own side, subtlety, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
and if the egg jumps out of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the siphac; then assemble the two leaves of the skin of the testicles into one seam, and then cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you loosen the vessels that are suspended, doubting the corruption of blood; then cut the testicle to the whole suspensory part, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two sacs; then cut the other part equally as you did the first one, and then stop the bleeding, and put a linen cloth dampened with rose oil into the wound.
and put another linen cloth dampened with wine and oil on top of it, and place it over the two testicles, and cover it with doubled cloths, and tie it up in the form of this shape:
Then take two cloths, and use woolen cloth according to this likeness and have them sewn together in the gusset of the braies, and one of the strings takes up from the foundation to the back, and the other at the part of the navel; and the other chief is placed over the two armpits, and be all assembled in a restricted manner in the loop of the braier.
and sometimes this sac is treated with a fire cauterization in place of iron, and it's that you take one subtle cauterizing tool, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white siphac that contains the water is revealed.
so take the cauterizer according to this form, and pierce that siphac with your fingers, and scrape it with this subtle hot cauterizer.
And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have reached the end; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salvaged; and keep watching out for corruption of blood, and take care with the ironwork as well.
and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscesses or corruption of blood or another thing, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that this wet sac is bad,
then make the patient sit on a low stool; then pierce the abscess in the part below to the whole spatula wide, and place the perforation from the length of the body; and be large the openings, so that all the water may flow forth.
then place cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow forth, then cure it until the wound is healed.
and if the white membrane does not let the water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a probe or the instrument used to drain the water from hydrocephalus, as we have described; and enlarge the wound slightly, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after 6 months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the treatment of this sac there are many apprehensions, because it seems to me that one must not leave it.
and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the testicles; and this is by many cases.
It's to know that it comes from bitter superfluity and ague, which spreads to the testicles, or by percussion.
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess;
and by chance is an abscess grievous and pained, and of a foul color, and sometimes comes from the absence of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to the absence of an artery, then it is known by the warm appearance of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not seem good that you touch it.
He who is caused by the swelling of a vein is known by its appearance when pressed with the fingers.
and it can be well done according to this appearance and on other similar things. and it is that you cut the key of the coils, then lift it up and pull the thread of white silk and release the suspender from all parts of the coil.
If the coil is already tied with these knots, then it is necessary that you untie the coil and cut the thread.
and if it is stuck to the silk or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension and cut again.
And if the birth of the knot is at the end, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the coil, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with a linen cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the coils
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bunch of grapes, with the softening of the coils and if the patient grievously complains when he walks;
and the cure for this disease is just as frightful as the previous one
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bind the suspender of the coils down to your fingers to all the vessels that are near the thigh, and tighten the masters, and stretch them properly;
then cut at the spatula-like instrument with a wide traverse around the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert an awl where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came forth, and tie it again to the other end. then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisters.
then cure the wound as with others who are wounded in the bowels, so that no vessel is left that could nourish one of the coils.
for then there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come forth blood, then it is necessary to draw out the coils from all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the thread of silk The event of this thread is by the section that comes from the silk, or the extension above the belly in the part of the kidneys, whereby the intestines descend from that thread to one of the coils.
and this thread is either from the silk or from its extension, and it comes in two ways of many causes: by percussion, or leap, or bray, or lifting a heavy burden, and similar things.
and the signs when it is from the extension of the silk, are that it happens gradually and slowly, little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal all the way to the very bottom, because the silk presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the silk, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse appearances of abscesses beneath the skin close by, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body being torn away from the silk.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the intestine, and are retained in this way, and cause great pain to suffer from the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these cases of iron cautery, there is fear, which is why it should be avoided.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to insert his finger into the intestine within the wound, if he can reach it. then have him lean back on his neck between your hands, and lift up his hips.
then raise the key above, and cut all the skin of the coils from the length. then insert inside the leaves of the needle according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can come out.
then scrape off the silk that is under the skin of the coils, until the white silk thread is fully exposed on all sides.
then place your index finger in what is between the coil, between the white silk thread that is under the skin of the coil and the second silk thread.
and depart what is behind the coil, and between the second silk thread; and then move your hand to the right within the key of the coils, and raise the white silk thread high on your left hand, and lift up the coil to all the silk threads towards the edge. and instruct the assistant to stretch the coil upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the binding.
and ask your fingers if there is anything of the intestine wrapped or white silk thread, and if you find nothing, then place it under the belly.
then take an awl with a thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it into the back part of the silk, which is after the skin of the coils; after the edge, then cut off the knots that appear from the threads, as long as there are 3 threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the silk, which we have said is under the skin of the coils, with a strong bond of two parts. then wrap the knots of the threads and tie them together with a strong bond of two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter in, lest the abscess should come forth. and place the ligament directly under the first long ligament two finger-widths away from that one, and then leave a space of about the width of a thumb between these two ligaments.
and then do the same with all the other ones according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the scrotum, as far as the blood flows and the bowels are released, just as we have said before.
then wrap a wet cloth in oil and put it on wounds, and I will tie the ligament that we have said. And at no time should you cauterize the white space that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
For this has happened many times, and leave the ligament until it heals on its own; and if it does not heal quickly, then raise the temperature with hot water, and put what we have said on top, until it heals.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
of flesh hernia
In this case I never saw anyone who dared to do the treatment with iron.
And the ancient ones say that it is done in the same way as the ramie cloth that is wrapped around the body, in this manner that you bind the vessels, after shaping them slightly below.
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
At no time does a rupture come in the inguinal region, as we have said, and open up the swelling; and none of the intestines should protrude to the scrotum, and if any do, it is little, and repair all hours.
and yet if it stays too long in this position, the wound or swelling will grow, until the intestine protrudes.
and this happens due to the extension of the swelling that is in the inguinal region, as we have said, for it is extended, then becomes soft and swollen, and opens up.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before; and at no time is treated with iron in this manner.
and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then cut the swelling of the rupture that has inflated to the width of three fingers.
and then extract the swelling that is under the skin and pull it out, then take the rat and place it on top of the apparent swelling.
and press it to the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent swellings on top of the rat's head, and cut one and the other.
and then extract the head of the rat, and do not cut nor stretch the swelling in any way, as I have shown you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines.
and then treat it as you would a wound. And when you cut the threads, let it not be sullied and treat the wound until it is healed.
The swelling is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the contents inside are softened, and it is a sight to behold; and when one wants to treat it, they must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin that has grown above the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the soft skin at three seams or four firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat it as one would other wounds, until it is healed, and the thread comes out.
of the punishment
Know that chastisement is ordained in our law, and for this reason it pleases me that I should not speak of it at all in this book; and it is only necessary for two purposes: one, to have the doctor respond when asked about a cure, and to provide an answer; and the other, because we often need to chastise certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the way that we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the scrotum are softened and relaxed; then we take hold of them with one hand, until they are remitted and you no longer feel anything. As for the chastisement by cutting: it is necessary to wash the beast, and press the skin of the scrotum against your left hand; then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle once, when you have thoroughly cauterized them; and leave some space between the swelling and the fine swelling that is over the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is more effective than the one done by attraction, because at the attraction there remains perhaps something of the scrotum, whereby the beast desires lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is in two ways in humans: one way is that between the two testicles appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair and sometimes urinates. And the other manner is in women, and has on the finger as much as a penis and two testicles. And the treatment of man and woman is to cut off the excess flesh, and treat it like other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
of tetinegine (not recognized)
Tetinegine is a mass of flesh joined to the natural part, so long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment. It's necessary to wash away the excess tetinegine with your hand or fingernails, and cut it slightly; and don't go too deep into the wound, lest bleeding ensues, then treat it with another cure until it is healed; and there is another lump that grows at the mouth of the womb, and fills, and perhaps bursts forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow's udder, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". It's necessary to cut it, as we have said about tetinegine, and treat it until it is healed.
of erratics (not recognized)
Erratic is when the natural state of a woman's body is not perceived, or if her uterus is small; and it occurs by birth or accident due to disease that has come upon her; or it is caused by a mass of flesh, or from the subtle or thick swelling, and it is done in front, sides, or below, wherever it may be; and it hinders conception, childbirth, and perhaps also menstruation; and the knowledge of this is recognized by the examination of the belly. If the swelling is nearby, you should go to your right or left. If it is from the subtle swelling, and it is near the two lips, you must hasten and do this: put your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spread out her legs; then let the two lips be formed until the subtle swelling is gone, and let it be above the swelling; then take linen, soak it in oil, and place it on the swelling, and make the woman rest at home each day, so that she cannot get better. And if the swelling is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a mirtle leaf. If the swelling is of new flesh, you should suspend it with an onion and cut it; and use medicines that stop bleeding, such as acetate, dragon's blood, and incense, together with an egg; then administer a wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot close; and thus be long enough, and administer a linen tent; then let it be cured by other cures until it is healed. And when new flesh comes in the uterus, you must cut it according to this method, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For at the enchanted aposteme that is in the uterus, one should not touch with fire.
Piles
Haemorrhoids are openings of veins which, without a natural outlet, and when old, become ulcerated; and we have said in our division about their likenesses and signs, and I will now say those that receive curation. I say that haemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are completely inflamed in the rectum, and there is no feeling of them, except through cure by iron. Those at the mouth of the rectum, which can be felt, are those that can be cured. It is therefore necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then set the ulcerated area on tongs, and wrap it around its roots, then powder it with medicines restraining blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and grape skin and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make .i. poultice on her back. And if it stays, that's good. If not, make ventouses on her back and breasts to cause no pain; then take linen, moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area. And when the abscess is quiet, cure the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, so it must be covered as I said about the ulcer; and then cure it until it is healed.
Abscesses of the rectum
Many kinds of abscess come to the rectum, such as chancre and hot abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in my division. It is therefore necessary for me to say about this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the rectum, which is not one of those abscesses that form a boil. And if you wish to know how to work with iron, see first if the abscess is acute at its onset, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red so that you can see it. Then do not hasten to lance it, but make it quiet until the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or one large one for them to lean against, and support their back and assemble their legs at the parties of the far leg; and spread their thighs, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a good bandage. Then secure the cloth on the right side, and apply the instrument that works on the mouth of the rectum, from which this form comes; and it is necessary that when you see me applying this instrument, you place the first layer in so that you can know the depth of the rectum, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the rectum with cloths, so that the instrument does not grieve the patient. And it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a gentle touch on it by hand, it is necessary to cover it at the head, or at the spatula-like place; and when the boil is emptied, it is necessary that you put wet cloths in rose oil or green oil into the wound, or in water that has been cooked with lilies and Aristologe, long so much as it takes to be cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment, until it is healed. And sometimes one opens the rectum and the wound by means of a syringe of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies, and Aristologe; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is returned to the rectum, it is necessary that you take care not to work with iron, but cure it as we have said in my division.
Childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs, that is, when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to give birth; then hasten the child to issue forth quickly; then you will know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under his head, and the afterbirth with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child issues forth soon; for when it descends onto its head, it brings the afterbirth with it, and cleanses the rectum of its superfluities by good purgation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or on the body or the arms, or on the belly, or in some other way, and is converted by chance onto his neck, or through other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should assist her.
If the child comes out under his head through natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have the women hold her; and anoint her with oil or fenugreek cooked in water, and then give the midwife between her thighs this small spatula-shaped instrument. And cut the afterbirth, and tie it off at its tip until the moistors that are inside come out; and take hold of the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fenugreek mush in oil of sisanth; then make her press down and strain through a cloth, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: now the child has issued forth. And if the two hands come out, then it is necessary that you gently pull them apart bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift up her feet high; then tip the stool back down to earth, and hold the woman so she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child has died, then cut off the hands at the join that is before placed here, and extract the child, and pull it out evenly.
The issue of the child on its feet. When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up. and then turn it bit by bit, until it is even.
Then take one of the feet and stretch it bit by bit.
When it springs just to the groins, if the command is to press, and makes the fat bulge with condiments; if it leaps forth, as God wills.
And if it does not leap forth as we have said, then turn it little by little, until it is according to its natural shape. For then it becomes easier.
And if it does not leap forth as we have said, then take mullein leaves, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put it on the natural shape of the woman inside and outside this unguent. then make her sit in cold water down to just below the ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, put a clyster of myrrh on her, and place it underneath, and let her be for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her open and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is now jumping. of the issue of the child on her knees When the child comes in this form, then place your hands little by little;
of the issue of the child who comes out one hand's length away it is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and gently lift her legs;
then administer the mullein mixture that I have told you about;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand; and help the child according to its natural shape, and make her open, and instruct her to take hold as long as the child emerges further.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and have spread out her hands, and her face turned towards the back of her mother. it is necessary that the midwife take hold of its hand, then turn it little by little, and help it gently;
and when it is even, then put on the natural mullein mixture of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and instruct her to take hold; and make her open. of this same manner for the whole second stage
of this same manner for the whole second stage When it comes forth in this way for the whole second stage, then cut the umbilical cord at your finger's length, until the afterbirth is empty.
and if the child looks up at its face and neck, then cut it off from the mouth so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
then put the child inside as long as you have placed it so that it is necessary, and instruct the woman to take hold some time;
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and little happens. Two are a rare thing, and do not live unless they are named.
I know that they multiply, and are divided by the cord which separates them, which is tied to the mouth;
and sometimes come out naturally just like one's own son, as we have said.
And if they come out quickly, then do as we have said, and be subtle, and make what she makes soon and easily. and do thus for the salvation of the mother. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of God's glory,
and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, for by chance similar things may happen to her. so do as it becomes.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman of a dead or stillborn child as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are compelled to operate by hand; it is necessary that you know whether the woman has natural virtue, and does not have an accident or fear of death.
it is necessary that the woman be careful on her back, and that her knees be inclined downward, and her legs lifted.
and the attendant holds her by two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child.
then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with mullein from althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then oil the midwife's hands with these oils and mixtures. then pour them into the mother gently, then take one or two and pour in those things that are convenient for this purpose.
and take heed if the child is prepared to descend on its head. then tie the ligatures in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs.
and if the descent is on feet, then tie it or pinch it and at the crooked places.
and it is necessary that you hold the ligature with your right hand, and place the cord between your knees of your left hand, and pour in all your hand gently, and tie the ligature in one of those places we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
then tie another ligature opposite it, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
and then stretch equally on both sides, moving from one side to the other, so that the joints may come out, and the incisors of teeth may hold them in place, as is the form:
And if some part remains, then anoint the ball with some of its oil and pour it into that part, and draw away the other part;
and if there is none left, then place this incision or higher and do it until everything comes out whole.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned for constriction. so you must wrap around once with a cloth, until everything comes out.
then bind at the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do it in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is thin in the birth, or it has a sharp or pointed cranium assembled. so you must place the spatula-like spine between your legs and bend the head and extract the sharp point. or you will cut it with the instrument which is called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus do the same if the child has a great natural head. and then draw out the bones with forceps,
and if the head jumps forward and it is strained at the forehead, so that it is split open, until the moisture which is in the birth comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can.
and if he is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture flows.
And if the child is on its feet, then the birth is light and the direction towards the mouth of the mother is gentle.
And if he is thin in the belly or at the breast, then it is necessary that you extract him to one cloth wrapped around your hand. and loosen the belly or breast until the moisture that is there flows.
and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, so put the ball of your hand into the mother's private parts and draw it just to the mouth of the mother. then place one or two incisions, and draw it out.
and if the mouth of the mother is constricted due to hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to trouble oneself. rather it is necessary to apply moist and greasy things. and the plaster should be softening and moistening with water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it evenly, then plaster as we have said for a living child.
and if one cannot do so, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if the plaster that we have said for hot abscesses comes to the mother.
and if bleeding comes from the decorations, it should be washed with restraining water, and other remedies applied.
And I saw a woman whose belly had been dead with one child, then she consulted another over that one, and rejected the other as dead. After a long time an abscess came to her belly button, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began with great turmoil.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I put on plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another came out. I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
So I thought it must be the bones of a dead child.
I sought out the wound and drew out many bones until the woman was in a better state. and the woman remained for a long time like that, and there would occasionally come out a small piece of blood from her.
and I have not forgotten this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he should know how to help it.
on bringing the mother back to her place
Hereafter comes the form of the preservative, by which one preserves the books; and with two turnings at two heads of two lines. However, the corners should be more subtle than the restricted one, and made of ebony or boxwood.
and the mouth of the fist should be one and a half fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and as long as half a palm. and between the two lines should be two joinings of this same fist, which are firm on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
and these two joinings are placed in the mouth of the mother to open when one turns the two corners.
Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, should be made of fir of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of forceps. and have two heads with two joinings, just as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide.
and when you see the mother opening with all the instrument, then make the woman sit on one bed, her feet stretched out and her legs spread apart, then place the two joinings together in the mother, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs. then work your hand with the entire instrument, just as you have done with the forceps evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mother, until the ball does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted and their appearances are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been prepared, then is the work more hasty and higher for men in proportion to their quantity.
So do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her placenta, and then make her expel it with condiments, and hold your hands to the mouth and navel. and if she jumps because of this, well is it.
If not, then take a pot, and make a small perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, casaline, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled or put in water on the fire; then place a rope or a perforation of the pot and one end in the mouth of the mortar.
and let it steep until the vapors come down into the mortar; then let it be strained, as we have said. If the second infusion is done quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not well, instruct the patient to soak their left hand in sesame oil or in alder muskroot, and then put it back in its natural state.
and make the second infusion; and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little correctly, so that the mortar does not hinder the extraction. but she must be moved slightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out; if it comes and dislodges itself.
And if the mouth of the mortar is stopped up, we have said the remedy for straining and for fumigating herbs;
and if she does not do all that we have said, then beware that you do not fail to extract it.
but what is at the mouth of the mortar, you must tie it to the woman's crutch, then anoint her with four-herb ointment.
so it will help and restore her, and she will come to be well; but nevertheless, when it has worked its way in, a bad odor comes up from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
It is therefore necessary to do suitable fumigations for this: none of the ancients have tried fumigations with parsley and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
And it resembles seeing a rope, and one puts the fine head into its natural state, and the wide handles above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and let it steep until it is well used up, and start another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it has been stopped up by subtle abscess. so it is necessary for the patient to pierce that abscess at its head, and not pierce it with sharp steel, and secure the ligature so it does not touch.
then put it on a moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop up, put a plug of linen or a perforated cord, and let it stay for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes this stoppage comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said with the linen plug.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come below the foundation are nodulations, and grow larger as they come from beneath the foundation to above it, or in the space between the two parts.
if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, it works and brings forth more moisture, awake white or subtle pus.
and sometimes these fistulas pass away; and they are known by this that there is either evacuation or purging or blowing when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance it jumps out in a leap.
And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they arrive just to the jointure of the crutch, and just not of the knee.
And thus one knows that the fistula is passing through the foundation, and not passing. and it is that you should put your two index fingers or foundation, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
And if it has twistiness, then you should insert a fine linen tent or one hair of horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your own finger.
and if you don't feel it, and there is no evacuation or purging or discharge from the perforation, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is passing just to the bladder or just to the urethral conduit, then it brings forth urine, and cannot be cured by medicine.
If it is pierced just to the jointure of the crutch, then the tent comes out just above it; if there is no twistiness and the discovery of the pain around it, then it is that it brings forth pus, and does not value medicine or healing by ointment.
and in these passing fistulas there is no cure other than surgery, and the vanity of foolish surgeons who meddle with them.
In that which is not passing and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have tried.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their crutches, and have their crutches inclined towards their belly. then insert a fine needle of iron or linen if there is twistiness, as long as you know where the tent comes out.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your two index fingers.
if it feels then that the tent has pierced; and is discovered where you feel between your finger and the abscess or flesh, then know that it is passing. so one cannot heal it without great effort.
One says however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;
and the aid one does there is that one cauterizes the subtle abscess according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. and insert it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out at the foundation; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred parts are burned, which are similar to a bird's feather.
and then treat it with moist tents in butter, until the burned parts are well, and then treat it with ointment anointing the char and sewing.
If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, there is no other way for it to be healed;
and if the tent enters and does not pierce just to the point that is at the foundation, and there is between your two fingers and the tent a thick covering of char or abscess, and you see the fistula where the covering of flesh ends. If the head of the abscess begins at the start of the fistula, and pushes forward until it reaches the tent, and then does the cauterization afterwards, as long as it comes to the top of the tent.
and the tent will be delivered and fall; then remove those fragments that seem like a bird's feather, and none remain.
And if the blood flows forth, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine straight away.
For the fire cauterization assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning away of those fragments joined together, and the stopping of blood and drying up of moisture.
then treat the wet tents with butter or crushed hazelnuts, until the flesh yields and the charred fragments fall into the bowl.
then treat the wound of the swelling sores that grow hard skin, and are the dried medicines.
For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not recur.
And if the fistula comes right to the bottom of the foundation and is far removed from the body, then bind your double or foundation and question those things.
If you sense the tent and there are two threads or strings or fragments, where it is close to piercing, then there should be no fires but only a way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the foundation, or if you can, insert tents and treat it as before.
and don't go too far in depth, lest you cut the tenant who holds the foundation, and the evacuations come unwillingly. then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean then when it is cut away from the foundation, by tent or other appointed instrument. then remove those fragments that are in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you bind the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation next to the skin above. if you take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And I bind one twisted thread into two, and bind the tent to all the thread in the fistula as far as it reaches the top.
If she is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then take out the thread from that perforation, so that you bind your double or foundation.
and draw the top of the thread, and bring together the two ends together, and bind one to the other, and let it stay for one day or two days.
and restrain it at times, until the fibers cut those fragments that are between them, and they fall.
then treat the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep down.
For it is not good to make a cut so deep and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spine of the spinous bone which makes the fistula is much gnawed at one end and torn. and on the other side not, for that reason you should not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
Ulcers are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in the end blood flows. and there is one or more, and they are beyond the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are beyond have little moisture.
and in the end a little yellow water or a little blood flows, and they have the color of the body.
and the treatment of those that are within the foundation is this: you instruct the patient to stretch himself so as to lie in chambers until the foundation comes forth, and the fibers appear. so hasten, and hold it with pincers or at your fingernail, then cut into its roots.
and if the ligaments cannot hold due to their moisture, then take them in one cloth, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of cambric. and pull them to your double, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powders that are in place of cauterization. or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until he is healed.
and if the foundation cannot come forth, then enema the patient with an enema biting and sharp to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it may come forth openly.
when the patients are prepared, and the fibers are loose from the foundation, then the treatment is easy. and it is that you take them at your fingernail or with pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he may fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you make the stitching according to this manner: take one twisted thread, and bind it in a needle, and then draw the thread up and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. and if it is of the width; and bind the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for correcting the excess blood.
then put a moist cloth on the foundation in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave him until he has fallen asleep, and when they are asleep, then treat them with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
of the drying of the devil or foundation Many times it happens that the intestines dry up in the intestine, and by natural constraint, and when the patient is old and medicine is of no use.
It is necessary that you remove the bark above at the point of a spine or at your fingernail, which does not allow it to moisten. and then treat it until it is sewn up as necessary.
If he cannot sweat, then continue the purging more strongly than before, until he is healthy and drained. Then cure him until he is healed.
from fear A mouse is a small, imperfectly formed appearance outside the body, and goes in very deep.
and at times the tumor freezes, and it is felt just like death from fear, and comes throughout the entire body, more so in the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a cord from an oar of a goose or a strong vulture's feather, and put that cord on the swelling, until it surrounds the swelling entirely. Then turn your hand around all the cord until you encircle the swelling entirely, and put it in deep, and extract the swelling from its roots.
And if you see fit, then do this with a cord of iron or lead according to this form, and be subtle beneath and drawing above.
not piercing, but rather to hold at two and press; And if you see fit, then cauterize the swelling, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
of the shape of a cyst At times one makes a cyst of silver or bronze, or melted lead or mail; and at times one makes these small and great instruments, according to the way they are arranged.
Those then which are used in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
The shape of the cyst, small or great, is above broad, or if the belly is bound according to this manner:
and if there is a swelling or the belly is bound, as you see, and the head be pierced within; and have two holes on one side, and one on the other.
and the belly or the womb be filled with medications from a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around by small holes.
and have between each hole one thread of espace, then put in these holes one strong thread of twisted silk in ten or eleven turns around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medication is inside, tie it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of the circle.
And be the medication not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cyst with oil or hen's egg yolk or something similar, then put it in gently.
then press the instruments with both hands together, until it is completely visible, then extract the cyst, and lift the patient's legs up to the appearance.
and if the medication wants to come out, then bind it tight as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night afterwards, it is more helpful.
And if you cauterize him in a disease of belly swelling, and the medication hastens to come out, then continue it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then be the cauterization as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle cauterization where the skin will be strained.
of wounds
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by stoning with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or with a spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes on the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from stoning with a stone or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large. and you doubt slightly about abscess hot: if it does so soon heal from the cephalic side even if it comes forth with blood from the wound, and be the healing contrary to the injured part.
and instruct the patient to take in wine and large meat.
And if he does not want to get better, then be reduced in his meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
and put on the wound, if abscesses hot come, a moist cloth in rose oil only, or in vinegar.
and if there is no abscess hot, then put on the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and it's not moved by air, powder that I will say a little later.
and if the air has moved it, then put on some unguents, until he is healed.
And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, as I will say about belly wounds, of suturing.
If the wound is uncovered of bone and putrid, and holds only by a little, then cut it; then treat the wound with medication, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat large meat dishes, such as cooked testicles and wheat, as well as chickens, and similar things.
And if you find or skin rot, and it is not touching the bone, then cut out all the rot and throw away the foul flesh, then treat the wound.
and if he has an artery in the wound or vein, without a cut, and it cannot be stopped by medications, then tie off the artery, and if you find it loosened, then tie it with a thread. and if this does not help at all, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which heals again as soon as the air has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and powder it finely. and apply the wound, and stretch it strongly, until it heals well and joins all its blood;
and then bind it tightly, and let it remain unbound, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one does not do this with cold only, when one has not the incense or the blood of a dragon, but only if the fire has changed the wound.
And if the fire has changed the wound, so too it should be, and one would not put on this powder at all.
but put on some digestive unguents or poultices made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it flows freely. then heal with other remedies until he is healed.
And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle forceps.
and I will tell you afterwards about breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy but to leave the wound alone and put nothing restraining, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat. and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be sweet, like cold water mixed with rose oil and mixed again in sweet water. and other powders of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, then bind and tie it with bandages, then heal with remedies until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, then lance or cut them lower down.
and if the artery is cut and there comes a flow of blood, then open it up, ligate it, and cauterize it as necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut or the jugular vein, and the conduit is blocked, by which the flesh goes. so sew up the jugular vein on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but restore it to its natural shape. and then stretch it gradually, and let it be for some days, then heal with dry unguents until he is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot get rid of until the wound has healed. and let the flesh be severed and ligated at the exit.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound caused by lance or knife
If it is a cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of festering or pus in the wound that makes the patient languish: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then put no powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with the bandage that does not allow the blood to flow deeply. and returns to the heart, and kills the patient. but I put on attractive unguent, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have unguent, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out excess moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if it does not come with spasms, nor evil trembling of the heart or faintness from languishing. and when you see the good signs, then know that the wound is healed. Then heal with tents and other remedies until he is healed.
and if it cannot heal, and work, then know that there is a fistula; then treat as one should.
And if the wound is from incision of sword or knife, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, then treat as one should with what is before.
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone and there are cut pieces, then scrape the wound, and remove the pieces that are loose. and if they are not loose, then let the wound heal, so that it will be bound with ligatures.
and of other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small.
of the great wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines are cut, by which the introduction of them.
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse for a small wound than a large one,
because one puts the intestines back in more slowly, if one does not put them in little by little. because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, so they enter more slowly.
and because it is worth more for the medium wound, because one resets the intestine to its place that has other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch of other wounds of the body and two other stitches proper are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine comes out, and if something is of the putting back, it is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said. or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner: Soak an esponge or one woollen cloth in cold water only. or you boil in water, wormwood and cypress, and spikenard, and purge the intestine until the swelling is removed.
and sometimes this wine restrains, and is good for only one application to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestine with water or ale and have the meadowsweet cooked. for by that it is relieved the entrance to a little something;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is good only once the cutting. that no one should cut without great necessity, there isn't;
and that is the instrument to split it:
so cut within the curvature and do not force it, and see how it takes shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs forth, so put it back in its natural place in its proper location, if you have the power, for this is a marvel.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient sit on their back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts so position it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to follow what I say about great and small wounds.
Put these things on small wounds that are pleasing to you,
then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and close the lips; and that is the common method of stitching,
and that is the common method of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound one or two fingers' space, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the sphygmachus,
then strain it with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides, and then close the two heads of the wound properly,
and then leave one or two fingers' space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this until you have need of needles. until all the wound is restrained;
and be the needles suitable for small and large things, because fine needles pierce through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be suitable;
and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
for they do not cut and open the wound before the stitching;
and then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not harm the patient while sleeping. and I put tents or cloth strips on the heads of the needles to keep them from moving, and leave them until the wound is sewn;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient.
The second stitching method is common, and it is that you tie the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the sphygmachus together with a needle that has a good strong thread, and when you have pierced these heads all three times,
and when you have pierced these heads all three times, then draw out the needle from the part where you began, in the manner that one sews dresses.
and put a space between each stitching, as wide as the breadth of a minor finger.
this stitching is suitable for men,
and I stitched a wound that a man had on his belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in width. and thus were the intestines badly exposed for two palms in width,
and the wound was in the belly. I brought back the intestine and it had been outside for 24 hours,
and the wound was stitched up just 15 days later, and I healed it, and it became sound.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in one place where we could not find any, nor any medicines; and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was sound.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
take the needle and push it from the outside part into the inside part;
when it has pierced the skin straight on straight, then tie the head of the sphygmachus or costive to where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the other side of the inside part straight into the outside;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as tailors do with furs, and that you leave the sphygmachus once on one side and then take it up again on the other, until the stitching is all completed.
The second method of stitching, which Galen says properly,
is such that some people do, who bring together the two parts naturally, and apply one of the heads of the sphygmachus to the other head, in this manner:
insert a needle near the head of the mirach, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two heads of the sphygmachus; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part into the inside part, the second joint of the scrotum;
then make two punctures one on each side of the outer part up to the inner part in the two other joints of the scrotum that are on the other side;
and this is the more usual and common method of stitching.
Galens says this saying, and some bear witness to it,
one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each one;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leathers;
and know that when the rupture is inside the belly, it is the stitching more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the air has changed it, then put back the intestine and the skin; then place on top a powder of burned charcoal,
then put back the intestine and the skin; then place on top a powder of burned charcoal, and if the air has changed it, then apply some ointment that is present until the wound heals; and cut off the thread, and sew up the scrotum and the testicles; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you don't have medicine, then apply some old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you don't need any other medicine for many simple wounds;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause community of the main members, then it is fitting to anoint with light oil of temperate heat, or with rose oil, and place it around the armpits and under the shoulders;
and if he feels pain or burning in his bowels, and many times this happens, then cleanse him with black wine tea, and likewise if the burning comes just to the intestine;
and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the plantness of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to that of hares.
And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, then put it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has become green or black, then it is fitting that you bind the place that is black, so that blood does not flow forth, for there are veins and arteries;
then tie off what is between the ligament, and place the two joints hanging down from the part below the wound up to the outside to facilitate extraction when the intestines fall, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men,
because I have seen a man wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became covered and turned into a fistula, and from there came the evacuation and belching;
I applied treatment according to what I could do, and did not cease to subtlety until he was healed, and the wound closed.
And when I saw it close, I doubted that the patient had harm in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
and some experienced people say that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner: take fresh threads from great testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
then put another thread after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and sew up the wound. This method remains in the intestine, and comes to no harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this manner: take the end of this thread of intestine that is well cleaned, and then tie to the end of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread on the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it in the rupture;
and this manner of stitching with threads is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the larger intestine, then there is no remedy nor health, except subtlety.
of fistula or whatever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes a boil, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it breaks and heals.
And fistula is according to the greenish nodulation of hard and white abscesses, or one does not feel pain, and it breaks open like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes it bursts forth suddenly, and other times slowly. sometimes little, and other times a lot;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and there is no scar, is not other than by one of the eight causes:
to wit, by the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow. or if there is too much blood; or the wound is corrupted, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because of the property in the region, digestion is slow and health is delayed, and it flows naturally; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicine in the division.
And it is necessary that I let you know the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the spleen, or intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grievous sanitation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if any fistula does not come just to the point that I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and you see it clearly, take a piece of iron or bronze, if the fistula is straight, then cut it;
and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a subtle piece of lead for lead bends to fit around the curvity.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tenths, then cleanse it through one of the openings,
for the moisture flows quickly from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then cut the bleeding as you are able, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and it is covered in depth.
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a jointure, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I told you, then cut according to what I told you,
or in any of the places I told you, then cut according to what I told you, and extract the decayed flesh and corrupt char that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well founded from a right place, then it is necessary that you cut in depth as far as you can, then put moistened tents of medicinal aloe, and bind them just to the head of the fistula,
then put moistened tents of medicinal aloe, and bind them just to the head of the fistula, until the medicine consumes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then put ointments of sweet salve on clean flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. If vein or nerve does not trouble you or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it all until the corruption is gone. then treat with sweet salve until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, then do as before. know that you are not yet at the end:
so uncover and cut until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot go further; so there is no other remedy than to wait for nature's aid.
and if it is a small corrupt bone, and you can draw it out with tweezers, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this.
and if there are many bones, then remove them all, not leaving even one.
and if moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cut and separate the moist flesh and bone, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put the wound into a poultice of sweet powder. and leave it until the flesh is purged around the bones,
and then they will have removed more easily.
and if it is a great bone, such as one of the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone. and then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of the corrupted bone and it comes just to the mold of the bone. then it is necessary to scrape and cut all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is closed.
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
so that the materials came to the leg and it was inflamed with a big abscess, and there was no other cause by which to open it;
but the surgeons, through their foolishness, worked so much that the abscess opened. and it was corroding a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and there came many openings that all poured forth foulness and moisture from the body;
and many surgeons put treatments around for two years, and there was no relief in the art of healing,
so that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medications by which he was treated. and what flowed forth from the openings with great force; and the body of the young man became red and had a yellowish hue.
I placed a tent in one of those openings, and then searched all the openings.
and I found that one opened into another from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut in one of the openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and it was corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came just to the bone inside.
I cleaned away what appeared from the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for the one I removed.
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, and could not heal.
and then recommenced, and uncovered the bone just as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and cleaned it, and then removed it, and I made an effort to close the place.
but I could not pull so hard as to pull off about a palm's width from the bone, and then tear it all apart. then I restored him with medications; and he was healed and bound up quickly.
and it did not seem necessary to start the work again except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For often the blood evacuation was painful, but he was healed entirely.
For often the blood evacuation was painful, but he was healed entirely. and instead of the bone, a hard callus grew, and he was in good condition with no harm or hindrance from anything at all, neither when lying down nor when getting up.
and stretch the top, so that you draw the corrupt flesh down below. and uncover the callus above the place where you want to set it, so that the setting does not harm the callus. and put a hot iron or a wooden splint below the bone to cover the corrupt flesh. and it is necessary to set it as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and then set it again.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part. then uncover all the callus; then put a hot iron below,
and then set the part from one end of the corruption to the other, and be sure to make the setting a good distance from the length of the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint and set the bone where it contains on the other side.
and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then there is no other option than to cut it out;
and if the corruption is in the fingernail of the hand or in the toenail, then that is a very strong thing. but nonetheless it is necessary for you to ask about this corruption how it appears; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you.
and know that the incisors and settings for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness. and therefore it is necessary to prepare the instrument for each kind of work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases. so prepare the instrument that you need according to what is necessary.
of fire The head of the shoulder can become dislocated due to a cause within, or due to a cause outside.
and when you have used medicine to treat that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not help. so cover that member up to the place where the corruption comes from. so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil of a greater deficiency in the member.
so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil of a greater deficiency in the member. and the sign is that the member becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire. and afterwards it appears as if the blackness had spread from one member to another. and takes hold of everything in the body; and you hasten to cover it.
and if this is due to the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and viper and similar creatures.
if the corruption is at the head of the joint, then cut it off, and do not give it any space to reach up to the hand.
And if it reaches as far as the hand, then cut it off at the wrist, so that the corruption does not reach up to the arm.
and if it reaches the arm, then cut it off at the shoulder; and if it passes beyond that, it's death. and there is no remedy other than the quantity of his virtue.
and so it goes when the corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, then cut it off after the second joint.
and if it reaches the foot, then cut off the entire foot. and if it rises to the leg, then cut off at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die.
and the manner of cutting or setting the member is that you tie it above and below. and stretch one minister down with one ligature, and another minister up with the other ligature. and you uncover the flesh that is between the two ligatures to a spatula-width wide, until the bone is exposed.
then cut or set it, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the setting does not touch the healthy bone. and another injury and abscess ensues in the patient.
And if bleeding occurs during surgery, then cauterize the area quickly. or you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medication until it is complete.
then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man on his sickbed:
he had a blackness that seemed like burning fire.
and that corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it consumed the entire foot.
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed.
and long after that, the corruption came back to his finger of the hand, and he came to me.
and I put on him things that would rebound after the purification of the body, but the corruption could not cease.
and he wished that I cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of making the material rebound. and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would not die. because the man's vitality was weak; and he became despondent altogether, and returned to his land. and instructs him to cover his hand, and becomes well.
and I have no other story except that which is made on the other side, if one needs it.
An abscess sometimes comes to a swollen joint, and stays so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then bursts and breaks open, and the pus jumps out, and the joint remains empty, just like a vessel. and the skin above is as subtle as one-eighth of delicate cloths, and do not reach all the way to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such diseases are called "stains",
but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone in depth, then it is called a "fistula";
and the skin is like this: you cut the skin all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just like delicate cloths; and it does not hurt because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thick with fat, then treat it with a poultice thus:
look and see if the breasts are large, and the abscess that is in them has a foul odor, then treat it with Egyptian medicine made thus: Take equal parts of asafoetida, oil, and white lead, and put them in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take what you need from this, and mix it with water and honey, and use the poultice to compress the breast, and stop the abscess; and leave the medicine there for two hours, then strain it by squeezing;
do this many times until the breast is healed and the pus is removed;
and sometimes mix with ash water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water on top,
then let it flow, and use it as a poultice, until you know that the breast is well healed;
and if the patient cannot endure this, nor the Egyptian medicine, nor the ash water, then mix it with water and honey, or add a little white lead to it; or use it as a poultice with honey and wine mixed together, so that the honey has the property of healing and cleansing, and the wine makes the flesh fresh;
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well healed, then use a poultice of what causes flesh to grow in it,
and it is that you take diaphanous powder, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or use it as a poultice of some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned or to treat with ointments;
and if the abscess on the breast is small, and the poultice of the clister cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with a bit of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or Basilikon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it just so that one little part or the poultice can enter,
and if the abscess that discharges pus is above, then cut it open or lower it to where it is. For when the pus is in depth, one should not allow flesh to remain; and if you cannot cut open the breast below as you see; then prepare it in such a way that the pus runs to the lowest part where it is,
and if you cannot cut open the breast below as you see; then prepare it in such a way that the pus flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the pus; and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
and place it on one layer of linen that covers the entire breast; then cut at the stronger part of the abscess in the breast a little larger than the first, then put soft ointment on one more layer according to the size of the abscess; and put it on the abscess of the breast to ease the pus, and do not remove the great linen cloth except after a few days once;
and that which is on the abscess of the breast, often removes to remove the pus, and knows what flows from the pus, whether it is venom or a little or enough, or digested, or indigested;
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been thus extended and you see the nature that bursts forth on the abscess of the breast, then know that the breast is healed, and approaches health;
and then remove it in the morning or the third day, and when you remove the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast discharges undigested pus after many days, know that the breast is not healed. And if subtle poisons come forth after a long time, do not despair of health;
for health is approaching. For there are some people whose flesh takes time to heal in their wounds, and others who do the opposite;
and if undigested pus bursts forth from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healed.
and if the breast takes time to heal and becomes inflamed, then add dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, like diaphanous ointment, for it contains a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take diaphanous ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance;
then cook and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked and thickened, when diaphanous ointment is not present,
or take mercury and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and powder on the honey when it is on the fire; and then apply one piece of cloth, and stretch it over the chest, and sometimes administer an aromatic substance for a long time, and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like wheat of violets and centaury;
and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like wheat of violets and centaury; and in the use of simple or composite remedies: crush them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption has penetrated deep into the bone, or made a impression on the bones, or caused stiffness in the limbs; if it is the treatment for fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the tongue
Furuncle is an abscess that arises under the finger of the hand, or of the foot, or happens by chance in other toes;
and when it is neglected and not taken care of, then a great abscess comes forth, and they run and flow so much that they reach the root of the tongue, and sometimes even all the way to it;
and comes corrosion right up to the bone, so that there is a foul pain, and the joint of the toe is wide, and the color is fluxed.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut away all the excess flesh remaining from the tongue, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the tongue is healthy;
and if the tongue then putsrefies the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed, then it is necessary that you put a cloth under the tongue which pricks the flesh, and tie it up above, and cut away that subtle and delicate flesh. and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut away the bone, and treat further, for as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the toe corrupting, then cut it away in one piece as is said before; then treat until it is healed;
and if it is inflamed and swollen, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut away the tongue of the palate with a crosswise cut above,
and take care that the cut does not come right down to the flesh underneath the tongue, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The fingers which are born on some men's hands by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is a bone or a joint.
and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or in some of the toes of the feet. Those that are born in any toe of the foot do not move. and those that are born at the joint of the foot, by chance, do move.
the fleshiness of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at the root with a broad spatula.
Those that are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold off from cutting.
In one who is born or has a bony toe, it is necessary that you cut away the flesh all around to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread for this case, then treat until it is healed.
The swellings that come together in the toes come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you cut away the swelling, and then repair the toe according to its natural shape; then put between two cloths or moistened napkins soaked in rose oil, so that they do not swell. or you put between two thin pieces of linen, until the swelling is settled, as is necessary.
If a swelling comes on any of his toes with the palm, then cut away that swelling in the same way as before.
Of warts
Warts are great, swollen, and full of melancholy excessences that come on many parts of the body.
and they come more often on the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, rather than others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him at times an evacuation of bile, and then heal with the help of basil.
The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is when you cut them away, and treat with black blood afterwards; and the other manner is that you lift up the vein, and treat it entirely.
The cutting is according to this manner: first rise the leg of hot water very strongly, so that the thick blood becomes subtle. then strain the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap; then cut the vein in one piece, or in two, or in three, with a wide incision,
then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can endure.
and then bind it, and command that he eat food in order to evacuate black bile.
and begin again the evacuation and healing when the veins are full and harmful to the patient.
The shaving of him is according to this manner: rise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair. then put him in a bath, and rise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins.
and if you don't have a bath, then heat him up over the fire, and then cut away the vein in the long part of the leg at the top of the kneecap, or in the part below the ankle.
then soak the skin in vinegar, and scrape away the vein from each part, until it is apparent when you touch it.
and one can see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white cord.
Then tie the thread underneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then pour it onto the scale lightly.
Then cut into another place on top of three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears. Then lift it onto the scale, just as you did, and pour it onto another scale, just as you did first.
Then cut another size, or as many as you need, then lift it, and cut to the bone of the foot.
Then pull and lift just to the second size; then draw it from size to size, until it is all bare, then cut.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, then tie an awl to each strong doubled thread. and pull and lift it, and tie underneath one thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out. and be careful that it doesn't cut, for if it cuts, one cannot pull or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
and when you have pulled it all out, then place wet wool on the wound's bed in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and turned together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must divide it twistedly, but do not cut it; and pull it out just as we have said before.
then you must divide it twistedly, but do not cut it; and pull it out just as we have said before. The form of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it only cuts the vein.
and it is of great curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is situated in legs, in warm regions where there are no herbs nor trees, and in land where there is not a drop of moisture;
and by chance it is found elsewhere than in legs, and this happens due to the purulence that comes from underneath the skin,
as if it came from within the body as a serpent and moves, situated between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes with a very great inflammation in the leg, then the places change, and the vein begins to come out, just like a root of a plant.
When the opening is made, then you must envelop around a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to two inches, and bind it.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it comes to the end, wrap it around the cloth, and bind it. and if it is too long, then cut off a part and wrap the remaining piece, and do not cut off its root until it is all out. for if you cut it, it will return to the flesh, and bring abscess and purulence or inflammation at that place, and a bad disease;
for which reason it is necessary to treat it little by little until the end, and not leave anything remaining in the body;
and sometimes this vein is treated when it is five palms long or ten, and one man came to me, from whom it issued ten palms long, and when you cut it, he put a thread or a peg in, and pierced it right down to the bottom,
so that everything comes out; and let the material inside be emptied, and bring medicine to the place to prevent purulence for some time, then care for it just as you would for abscesses.
And sometimes this vein is treated with many remedies, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out much through openings, and from which springs forth remedies; then care for it just as we have said before.
Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it often occurs in oxen.
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down through the entire body, and one can feel it very well as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes and bursts forth.
and is caused by purulence of some humors, such as those that come from worms, serpents, and lumbrii or ascarids in the belly.
and one doubts of its evil nature, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eyes. by chance, it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot avoid but when it moves:
then it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong tight ligature.
then cut on top and pull it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire above, until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye at the forehead, then tie a bandage tightly underneath it, then cut on top and pull it out.
and it is necessary to use the patient with a purging medicine for the body's foul humors,
and beware of foods that cause purulence.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and it moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and about an hour later, I saw it rise up like a worm on the shoulder, quicker than anything else, like bright silver as it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder,
and then about an hour later it coursed throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
then she told me that it was twisting around the body, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease move like that before. However, I had wanted many to move well from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry skin and her veins were uncovered, and therefore appears that constrained breathlessness;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are healthy, and who have moist skins and responsive veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, so bind above and below hastily, and then cut on top until the constrained breathlessness comes forth. and cautery the place; and if you do not see it to your satisfaction,
then use a remedy against the breathlessness, such as stinking pills and serpents' pills, and similar others.
(None)
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they pierce.
The diversity of theirs is that there are those which have large points, and small, and barbed, and glued; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and those that pierce in any member do so in two ways: either the principal member is barbed,
such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it pierces then in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many conditions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and treat the wound.
And the brain sign when the arrow pierces and breaks through the bone, and jumps over the sac that is above the brain, which is when there is dimness and dullness and bewilderment and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and commotion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and jumps from the moist white wound like pustules, and also as if bruised flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the cure, and do not extract the arrow.
The sign of the spleen when it is pierced is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the spleen becomes as if boils, and in dark black blood, and comes with cold sweat and fainting; then know with no doubt that death is certain.
And the sign of the arrow that pierces the womb is when without foam it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns color, and he sighs high and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow pierces the covering of the breast, then it is below the small ribs; and it yields a great deal of pain and great anguish and sighing; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food jumps out of the wound.
And if the arrow pierces the belly, and in jumping it does not pass through the large intestine, then there is no hope for the cure or the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels very great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and loins of the back, and the ribs, and hips, and legs, and similar members are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because I experienced it thus, so that you may do the same.
It happened to one man that an arrow fell onto the palm of his hand at the root of his nose: I tried it and extracted it from the other side below the ear fat, and he was healed without numbness.
And I treated one man who had an arrow in the fatty tissue of his eyelid, just below the eyebrow: and the arrow was lodged and I could only reach as far as the tip towards the wood. and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, all light iron without ears; the patient was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
And I treated an arrow that pierced a Christian from the throat to the ear:
I extracted the barbs and made it subtler until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I treated an arrow in one man who had it lodged in his belly, and thought he was dying;
and then after 30 days, his condition did not change at all; I cut above the arrow, and drew it out, and there was no bad accident.
And I saw one man who had an arrow pierce his back, and the wound was closed above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural disposition. nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw one other man who had an arrow pierce his face, and the wound was closed;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others were similar.
And I treated an arrow in one of the prince's king who had it lodged near the nose, and was slightly declining to the right side; and the arrow was entirely lodged.
I was called for the treatment after it had been lodged for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I sought it with all a subtle tent, and did not feel it. and he felt a pricking and pain below his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow
I put on the skin a plaster of attractive and digestive nature, because the skin does not inflate; and the skin of the arrow appeared.
and the skin of the arrow appeared. I put on the plaster for many days, and the wound was resolved above, and the patient remained thus for a long time,
so that he felt the arrow one day inside his belly; and he told me so. I put on the wound a medicine of corrosive nature for many days, until it was open.
and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck to the skin; then I inserted into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow became visible;
and the edges of the wound healed well in three months,
and then I opened up the wound so much that I inserted forceps, and pulled it from one side and the other, but could not get it out;
then I did not stop subtlety and ingenuity with instruments, until I took it one day with well-made forceps, according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, so I did and restored the wound.
And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for books cannot learn everything;
but wise masters can take note of very little, and of that which is present and lacking, and true experience of nine works, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of members where they are stuck except according to two manners: either through the skin where they enter or from the other side;
and that which jumps out on the other side where it enters is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes now jumps out.
And if it does not jump out now, then leave it until the flesh is ripe around, and the issue is freed;
and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it so for some days, and move each day;
and then it jumps out, and if it does not, then pierce all around with one very fine force, until the skin around is stretched, and then pull it.
And if the arrow is stuck in the flesh of the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it in every tent. and if you find it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the constriction of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut through as much as the wound becomes large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it is stuck.
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it is stuck. so cut off the flesh that is stuck from both sides to the point where you can; and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out; and subtlety well that you do not break the arrow, lest you should pull it out more grievously.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the skin around is ripe, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be freed. And if the bleeding makes you contrary, then administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and put your wit to work on how you can pull out the arrow without danger.
or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and put the patient in the form that he was when the arrow struck him. for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot do so, then put him as shown by the sign which shows to you.
The arrow that comes from the other side, or it appears to be connected to something of it, or the skin is inflamed in the area where one can see or feel it apparently;
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps out now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then turn your hand around gently, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
and if the head of the arrow is stuck in there, then push it all the way to the end.
and if the head breaks off and you must administer binding, then use one instrument that is beveled; so that the point of the arrow enters into the bevel of the instrument; and then push forward.
and if the arrow is beveled, then use one instrument with an entering point to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is surrounded by flesh, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as is proper.
And if the arrow strikes at the hip or at the stomach or at the bladder or at the ribcage, and it is nearby, and you can cut above it, then cut;
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then sew up the wound if necessary. and the treatment until it is healed.
The forms of tweezers used to remove arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
And there are many forms: large, small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow.
of common veins of the body Of veins that one cleans oneself, there are .xxxi., of which it has sixteen in the head.
that is to say: two temples which are after the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two jugulars which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins one cleans oneself commonly are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic; and people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the scrotum, and it is that one that one cleans oneself, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
And the saphena is the vein which is between the auricular and annular, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is under the curve of the pocket on the left side, and the second saphena which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins under those.
The cleansing of the veins that are after the ears helps ancient catarrhs and migraines; and the quality of the cleanser, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the cleanser, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two small pouches depending on the head: which then goes to your shoulder, and where you feel the pulse under your shoulder, it begins to rise;
then take the lance, and plunge it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two fingers' breadth across, and make it bleed until you see;
then bind and tie it, so that it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The cleansing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for ancient migraines, and for sore eyes, and habitual blindness, and for tears that flow to the eyes;
and the qualities of the cleanser are as I say: and it is that the patient tightens their neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and feels the pulse under your shoulder, and then begins to rise;
then lift the key above the vein at the height of your thumb's first joint, and plunge the lance below. and lift the vein high, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and make the wound bleed according to your need;
then release the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
and then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, in the beginning of this book.
The cleansing of the forehead vein is just as good for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for ruddiness;
and the qualities are that the patient tightens their neck while twisting, so that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fossor", which has this form:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed and no longer has a broad inflammation.
However, it is not good that the inflammation be too great; and the wound will cross over, for the bone is close, and by chance break through when it is subtle.
The cleansing of the two veins that are in the two eyes helps with eye problems, and with itch, and with ruddiness, and with yellowing in the eye, and with facial diseases;
and the qualities of their cleansing are that the patient tightens their neck while twisting with some kind of ligature, as before;
then let it bleed, and be the cleansing of the transverse vein, about a finger's breadth long and about as wide, for there is no fat.
And if the inflammation is subtle, it may break through; then make the wound bleed, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind well.
The cleansing of the nasal vein is good for ague, and for sudden sneezing, and for facial diseases. as migraines and ruddiness that come to the face, and especially when they are ancient;
and the qualities of the cleansing are that the patient tightens their neck, then presses their nose with your left hand. and take a thin, long inflammation, and insert it into the space between the two nostrils, in the lip-like fold that is between them. The vein does not open well here, and blood will start flowing now.
and do not go too far in depth, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it at night, for it is soon restored.
The juice of two ginsengs helps in the constriction of the gout, and at the beginning of menstruation, and in many diseases, and in impotence, and in corruption, and in herpes, and itching.
and the quality of the juice is that the patient stretches his neck above one and then the other, as we have said. and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on one seat,
then open the vein of the long one somewhat widely, then let the blood flow temperately, or as much as is necessary.
then do the same on the other vein, then release the ligature, and steady the veins moderately. so that the patient does not choke; and let him sleep until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the juice of leaves The juice of the veins from the leaves above helps to heal in the mouth, and to corrupt gums, and splits in lips, and around the nose.
and the quality of the juice is that it makes the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and you can recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
Of the juice under the tongue The juice of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the cephalic juice, and it is for constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the juice is that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks under each side one black vein:
then cut one and the other, and do not go too far in depth, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the back which are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
either in piercing with a wide flannel or an olive-like subtle one as the back trenches, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The shape of the flannel is very well known, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins which are smooth and full of thick blood that appears, and contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the shape of the olive-like flannel:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for bleeding thin veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and around the neck, and around the belly, and in the chest;
and it is necessary for the doctor to bleed carefully, and to beware of the artery that is underneath. And if he cuts the artery, and blood comes forth in abundance, then it behooves him to stanch it, as I said; and should not be pierced with the flannel, but cut as anesil.
And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, then it behooves you to compress it, and change to another one; or else you want some part of it, or you bleed instead in the arm between the veins: it opens clearly; and cut with the flannel as anesil, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the bleeding, it behooves you then to compress the arm, that you touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a pin, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with flannel anesil;
and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swelled, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it flow upwards just like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is arterial blood: hurry then, and put your hand on high for a long time, then remove your hand if the bleeding stops, as often happens;
tie up the arm and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be on watch, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it flows forth, and medical supplies are not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retreats; and stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of linen from the fistula, and cut it, and take one half and tie it on well until the next day;
if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping of bleeding is not grievous in many dispositions for the small wound of the plaque, and the power of the ligature of the arm.
The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood that flows from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and it behooves the doctor to beware of the nerve that is underneath, and if he pierces too far in depth, and finds the nerve; and swells up and the bleeding is grievous, and by chance cannot be stopped.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then it behooves you to bleed it with the instrument anesil; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it longwise.
The brain fluid of the cephalic region helps, which attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes.
and it is necessary to bleed with a vein of the olive or myrtle flame, because this is the most saving of all veins, since there are no nerves nor arteries below.
However, it is necessary to seek out the most level position, and do not disturb anything if it works the first time, and one recommences; and by chance some people's veins become swollen, so that one must do it once, but it does not cause anything. The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
The first thing you should know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not done except to preserve health,
and to prevent diseases from coming; and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are cut: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of privations to excess, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one should bleed either the first day or the third day, after two hours or three of the day.
The bleeding done for diseases has no fixed time, but when there is need, whether by day or by night, in all hours and at all times;
and it is not necessary to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is more than four months pregnant up to the seventh month. Nor should one bleed those who are very old and have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to bleed, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he first clears the intestines with a light purgation. if they have many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not draw out the superfluities from the intestines which are harmful to the principal members;
nor should one bleed those who are too full of meats, nor those who are drunk, until they recover from it, nor those who are dropsical;
and one should not bleed after a colicky passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and multiple times going to bed with a woman, and travail, watching, and fasting, and all such things that make whole virtue, or by something of the arm or body;
then subtly mix the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter or take a bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtlety the blood;
and bleed from the vein of the liver around the third, as we have said;
and keep away from that day all labor, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be quiet and joyful, and let the bleeders be above him whom one bleeds, and press his arm two or three times;
then loosen the ligature gradually, for if it is too tight or too loose, the blood cannot flow properly;
and then press the bandage with one's hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the bleeders with the flame of a little old oil, then place his left hand on top of that vein below the bandage a little bit where he wants to bleed; so that the vein does not collapse and fail when it is pierced. For there are veins that flow as smoothly as strings at the time of bleeding, and others that are full of windy emptiness; so that when one puts the flame on it, it recoils from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those;
and if he opens the vein, it is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the bleeders be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens at the first attempt, that is good; if not, then one recommences a little below or above that place in haste, if the limb is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient is frightened, one should leave it a day or two, and not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter the bath, then recommence the bleeding if it pleases him;
and if the incision is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then trust in that very incision itself for all the flame straightway;
and work a little hastily, but so that the limb is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not recommence the bleeding, and put a little of linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and is good in this limb where the oil lies.
and thus administer the linseed oil to each bleeding that you bleed the veins, in order to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing causes trickling and bleeding from the eyes, when one puts it on the limb; so subtly does it flow and separate when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess which often happens, especially when it is not bled too much except at that time or the opening of the vein is small; so hasten, and put on the limb a wet sponge in water and wine, warm a little, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if there remains on the limb after some days any blackness or greenish color, then it will not harm him; and if you see, put on something with aloe or myrrh mixed in juice of camphor, mastice, or similar.
And many times there appears an abscess and swelling at the basilic vein: then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad swelling. Therefore, do not put anything of what we have said on it, for by chance there may be a lack of blood from the artery; but make one application of dry poultice to harden the limb, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it is thick, let it become thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is weak and feeble, and has need of bloodletting, that one make a larger wound, and the flaps be wide.
And to one who is feeble, do the opposite, and it is necessary to heal them little by little, and one should heal them by cutting across, not by piercing.
And this manner of healing is saved from the corruption of blood and the severing of nerve, and is worth more than long or wide healing.
And to one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread soaked in grape juice; if he is fevered, then apply blood-letting three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then moisten his bread with a sweet syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he vomits after bloodletting, then it is necessary that he drink broth of beef and a subtle, well-scented syrup.
and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of swooning, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to vent his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
And if he wants to vent his arm after the first bloodletting, and he has strong body, then he heals in 7 hours after the first bloodletting, or after the ninth hour.
And if one wants to heal from another part, then he should heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body which is already fevered, and brings on fever; so one must draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening as far as it can be done. and then you will bring together all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse while he is healing, so that death may not come in place of convalescence. and this happens many times when the healer is negligent;
and it does not happen when you see the arm loosened, and blood coming out the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on. unless he is curved, then let him straighten his arm quickly, for it would be bad;
but let him stay until he heals the second time; or you come to the tip of the flap, as long as the blood that has congealed at the opening of the vein issues forth, and put on one pouce of silk dipped in water, and press upon it lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, then let it be done in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein within the arm is healed in place of the jugular vein because it is compounded.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the fleshy part is red.
then bind him moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal him now by cutting across, not by piercing long or wide.
and let the opening be wide, and let him heal well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put his hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until you have enough.
and if it is summer, then do not put his hand in hot water again, for one puts him more at risk of harm in summer than in winter.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
The healing of the salvetele of the right hand is worth more than all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is inflamed, so that one can see it. and if it heals across, and if you cut through all of it in all, then nothing will hurt.
and do not go too far inward, for the nerves are underneath all those strips of flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have let blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to close it quickly, and thus do for each one.
The healing of the vein on the left hand is worth more for the illness of the mouse, and do all the same as I have told you regarding the right.
The healing of the sophene is worth more than all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and old women's hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its healing is that the patient puts his foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks. and lie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and many rain-like substances go up above the foot.
heal it then either by opening a larger vein or at the ankle, which is worth more.
And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and let the healing be across as in cutting; and let the flaps be evenly stitched.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the healer fails the first time, then he should start again the second time a little above, for the flesh is salty; nor fear nerves, as we have said, and thus do with the sophene of the other foot equally.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its healing is worth for the pain in the back, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters or takes a bath, and stretches above the ankle four times by twisting.
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then heal it in all ways you can, and by crossing. and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very quickly healed by many hands.
and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very quickly healed by many hands. And if you do not believe it, then look at any scar of his that appears on the back of the foot or towards the little toe, and beware of nails;
and do so much to stop the bleeding as you see fit, and then loosen the bandage, and put a cloth on it and tighten it; now it is healed.
Of wounds from cupping
Cupping-glasses are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by piercing and attracting blood, or without piercing.
And this cupping that is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is all fire, or not on fire;
and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the cupping-glass below the chin; and the cupping-glasses on both shoulders; and the cupping-glasses above the hips; and the cupping-glasses in both arms; and the cupping-glasses in both legs; and the cupping-glasses on both ankles; and the cupping does not treat blood, unless for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and therefore one should not faint from it, as one would from bleeding; and it is not fitting that it be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
And if, due to necessity of diseases, it is necessary to cup, or for habits, then we should administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between, and throughout each period;
for there are those who, when they need cupping, have a heavy head;
and there are those who become repleted and flushed in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darken around the eyes;
and there are those who develop a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and bleed; and there are those who see visions, and behold by night, and are hurt and wounded and die and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even more so when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to cup after three hours of the day.
The bleeding from the nose helps with the swelling of the head... that comes to them, and it is not fitting for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body;
and this cupping is in place of the bleeding from the head.
and it is not fitting for someone who has a cold complexion to use this, or who has catarrh, for this does them great harm;
and therefore it is not fitting for the elderly to use this, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who cure themselves often, become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping-glass a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The cupping on the neck is in place of the bleeding from the head and the basilica, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the chest. and for rupture of the channel of the womb, and for all sorts of swelling, and for repletion;
and it is necessary to use a little force, for if it holds too tightly, it will cause forgetfulness or obstruction of the stomach and heart.
The cuppings on the two sides of the neck are worth for pains in the head, and obtalmia, and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth.
and it is in place of the bleeding from the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the servant to stretch out his hand when applying it, so that he does not compress the artery, and no blood comes forth.
The cuppings below the chin are worth for mouth diseases, and for corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the bleedings from both lips.
The cuppings on the shoulders are worth for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
The cuppings on the sides are worth as much as the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the servant not to pierce too deeply in front, for the places are bare of flesh, and know that they are beneath the nerves and arteries.
The cupping-glass that is on the hip is worth for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping-glass be large, and made of iron, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if they were small, they would break; and this makes great wounds.
The cuppings on the legs are said to heal obviously, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and womb, and restore the flowers; and they take the place of the two Sophene bones and the two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring on fainting in many dispositions.
The manner of applying the cupping-glass is that you first empty it, and then apply it with a gentle touch, and place it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and swollen area, and observe the flow of blood; then pierce, and remove the cupping-glasses, and take heed of the condition of the body, for there are those who have thick skin, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and slightly deep ones; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we should only do it once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we should do it often; and if the blood is thick, we should pierce deep and stop when the hearts are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for someone who has thick skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you grease the places of the cupping-glasses with oil that is appetizing and dissolving. if it is in the east, with oil of violets, or with oil of sweet almonds, or with oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is with vinegar, oil of tansy, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
and if the excesses are big and cold, take bitter oil, or balsamite oil, or wormseed oil, and similar ones.
and if the person being cured has tender skin and wide pores, it is not necessary to put oil.
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or another similar one.
And the one who has too much moisture, should rise up with ease, or with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have big excesses rise up with old wine, or water of sycamore, or a decoction of wormseed or chamomile, or other similar ones.
and it is not necessary to take medicine with a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep after the purgation.
and it is necessary that he warms himself when he must be purged and when he is purged. And take care of the one who is being cured is choleric, and his sweat is too abundant and inflamed. so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green apples and endive and lettuce in the morning, and similar things;
and drink a little, and broth of chicken, and moist meats.
And the one who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and moderately scented wine that is between old and new, and drink little, and drink frequently, and small birds and young pigeons.
and the day he will be purged, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some people sometimes triacle or muscatel before purgation, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the sweat be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The poultices that are put to not cause harm are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and on gout, and on the stomach and belly and bowels and behind, for these members do not tolerate being struck or hit.
and it is only done to draw blood from member to member. such as we put on the breasts when a child is sick; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put poultices on the stomach and belly to reduce the member.
and it takes away the pain when there is inflammation or stone, and by its attractive virtue, by chance, it draws out the inflammation, or removes the stone from its place.
and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and spleen when there is retained purging.
and these poultices are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times with lukewarm water.
such as in diseases of the eyes, and in this manner one fills the poultice with hot water or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
The form of the poultice administered to fire is as follows:
And it should be a half-dozen fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have a small hole around the middle one as if to accommodate an awl,
and it should be made of linen, softened beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the member.
and it should have in the middle a cross-shaped bar of iron or steel to place a candle upon.
and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the poultices of children are different from those of old people, and of thin ones from those of fat ones.
And one should thus place this poultice on the member:
take the candle of wax or a linen wick, and place it in the poultice across the bar that is in the poultice, so that the light may be at the bottom of the poultice so it does not burn the patient.
and then put it on the member, and the edges should be on the hole that we have said, so that when you want to, the vapor goes out, and one removes the poultice.
and take up the wick just as before, and keep it going often if you need to.
In the poultice therefore which is administered in eye disease, it has no bar or hole, and is only used when it is full of water, and is placed on the member alone.
and this is the form:
Poultices are only used when there are no other options for members that cannot be treated with poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts. and in bare bones, such as fingers or toes, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find poultices that are in sweet and pure water without any disturbance, then take them.
and put them in a nut of sweet water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cleansed with wine and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the poultices;
and when they are full and dry, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put one there, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, lift the limb gently and then with water, very well, and then press it.
and if the limb heals too much after the poultices, moisten one piece of linen in cold water and put it on, until the sweat is stopped.
and if the sweat is multiplied, put on vitriol that has been pounded, or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped.
or you put half a handful of peeled peas on the limb and leave them until they dry out on the limb, it will now stop sweating.
and if you need more, take other poultices.
And if the poultices will not adhere, rub the limb with fresh blood, or fix a needle in it until the sweat comes out. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry.
and when you see that they are bleeding, powder on a little bit of alum and silk thread, or ash, so they will stop now.
Here is the translation:
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for breaking and dislocation.
Listen, dear son, that the foolish doctor will fall from this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter about it.
and because of this reason is estranged the science in our land, for I never found any good;
and I know nothing except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of instruments that are prepared, just as I did in these two chapters before.
It is necessary then that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on truth, so that those who have been experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when breaking or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, unless something else entirely takes over, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old men;
or if the weather is not very cold or too warm; and mixed chills, that is to say cold fits, and flesh of hare and of goat, and does not drink wine, nor mix any fat meats, and does not overfill with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about hot abscess or spreading of matter in the member; then revives the patient to his previous good governance which he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or if he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and pork belly, and oysters, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For good nourishment makes the patient recover more quickly and sooner fixes the break.
And know that the broken bones of old men and decrepit people cannot be well recovered or united according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but don't care, reset on the broken bone one thick tendon that sets and joins the member together, so long as it strengthens like it was before; and don't let it stop doing its work, and because of this it is necessary to nourish with thick meats, just as we have said.
And know that breakages are diverse in many ways.
For the breakage of the head is one thing and the breakage of the back or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breakages. For there are breaks that occur with movement, and others while adjusting, such as the snapping of a feather to write.
For there are breaks that occur with movement, and others while adjusting, such as the snapping of a feather to write. And if it has a break with a wound, and a break all along a small crack.
And each kind has its own remedy, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and the break of the bone is known by what the joint twists, and appears well by its defect, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor sound when touched, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there is a break;
but it can well have twisting, or cracking, or small break. So it is not necessary that you move the limb with your hand, but put on medicines that come next, and then restrain it now subtly.
And know that the breakage that occurs with movement, and are the two parts disconnected, it is necessary now to set them in equal alignment, so that hot abscesses may come forth;
and if hot abscesses come forth, let it be left alone for a day or two, until the abscess is appeased; then set it in equal alignment with the joint that you can do lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is more light than the restorations of those who have pieces; then restrain it, as is necessary next.
And if the bone has broken pieces, and they are spread apart by two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or as far as your hand can reach if it is small members, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and set the member in its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, reset by all means the additions to their places with the movement that you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
and join well the two bones of the joint according to the best forms.
And feel well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: so dress it beautifully, and don't restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring about hot abscesses and contraction in the member do, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in place, so chastise the patient well that they do not move it, nor while awake or asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it needs to be put in such a condition that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it needs to be put in such a condition that it does not feel any pain; and take care that it is set right, so that twisting does not come about when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and subtle linen drapes.
and those that are great, such as thighs and leg: it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and strong linen bandage, for the wide bandages encompass all the large member and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no flaw.
then tie around the stumps light bandages, three turns or four according to the member, and restrain your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go up above the break and restrain it less, so that the break may withdraw a little from the break.
and soften it little by little, until you take a great part of the healthy place, then take another ligament and turn around again on the broken place;
then return to the part below the break and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we said in the first lesson above;
then put between the ligaments pieces of linen or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything together with one bandage, and then put well-made stays on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put something calming on top that absorbs the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it thus for several days;
then strain on your stays, and be of the thickness of a well-worn cane or of boxwood which makes hawthorns, or of palm tree saplings, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the stay you put on the break is a little bigger and wider than the others;
and be also as long as is needed for the member of smallness or largeness;
then strain on the stays just as you did in the first lesson, then bind above with a thread in harmony, just as in the first lesson on the break;
the tighter it is above, the looser below; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bonds with twisted linen cords, and it's a great error, because the bond cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have between each stay less than two fingers' breadth.
And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the stays after the straining in their natural state, then put under them pieces of linen or fleecy wool, so that he does not get wounded.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will speak of its cure hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to bind with stays all the members that are broken on the first day. For when the members are great, it is not necessary to put stays there other than after five or seven days, or more according to your security and certainty of a hot abscess happening.
and see here the manner of ancient poultices to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour which is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this concoction, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the poultice restoring breakage to several dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of poultice restoring breakage and dislocation and twisting: take 20 abareis and ladani and enule and asefetide and gum arabic and mugat; myrrh and aloe, each 5; alechil 8; and make powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth many men.
Another manner of poultice that is worth for twisting: take mugat and vismalve, each 10; myrrh and aloe, each 8; acaice 6; Armenian bolic 10, and grind well, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer.
Another manner of poultice for joints and bones that are dislocated from their place, and calms the pain occurring, and the usage of bone and breakage: take new wool, and soak it in water and oil, and put it on the area. These poultices do not restore, but they are good for calming hot abscesses, and properly removes the pains.
Another manner of poultice that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of terrestrial mulberry, and grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another manner of poultice for the restoration of broken bone and to ease the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, vetch flour, each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another manner of poultice even stronger than the first one, when a stubborn abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of vismalve, and flax seeds, balaust, mellilote, and sansuce, and violet and chamomile flowers, each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member to restore it except a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member things that are slightly hot and dry, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of poultice that is worth for wound and pain: take mugath and shorn men's hair, or bird's feathers, and vismalve, and mix it equally, and grind it, and make a poultice and the binding.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not loosen it for several days.
And if pain comes to the place, or pruritus, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge into water, and lift up the place, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is calmed. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a knot, until you are sure of hot abscess.
And rest the inflammation of the member, and let the pain be removed, then continue the subtle binding, and a little poultice, and do not strain it too hard as before; and subtlety until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess has become calm and red and painless and swollen, and you have need of plastering and binding, then reapply it as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not release it except after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the breakage is set, and approaches the adjustment to the flesh above.
Then the constraint is more than initially, and the swelling increases its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the place dries out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it. Then bind with warm water again, every time you loosen it, and so do this each third day, and adjust the bandage slightly.
By this work then the swelling is cut off from the member, and promptly make amends to what foolish surgeons do, who leave the member twisted: it's bad, and if it's a troublesome work, I see nothing else but idleness and working correctly.
No translation provided as this is not a sentence to be translated, but rather the title of the section or chapter in the medieval medical treatise. There are many kinds of breaks, and diverse shapes, and the causes are intended;
For there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone removes all the bone up to the sacrum which is below the bone, as does a hack or a wedge; and for this reason it is called this kind of break "hack".
Or the sword strikes the bone above its piercing point, and it is called this kind of break "absolute"; and the wound from these two breaks is great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or a splitting or a collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a break that persists, which approaches just to the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound is reunited in the bone as fine as a hair, and it is a small splitting, and for this reason it is called this break "capillary".
and if the wound is made by piercing stone, or falling, or similar thing, and makes a part of the bone go down, and it looks like hot coals when they are heated above the cauldrons; then the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have or had moist bones, as a child's head.
and this happens with all these kinds of breaks where small pieces are dislodged like that, and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all kinds of breaks by the pulling on them, and the questioning by probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
The capillary resemblance is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it above, then the break shows itself black.
In the treatment of the break, take heed to the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of understanding, numbness, swelling, fever, and the eyes bursting forth and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the hurt comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents that we have said come.
And if the break of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus: and this is that you take hold of the patient's head wounded, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as softly as you can.
and if bleeding comes to uncover the bone, or abscess becomes calm, then apply the aid that is needed, and this is that you fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess becomes calm and you are sure of bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you strike with a small incision in front, and this is the form:
And then insert another incision slightly larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, all pointed and made of iron, and work gently, so as not to cut the head.
And if the bone is hard and rough, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you make incisions with a rasp, not too deep lest they penetrate outside the bone of the skull, and should have above the point a margin or one circle, so as not to let the point pass outside the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have rasps for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of rasping:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one rasp on the bone and turn to your right side until you know the bone is pierced; then place the rasp in another part a little later, and do this all around, then strike at the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perturbations, and make it as fine as you can, and gently, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have such as pincers, forceps; and be careful not to touch the brain or sacrum.
And when you have pierced and shaped the bone, then it is necessary that you remove the apiculate point which remains of the bone to all another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more tapered and more subtle than the other incisor.
and if nothing remains of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of work is that which Galen says, which is more sound; and he says it with great force, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place below the head of this lancet-shaped incision, from which it takes its shape:
And do not cut at one spot, and the part is thin in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is below.
If it is applied to the bone, then gently remove it, for one does not hurt the bone at all, nor with fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach to the cloth, and the bone is chopped only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to cover over that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
So scrape in front with great scrapers, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not stop until it is well.
In each of the other fine and subtle cuttings and breaks, it is necessary that you make a cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not readily answered by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the abscess is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take one more cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to harm the abscess, then administer above another linen, and do not strain it too hard except until it covers only the wound.
and leave it thus for one day or two, until the abscess is pacified, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer again medicines without biting.
and watch that the wound is soon clean, so that you do not leave any ointment, nor let anything assemble above, for when bowels assemble on the cloth of the brain, they will run and burst, and great misfortune will befall the patient; for when something biting is placed on the abscess, it will necrotize above.
Take heed then, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if nothing worse comes but because of the medicine one has put on, and such virtue is present, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in equal measure one cloth, and place it on the abscess; then proceed with the treatment by means of treatments as is necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one on its own, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, except it swells or twists, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your little drill or perforation to the neck, and place this break within your index finger and at the back, until the neck returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and the drill cannot come to the place, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a rod about a small thickness.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it similarly, and hasten to restore the first part as soon as you can;
if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is pacified, then drill at the top of the neck with pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Or you drill another from the other side, if the break is there; and let the tents be so big that they fill the perforations of the neck.
And some restorers say that the tents should be moistened with butter and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they are moistened in a mixture of hen's egg and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes one drills into the neck or pennes of goose in place of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around, it holds the break, and blows on the patient between; then do what you see.
And if the abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then place a poultice or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of aquaion.
And if the abscess does not come, then place an emplaster on the back, made from sarsaparilla flour and incense powder, mixed with hen's egg, then apply it to the neck in a light poultice, and do not bind the neck.
and if the break in the neck is small and it is broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then close the gash, and cure things by soldering, as with plasters and unguents suitable for this.
and if there is no wound inside the neck, then cure with tents, and place pawns of lead, until he is healed.
The text has ended. The last phrase "de la routure de la mandibule" likely refers to a section or chapter on the treatment of jawbone fractures (routure = fracture, mandibule = jawbone).
When the jawbone is fractured below, and there is no wound behind, and the break is only slightly above, and is not split in two, except for small cracks inside, then one can recognize it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right side of the jawbone, that you apply your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jawbone, then apply your index finger from the right hand, and drill the break lightly, and close it with the other hand by the back, and place it evenly.
And if the break of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you administer an extension of three parts, until they are equal.
Et if the movement of teeth has occurred, or a routure, so strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on one double drapel; and put on the drapel a great estele well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as tightly as you can, and command the patient to rest, and feed him light foods.
And if you see that the swelling changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply ointment on top, with a mixture of flour and egg or farina of wheat, after you have removed the cerote; and apply a light woolen ointment, and if the ointments harden, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it alone until they are healed; many times one is healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses form, so treat according to what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, repair no part of the bone that has been taken out; but do subtlety with instruments suitable to this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by degrees according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remains, then close the wound, if it is large, and put on one of the ointments suitable for this, to bring forth flesh, until they are healed.
of force The forcele breaks in many places before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and disjointed in two, and there are pieces, and this is the lightest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is such when the break has no wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the aid box which feels the forcele broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break in place between your knees, so that the form be as it should be, and there be neither appearance nor jutting.
And if you need to extend further, then place under the shoulder of the patient a rounded sphere of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the forcele, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in its proper place.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele out forward, because it comes too far in, then it is necessary that the patient lies somewhat on his hatereil, and puts a pillow under his shoulder, and the assistants push the shoulder down, so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
And then direct the break to your knees, and if you find it debrisied, then it is necessary that you split it open; and pull out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot join by any means, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but make sure to put this instrument under the forcele to ward off the syphac.
and it should resemble a spoon, and not be sharp, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, such as you see, and one large and one narrow, like the routure of the wound that you made when you broke the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then close the wound, and if the routure is small or you doubt a hot abscess, then pack the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, then soak one cloth in rose oil and egg white and wine, and apply it.
The dressing of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incision, is that you apply to the bone a poultice made of flour and egg or farina of wheat, and put on light bandages, and place a sphere under the armpit, if you need it. Then take a very thick bandage of one palm in width, then put on a double cloth, and the ointment; then take a fine bandage of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the end of the bandage is hanging down. and put the bandage on the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the armpit of the healthy one, and under the armpit of the sick one; and wrap each part separately, and when you see that the ligature holds the break well, and you clearly see that the bandage is not moving over the broken bone, then bind it every day, and when the ligatures loosen, then restrain them.
and make the patient sit on his backside, and place a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the aid box up high; so that the break of the forcele will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless bad accidents come, until .xx. days.
then reapply the ointment, if you see that it is needed, and strain and leave it so, until they are restored; and it is restored in the best case in 28 days, and in less to some people.
of the break of the shoulder
Not long after the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and it does not stay in its place unless touched; so prepare it according to the figure of the break, and bind it according to its natural form, in all the ways you can; then put on the skin powder made with flour and egg, and light bandages, and a double cloth; then put on a wide and fine bandage, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are any rough patches under the bandage anywhere on the shoulder, then pack those rough patches with linen bandages, so that the bandage stays in place evenly; and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the bandage does not move from its place, and check the ligature every day; and whenever it becomes loose, bind it again, and put the same bandage on if it has moved out of place, and make the patient sit up straight; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when these numbers are fulfilled, then release it, and be sure, for this is not a bone that can get loose lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward and points under the skin, then make it prominent, and let it be, and do what we have said about calming hot abscesses in the break of the forcele.
of the rupture of the breastbone
The breastbone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the back. And when it is broken in the middle, so it slopes down below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all around, and by chance vomits blood, and shows the ribs in the broken bone, and one feels well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one places a small cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly puts equal to all the ways you can, so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then puts salves and poultices above the subtle salt, or other lightweight wax, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the strap around again to the back, and holds it gently, and rewards each hour with a little bit, and if it relapses, then holds it tighter; and if it should be released, because of corrosion or pruritus that comes from there, or pain or abscess, then hastens, and releases it, and rages the salve, and addresses what has come to the cures; then renews the salve, and holds it so until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in large joints after the back, and at the top inside, and they only bend because they are soft; and one feels well through investigation of the back.
And the restoration is that you put equal the breaking, as it should be. And then put a salve, and bind it with a cloth, if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is inclining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and breathes short, and all around vomits a great quantity of blood, and this is a grievous affliction, and the ancients have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to drive the breaking away from the back.
We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come forth if it is not done. And if it has been done, then he will be healed.
And some of us say that one should put poultices on the place to draw forth strongly, and this seems like reason; however, there is doubt that the poultice may attract superfluities to the place because of the condition of weakness.
And some of us say that one should cover the place with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put equal the bandage around, then be cured through the treatment of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone that pierces the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open above the place of the broken rib, and put below one instrument to ward off the pus; and then one must split the bone and pull gently, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and cure with salves until he is healed. And if abscesses come forth, then put moist cloths in rose oil on the place, and put on the place; and cure the place as needed for the abscess, and be patient above the ribcage where it should be, until he is healed.
of the breaking of the neck
Sometimes the breaking comes to the bone of the neck, and it bends little; and also to the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if they are numb and feel well when one stretches and pricks them, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one applies treatment.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents in his hands, and on his back there is ventosity and evacuation without voluntary movement; and when one has stirred him up on his belly, there is evacuation without voluntary movement. And when he is stirred up on his back and wants to ease, but cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not take care of himself in his cure.
And if these accidents do not come to him, then the thing is easier.
And the cure is that you apply if there is hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is calmed; then put on a comforting and drying salve, and bind it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until he is healed. And if some bone dislocates, then it is necessary to cover with a cloth; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large, by stitching, then cure with ointment anointing flesh, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", then put your pouch in your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the salve and cloth on, if you need to; then bind it, and if there are dislocated bones, then make them straight again, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the hip bone
Rarely does the hip bone break, and if it does, then it happens only a little bit of shortening at the top; and becomes long, and inclines downward, and comes to the patient with pain and piercing, and swells what is broken.
And the restoration is that you stretch your hand up, as far as you are above the breaking; and know what the breakage is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the top, then put equal to that breakage, until it is in natural shape.
And if the breakage is long or it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that breakage appears to you. And when you have made it even, then put on the poultice, and then put on a piece of birch bark or of horn, and hold the binding tight, so that it does not move; and fill up the space below the ribs, until the parts are even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their side with their healthy side or back.
And if the abscess subsides, then do not touch it, until the abscess has subsided; and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the back and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of two manners: of which one is that you take a piece of straight wood, about the thickness of a thumb, in this shape:
And bind it with two knots, and bend it upwards, and have the patient sit on a stool; then throw their broken arm onto the wood, so that it comes to the elbow, and has about half a span of wood, then bend it over some heavy thing or let the assistants stretch it down; then put the binding even with their hands together, until the binding returns as it should.
And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hatreil, and bind their hand to their neck; then instruct two assistants to have one hold what is above the binding in their hands, and the other stretch down to every knot, and extend each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then bind one knot below the binding, and another above the binding, and have each assistant stretch to their part. And if the binding is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put a knot in the middle below the stool, and another towards the back, under the binding; and also if the binding is towards the back, you must put a lighter knot, without effort, until the binding is even on the shoulder, and on the back; then set the binding even as it should be, and hold it, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess comes, then do not bind it at all for seven days, and put a poultice on the binding in a linen cloth soaked in rose oil, until the abscess subsides; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put the poultice on the binding, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the wrapping, and hold it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, then use splints, and put on the binding a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one or two spans of space, and be each splint so large that it passes over the binding three spans from each side; then bind on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the binding, more strongly and less distant.
And if you see the seat of the splints and the binding, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then let it be for seven days, just as we have said; then look at each three days, whether prickling or swelling does not come to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too constricted. If so, proceed, just as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not remove the binding except after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and put a linen pillow under the shoulder, and watch each hour of the day or night to see that the figure of the broken member does not move, or become slackened the bindings; then proceed by the virtue of medicine, and give them food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is for the first subtle things; and when they begin to recover, it should be thick. And it is custom that the shoulder and leg should be taken up in forty days from all; and then you must remove and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the place. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, you should wait one day or two months before removing it.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fasciculus", one of which is small and is the one that supports the elbow; and the other is large, and is the one that lies below, towards the little finger. Sometimes only the large fasciculus breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small fasciculus is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is poor, and more painful than when both are broken together. If it is the small fasciculus that has been broken alone, then it should be gently stretched a little bit, and set even.
And if it is the large fasciculus, then it should be bound more tightly; and stretch it on a pillow, and hold the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the others, and have the patient cross his arms over himself, and a pillow in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch one assistant's arm to the part below their hand, or to a strap, and another assistant above. And then set it as the mire sees fit, according to its best form.
And if the breaking has fragments, then put each one in its place; and if there is one that is loose and can be grasped with the horn, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
And if there is a wound with the breaking, I spoke of it in the chapter on singular wounds; then take care.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there appears a hot abscess, then apply one layer of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and wrap one layer subtly above the abscess until it is calmed down. Then remove the cerote, and put on the ointment with egg yolk powder, then put on the splints, and make sure the splint of the breaking is thicker and a little wider than the others; and know that there should be 7 or more splints in various positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two; and bind it more tightly above the breakage than at other parts, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and be the drapes above the breakage soft and moist, not hard nor dry; and be the thread that holds it, made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And restore the member and the binding after some days. Et if some bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must bathe the member with hot water until those itches are calmed; and let the member not at all rest tightly. Then recommence stretching, and if the ligament is softened and the bone relaxed, and similar thing, so address it.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it slightly and let it be like that for some days, until the swelling comes in, and then bind it.
And if none of the things we have said do not come to the patient, then do not loosen it until 20 days or thereabouts, and then lift his hands up to his neck, and make his necks even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruising is restored in 30 days or 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and in the fingers it often happens that there are breakages, and only sometimes does pleasure come.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sits cross-legged, and sits straightly in front of him evenly; then puts his hand on the outstretched cloth, and stretches the minister's broken bones, and makes them equal to the sight, until they are well joined; and applies the poultice and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then sets a splint according to the quantity of the swelling; and is enveloped in one wrap of linen.
And if the breakage is around the pad of the finger near the hand, then make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken finger; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be as hard as the flesh of the hand, and strain it, as is necessary.
And if the breakage is at the tip, then it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another below in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
And if the breakage comes to one of our fingers, and it's the thumb, then set it straight as is necessary; and strain with the finger, and if you see that you must put a small straight splint to lift the breakage, and not move; and if the breakage is on another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after; or tie them all together in one holding, as seems best, or put a splint on top like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscess, and support what comes, as I have said.
of the broken shin
The shinbone is often broken, and well seen when it turns before and behind; and the restoration is such that one bandage is placed above the breakage, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each minister's bandage to its equal part; and that is when the breakage is in the bone.
And if the breakage is near the root of the shin, then one bandage goes towards the elbow, and the other bandages below the breakage. And similarly if it is near the knee, and then put the bandages on the knee, and extend downwards; then place the mirror so that the bone is even to its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and bind it, if hot abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it subside and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in the same manner. It is necessary that you envelop the breakage with one bandage made of doubled cloth in two or three layers, and leaving any superfluous parts, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and put a long thread between the shin and the leg, below the knee, and let the ends of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the shin the bandage, then place splints on the breakage, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then apply a poultice eight days between the leg and the shin made of soft cloths to even out the straining, then begin to bind tightly three or four times around the breakage; and as you go above the breakage, and less strain it; then come back down below to the heel of the thread, so that you come up below the foot; and strain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless some abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes.
And if there is, then loosen it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then it is necessary to sew them, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut the flesh, and draw out the fragment; and care for it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the shin is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, just as in the shoulder and arm; although, in this restoration made, it does not bother the patient.
And know that the shin is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversities of temperaments.
of the joint of the knee
Know that in the joint of the knee there is often breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it's just a fissure, or one perforation, and has to be all wrapped, and without wrapping, and this feels well enough.
And the restoration is such that you set equal those things which are rent to their parts, until they are assembled as much as one can; then apply the poultice, and put a round splint if necessary, and strain it as is necessary, then reward all the dispositions that we have said for other breakages, whether hot abscess or other similar thing; and set each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "tibia" and the other is called "fibula"; and it has all sorts of breakages as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done equally with that of the arm, and the work is all alike.
And if the two bones are broken together, so the leg turns everywhere.
And if the small bone is broken, so it turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and turns below. Then apply an extension, set it equal, and bind the splints equally; but always, it is necessary to consider whether the break is ugly and there are many pieces, so that the extension be less and more gentle; and ease it according to your skill.
And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of cedar wood that surround the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap it in two layers with a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle also, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; some people give one piece of wood as long as the leg, and use cedar, and set the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this at the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; then care for it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the toe is affected, and there are only a few exceptions in more or less conditions.
And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones overlapping one another, so set the patient's foot on the ground, just as if it were going to walk; then place your foot now on their sole, at the spot where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their place; then put the poultice and compresses on top, and under the foot of the foot a small plate with two full hives, then bind it to the foot accordingly, after you have wrapped drapery around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days are passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers; then put a splint on each broken toe according to its length, and make it a little wider; then put that plate under the foot that I mentioned, and bind it accordingly; and if there are two or three or more broken, put a splint on each toe according to its quantity, wrapped in one piece of linen, and bind the plate under the foot; and let it be so that the top of the plate is outside the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, as we have said; and treat each accident as it requires.
of the breaking of the bone of the finger
When the natural bone of a woman is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then bend her towards the back part and keep her held by the rear; then fill the vaginal opening with cotton and put in as much as one stone; then remove the woman, lift the back slightly and slowly, and then the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of the natural bone, and the bone will return to its place with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, take away the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for about seven days or around: then the break will be restored, and if you see, take a goat's bladder, tie a cord to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the natural opening; then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is emptied inside: the natural bone will return to its place; then fill it with cotton and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, restore it in this way as we have said about the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into it and pays attention to my book. For the break indicates the right path of restoration in many dispositions: heed this then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and pour it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of break with wound
It is necessary for someone who has a break with a wound, whether it be great like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds we have said bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then wash it with vinegar, if you have nothing else, and then continue to restore the break in the same hour or day, unless there is an abscess that comes.
And if an abscess comes, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent above the knee uncovered, it is necessary that you set it in place slightly with your hands, to a small extension.
And if the extension is not ready to be put in place by your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers or length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four, depending on what he needs for each cure of a break; and be straight and a little thick, so that it does not bend at all under compression on the member in your work, and be curved forward, and thick from the middle going forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason it is necessary that the curved nails be placed on top of the apparent bone; and fill it once, until it returns to its place, and be equal to each other. And if the break is small, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the tip of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it off with an instrument suitable for this purpose, or a saw or file, to your ability; then take out what remains in the bone of roughness and small scales.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So make sure it is in its place, then wet one cloth in black stiptic wine, and use it properly; and do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound unless it has oil, so as to bring forth putrefaction and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut off all the covering around it, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the break; and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, and they have brought about death or corruption on the patient some time; and the bandages should be softer and more gentle than those used for other breaks.
Et if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil occurrences will not happen, as we have said, and you find pain at the location, then it is not necessary to put on bandages; but instead, wrap hard cloths around, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days the bow of the wound appearing, then remove everything you had put on with all wine, and apply ointment for healing wounds, just like tetrafarmacum and similar things.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, morning and evening, until it is set and healed.
And it is necessary that the members be arranged in such a way that the bow runs down lightly.
And if it happens to happen many days, and it cannot heal but the bow returns, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you search the wound with a tent, and remove all these uneven pieces that bring about that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the location, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the great members, do not pull it out; for many times death ensues, but leave it until it can be removed; by chance it will fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of blisters that come on the swelling
We often see after the healing of the swelling, namely when it is near the jointure, and it is a bad thing to see the figure of the member; and by chance the members cannot perform their natural works.
Take heed therefore if the wound is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, either taking one of these things or all together, and mixing them with stiptic wine or with abundant egg white or with oil; and apply it to the joint at night in an estoup, and press it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and begin another, until the swellings are removed; or you strain it on a piece of linen well made; for the properties of linen are such that they remove all swelling from the members; and if the swelling has already been converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above, and make the superfluity apparent; or give it to any barber, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and remains after the member weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member; or due to excessive inflammation; or due to great movements, but not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and cause their body to become tender, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths, and give them joy and relaxation; then apply poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and inflammation often subsides with lukewarm water, until nourishment flows into the member; and returns to its natural figure.
of the twisted member after healing
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, though it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member all over again; many foolish physicians have done this in our land; and this work is blameworthy, and great evils come from it, and by chance death ensues; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then it is necessary to rise them with hot water, or cooking soft herbs such as those of mallow, and roots, and melilotus, and similar things; and make a soothing plaster, such as one made from dyaquilon well prepared, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take fat figs, and grind them with rye flour, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And at no time is the swelling removed by continuous and prolonged friction with many moist things. And administer gentle movement to the member each hour.
And if the tortuosity is hardened and toughened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it is necessary to cut just to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and apply caution and study in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary now to bring them back gently.
For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, it is set in place with great pain at the joint; therefore, do not move them to the hour when they are swollen: many times bring shame and other pains.
However, when this happens, make the patient well again, then leave them alone until the abscesses are calmed; then rise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the treatment comes to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters of dislocations from top to toe.
of the jawbones
It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated and downwards, and the dislocations of both sides occur in two manners: either they are slightly removed from their places, and somewhat softened; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang down towards the chest, and cut off the saliva of the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and involuntarily wrap his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by gentle means.
And if it is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and insert the mirror's spatula into one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and with the other two hands, they should be free to apply equal pressure; and command the patient to soften their jawbones and move them from all directions.
And the physician sets it equal, until it recovers to its place.
And if it is returned with difficulty, especially when the two jawbones are together, if they have been loosened by hot water and oil, so that you return them slightly; do not force the return, as we have said.
And when they are returned to their equal place, and the mouth of the patient is well moistened, then put on damp cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, and tie it lightly with soft ligatures;
and the patient sleeps on his back, and his jaws are between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he strain himself to masticate, but takes light food, until the pains are gone, and the jawbones are set.
and then he takes what he wants lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth while eating or drinking, until the jawbone is well set and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back to their point within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and habitual sweats come, and perhaps colic, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a death sentence; and many times the person dies from whom it happens, within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot be dislocated from inside the chest towards the back and in a continuous motion of the shoulder blade and the ribcage, and is sometimes dislocated to the rear, and one can feel this well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and stretches out his arms; then presses the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on a poultice and bandage, and tighten it.
and the head of the shoulder that is towards the back cannot be dislocated; if it cannot, and if it does dislocate once, then return it to its place, as we have said; then put on a poultice and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and similarly, bring back the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the lower part of the socket; and the second is at the part of the ribcage; and perhaps dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inwardly for the nerves; and many times dislocates downward towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for to them it happens suddenly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps a little and returns a little.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or crushing, and the shoulder becomes swollen with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you examine it thoroughly, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it goes downward towards the socket, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them manifest diversity. and you will find on the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket where the top of the shoulder touches the armpit, just as if it were an ox's; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move in any way.
and also, if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the armpit.
and this way of dislocation is not difficult to return when it is new, or if the patient is young.
And the method is that the attendants lift the patient's hand up high, then put their fingers below the socket, and lift the jointure up to its place by force; and the attendants lift the hand again, and stretch it up high, then put it back down; so it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within three days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should use a gentle and soothing mixture, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and bring it.
then the patient should be placed on his back, and a wad of wool put below the socket, not too soft nor too hard, then the physician should place their heel on the wad, and lift the top of the shoulder properly, and draw the patient's hand.
and another attendant should hold the patient's head, so that it does not move downward; then this shoulder will return right now, and if you see that it is being returned in this way:
and it is that you make someone who is bigger than the patient be present; and he should stand directly in front of the patient's side, and place his shoulder under the socket of the patient's shoulder, and lift the socket up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another attendant should draw the patient's hand down towards their stomach. And if the patient is too light, then they can lift something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return now.
And it is also restored in another way: and that is by placing a long iron spike into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder fits just like a pistol, and not too big nor too small. then be placed below the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient should be standing at the end of the stick; then his hand should be stretched down on the other side firmly, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod of two arms in length and three fingers in width, which has the head rounded to fit easily into the socket below the shoulder, according to this shape:
then tie soft cloths on top of the stick so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then place it below the socket of the patient's shoulder; and stretch one arm up over the long rod, and tie the assistant on the rod, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a shelf of a wide basket, and let the hands down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is applied, in whatever manner it may be, you should place below the armpit an equal wool sphere, then put the plaster on top of powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then strain below the armpit properly, and turn the string over the plaster, and bind the hand to one's neck, and let the remaining hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he massage little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal sooner; and then massage more after five days or seven, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is sound.
And if the joint is dislocated from its place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply cauterizations to three pores, as it is written before in the chapter of cauterizations.
And if you do all this and after seven days it dislocates again, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast, or shoulders, or back, is made by impulse and stretching of hands, and it should be treated in another way; and care for it until it is sound.
And if after healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take baths many times, until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the hip
Know that the joint of the hip is displaced in a way, and comes back in a way; and is displaced from all sides, and just as much before and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for one sees it well and feels it well; and displaces according to each figure. And when you join the diseased hip with the healthy one, then it can be seen clearly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot flex the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscess does not come to life, for if the abscess were to come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset from top to bottom, especially when it is in the back; thus it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you should stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mire according to the hip around, above, and below, and bind the joint to its shoulders together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the hip which is displaced.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide.
and when the mire has joined the joint to his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly, until it returns.
and when it is back in place, put on a dry plaster with some egg yolk, and bind tightly, and bend the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it stay for a few days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the string, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the string, and leave it thus for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels swelling after the resetting of the joint, and it becomes inflamed, then bathe him well and rub gently, and press until it is relieved; or you put a greasy sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath. and when he bathes, rub the joint gently, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is sound; and if you see that it helps, apply moist heated valerian fien with butter, and bind it on; and it will return to its natural state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is displaced and returns lightly, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to reset it quickly, in the same place where it was displaced, so that the swelling subsides or an abscess does not form hotly.
And the resetting is such that you place the diseased hand on a board, and extend the fingers of the ministers, and have the mire put it even, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the joint, and binds it until it returns.
Furthermore, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a board for extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the board, and the mire place their hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If not, then bind emplausters calming abscesses, and leave it thus without reapplying.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the deformed joint remains.
and nothing but harm comes to the patient until his hands are softened, and he cannot flex anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to stretch by applying cauterizations in the case, and perhaps it is not worth anything else.
And when his hands are back in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, then soak it in hot water, and rub it gently until he is sound.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes are dislocated the two bones of the hand to each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or belly;
Then the two bones are repositioned and hold the dislocation in place as long as it recovers, then support the head of the bone and guide it towards the part where it is separated;
and let it be for two days, and then make it even that day; and bind the joint with a bandage, as we have said, and loosen it by day, and move it, and bind the joint again; and do this often until it is tight,
and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated on the other side.
of the dislocation of the spine
When the spine or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions jump forth without will, nor can they be held, and many times some member is softened, or the two thighs or one arm.
And many times the dislocation moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
the cure is that you correct if the gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no correction nor healing of the whole thing.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cure are spoken in great words, but there is not much benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbositez which comes to the breast beforehand, there is no remedy nor healing;
and also that which comes directly to the two sides, and one cannot cure more than that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in one place even, and have a strain under him, so he does not get hurt;
then stick one iron bar into the ground firmly, and another near his feet, and bind a strap across the joints of the patient, and one to his hips, and knees, and ankles;
and two attendants know the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron bars;
and be well closed, the iron bars as we have said, and the attendants put their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover with this cure, take a table three arms long, and place it under the appearance, and have the patient sit on the side, and put the head of the table under the appearance, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and have the attendants put their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it recovers its place; and if you see, then do so to the pivot which turns towards the hand.
And it is that you stick two iron bars into the head of the patient, one arm long, and towards the feet two others, and have between each bar, a palm's width apart.
and have in each iron bar one hole, where the pivot runs, and be the bars firmly stuck in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two bars be one turning bar, above which the strap turns, and have in the two turning bars two small iron bars, a palm's width long, to turn the pivot.
and then bind the strap that is between the joints to the pivot towards the head, and the other strap towards the feet to the other pivot, and each of the attendants turns his own pivot with all the strap, and the master sets the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then apply a drying poultice with plenty of egg white, and then bind the swelling, and then draw out a tablet three arms long, which will straighten the place of the gilbositez and the part of the spine that is sound, then bind it with a strap, as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient until he is healed.
and if nothing comes to the end of healing, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the poultice that we have said before; and sometimes one must administer a piece of linseed.
and sometimes an appearance comes to the back of the spine, and it seems like dislocation; and that is the bone which opens, therefore one must not have presumption about this: by chance death would come.
of hip dislocations
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come except from dislocation alone, nor does it come as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more so within than without, and less so before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the ailing leg with the sound one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the sound one, and the patient cannot flex their kneecap inwards. and it is the place that is below the swelling of abscesses hot, because the head of the thigh bone comes away.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from behind is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from before is that his leg is well-shaped according to its completion; however, he does not flex his kneecap without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot at first, and holds back his urine, and swells with anger, and when he walks, he passes over the ankle.
And the sign of him to whom it comes from behind is that he cannot stretch his kneecap nor flex it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in the place under the ribs.
The remedies for this likeness of dislocation are that you correct if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its condition, there being no remedy; and there is no need for one to have presumption.
And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of three kinds of dislocations, you must hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and there is no need for another remedy.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong servant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands or with one tie above the knee; and another servant extends his hand above in the same manner that he presses his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft tie above the thigh; and another ties the head of the strap;
and stretch all up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to three similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its likeness. When the dislocation is in the parting place, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then put the strap on the root of the thigh, and the bolt that is below the angle, then stretch the strap high towards the angle, and towards the hollow;
then take hold of another servant's arms and encircle the thick strap of the diseased thigh, and stretch it out far forth: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft strap on both heels and both kneecaps, and let the diseased leg be stretched out two fingers more than the others.
then be suspended on the top of a beam, and be above the ground two arm's length; then instruct one servant to encircle the head of the thigh, and let another servant hang with the patient, who encircles the thigh strongly, for the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the end, then the patient lies down, as we have said in one who has gilboiseity, and tightens one strap on the diseased leg properly, and on the hip also.
then put two pincers, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one pincer between the patient's thighs in the middle. and have damp cloths planted around, so that the patient does not hurt, then stretch each servant towards him, and the barber sets equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put on the table and press thus as we have said in the gilboiseity, and let the patient lie down on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is before, then it is necessary to stretch out the diseased leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and put the barber's hand on top of the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the end, then it is not necessary to stretch out the patient down or lift him up onto the earth, but rather that he be as if his hip were dislocated at the end, as we have said about the couching on two hips. and be on his face, and the strap stretched as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table;
and will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if it rests three days or four, then release it, and put the poultice on; and if you see that they are even, then strain, as before, and leave it. Three days; then release it, and let him go gently, until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; and does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not bend to his hip, know that he is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch out his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms and bring it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee properly; and another servant stretches out his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg gently back into its hip.
and put the poultice on, and make the leg come back to the hip, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then release him; and do not bother the patient to walk until his limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not in place, then administer stretching strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until he is healed.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankle is sometimes sprained and sometimes fully dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
the remedies are gentle, and one must stretch it gently with one's hands when it is only sprained.
And when it is fully dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and have one servant hold him firm by the leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it up, and press the foot up nicely.
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then re-do the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and stick one pincer firmly into the earth between his thighs, and wrap damp cloths around, so that he does not hurt.
then have the servant hold the thigh, and another servant stretch out the foot to his hands or to one strap, which he ties on the calf of the foot. then stretch out each servant evenly, and the pincers be placed thus between the thighs of the patient to retain him when one is stretching.
then put the mirrors on both sides of the dislocation to his hands, and another servant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, put the poultice and compresses on top, and strain firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so the bandage is not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage has loosened, strain again; then release it on the fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse again.
And if abscesses appear there, it is necessary to heal them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
you must
When the joints are relaxed, you should stretch them gently without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot, you should make the patient sit on one level or on six feet straight, and put your foot on what appears to be the joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
and when it is even, and there appears to be nothing, put a board under the sole of the foot, two inches thick, then strain firmly, and leave it three days, then release it; and make it rest, until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not unassuming in your treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and unless you are pitiful and merciful and slow, rather than hasty;
and use gentle things at the beginning to calm down the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset now the limb to its place, so that the hot abscess comes.
and when the limb is back in place, administer gentle things to calm down the hot abscess, and treat the wound with dried ointments, as is fitting.
and if there is breaking with the dislocation, and small bones separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
and take care not to fall into the path of fear, as I have said, for it is worthily done according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arm and your body. Amen
