You, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its filling, and I have finished it by its explanations and by its declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is lost from everything else, so the sciences are perished and decayed, and there remains nothing but small descriptions in old books that have been moved by hand. And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the sciences are alienated.
Or it seems to me that I will vivify it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cauterization and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation, as is necessary.
And for this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to climb in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the arrangement and moving and resting parts, and from the place of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hands.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is not familiar with the things said before should beware lest they make an error and kill men; thus I have often seen many who meddle in this science abandon their knowledge and skill.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into an abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; wherefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone from an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who took in charge the leg of a duke from our land which was broken, and with the breakage had a wound; and the ignorant surgeon forced the break to be set on top of the wound with great haste, and did not leave any dressing on the wound, and left it thus until the end; and he commanded that it should not be undone, and remained thus so that the leg was completely inflamed and the foot came to destruction.
I was called to come to him and I hastened to come to loosen the leg; and when I had loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But in any case the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to progress through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who opened up an infected abscess and then inflamed it through the bad judgment of his skill.
For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it is not necessary to touch it with iron unless one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, most dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple dispositions; and I will show you each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Why it is necessary that you guard yourselves so that the foolish surgeon cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms with caution, and begin to treat your patients gently and firmly, and use the best method so that through the mercy of God you come to salvation and are praised; and leave the dreadful diseases of grievous sickness; and put down your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and it is the chapter ordered from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bandages and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from head to feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Furthermore, so that we remember our work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle science and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about this, agreeing with it; and I was not sufficient for their words, because I feared the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally to all temperaments where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely, the hot temperament with material and the dry temperament with material.
In hot and dry temperament with material, some have divided and said that cauterization is great help; and others have said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness; and he who said the opposite says that cauterization does great help in hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it to be true at times through experience.
And in any case, don't intervene unless you are the one who has experimented and knows through long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of human temperaments, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the surprises and pace of time; we have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians gathered and agreed to the cauterization.
And know, son, that fire-cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and more noble than burning medicines.
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that it burns, and does not harm another member if there is no name.
Burning medicines come from one member to another, and bring diseases of great harm to the afflicted member; and by chance kill the patient.
Fire because of its highness and due to the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no surplus.
And I have found this in my experiments and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is answerable to fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases from bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating; accept it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and selected patients.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is put below by the aid of cauterization; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait until a greater evil comes to the member.
And never think it, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and surpasses medicine in its haste and virtue of its work and power.
And a possible thing is that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered at the right time or place where there is little excess and moisture, as in cauterizations for dens pain and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cauterization, and it is effective. Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold instruments is more gentle than with iron ones, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the place where cauterization is done does not cause harm, but it's not true because I have tested it, and I found that it's true in some people; and gold cauterization surpasses iron one, as they said.
And besides, when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know when it's heated by the color of the gold, and it soon cools down; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore we use fire-cautery because we have made it appear suitable to our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter from beginning to end, so that the way may be easier for you to find.
of the olive cauterization
This cauterization is worth against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two reasons for it: one because of a disease called "soda", and the other because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and because of a multitude of dreams, pains in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by a solvent medicine, clarifying the head 3 times or 4 times, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can tolerate; and then render the head of the patient.
And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and put his hands on his lap; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let your thumb be where it will come to, so it bleeds a little, and then heat the cauterization called "olivare", which is the form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it descend and spread your hand little by little in rotating; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see bone 1 small grain; and if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you; after take 1 handful of silk, and put a soft and fluffy cotton inside, and place on the spot, and let it be for 3 days; then apply a moist cloth in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacos" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and therefore it helps more.
And some of them said that one should burn the cauterization so long that part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and heal it.
And the others say that one should burn the cauterization so long above, and push it in as hard as possible to make a hole in the bone as wide as 1 vermicelli thread that women put in their hair for the humors to flow out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after one must heal and close it.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some people where there is a sign of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we observe in other members; and also when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salve and gentle for me, and from this I work a cure, even if it seems to be assembled.
of the ancient pain of the head
When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts long, the patient should use year's balm and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head, oils, and plasters; and if one does the fire cautery that we have previously said, it is worthless.
Take care if the patient's head is of a strong nature, and it is not too cold; then one should cauterize below that fire cautery as we have said above.
Afterwards, make a fire cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and hold your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of this elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those with which one makes a hole in the middle of the head, and that's the form.
of the fire cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and spreads to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by mundane medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and nothing helps: then one should do cauterizations according to two manners, that is to say of medicinal fire and of fire.
The medicinal fire cauterization is that you take a piece of alum, remove the bark and mix it with one part to two parts of water, and then make an incision on the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can pour the alum mixture under the skin; and when it has been poured, bind and tighten well and leave it thus for 12 hours; then loosen it and wash away the alum mixture, and let the wound remain thus for two or three days; then put a poultice on top of butter until it heals.
After the ointment treatment until they are healed; and if you see fit, make use of some burning medicines that I have written about or in the treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cauterization is done in this manner. Heat the fire cauterizer as follows:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or clover with a small amount of curvature, and in the middle there appears to be a little opening; and one puts it on the painful place, holds one's hand and turns the fire slightly, until half of the spark of the coal is burned; and lift one's hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and discharge an abundance of blood.
After that, put cotton in the form of a seal, and put it on the place by three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cauterizer called "cultellare", do so at all points, but be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not an old one.
of the migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the fire cauterizers previously mentioned for medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it is white; and then apply it to the painful place, a line of half a finger's length long, and lift your hand once, and strain so as not to cut the artery and not to go up to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard for it, lest spasm come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and also for one who does not know what to do, and who is not experienced in this art; and leave the work in my way; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizers do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, administer the cauterizer that we have said in the chapter on extracting the artery, with the cauterizer that has two knives; and this cauterizer is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear due to coldness, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizer called "poins" as follows:
After, prick the entire ear that is ailing, or around both ears if the pain holds in both, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked the place to burn; and have 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
of the torment of the mouth
The torment that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that arise from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cauterization on those similar to those that come from scorched skin and nerve spasms.
When you cure this appearance of torment that arises from phlegm and idleness, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizers: one in the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and put the cauterizer in the part that appears healthy, and make the fire cauterization near the head of the ear above a small amount below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a piece; and leave the cauterizer until half of the spark is burned; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
And this is the appearance of the cultellare that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knives be a little larger; after, treat the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizers: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterizer on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
Lying idle.
To this disease it is fitting to give the patient large pills and pills of a gentle nature for the brain; afterwards, rinse the head of the patient thoroughly, and place on the occiput an ointment of mustard as written in the treatise on ointments; and that is the manner of cauterization: if you do it just as I have said.
If he is cured thus, good it is; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the head going down to the neck, with a space of two or three inches between each one; and cure him as you would others, and if you see any swelling, and the patient is suffering, then make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure until he is healed; and it is called "olivare", as I have said before.
Of the chill of the head. It is fitting that the head be cleared of years and what we have said before; afterwards, rinse the head of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is fierce, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the burning is done, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure until he is healed, and it is called "olivare" as we have said before.
Of epilepsy.
Epileptics should not use cauterization unless one is phlegmatic, and it is fitting first to clear the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from penitent medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, then make him gargle and massage the brain often with good meats; afterwards, rinse the head in the middle, and make one cauterization according to what we have said before, and one on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is fierce and suffering, then make cauterizations as I have said to someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and it is called "olivier" according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, then make one cauterization subtle in this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or moists are corrupted and thickened, then make those cauterizations of threads as we have said to someone who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be cleared, according to what is said before in the division.
After rinsing the head of the patient; after make one turpentine of linen well made, like a circle, and put it in the head; and the patient should be crossed, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and moisten with butter of ancient herbs; and heat it over tempered fire, so that the skin can endure being poured on it; after empty the circle within the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the patient once a week for each one, with good governance, until he is healed.
Or, if you see that cauterizing causes many points all over the cautery. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain equally; and then put on soaked cotton in butter and goose grease.
Of the swelling of the eyes. When swelling comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink clearing the head, and ward off all moists, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting.
After, command him to rest his head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of swelling is together on both eyes, or if it is on one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the hair, and be the cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and take care not to let blood flow, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the bleeding as well as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision how to stop it; and never make a cauterization or cut under the two bones behind.
Of the tears of the heart.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or under the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the swelling descending to the eyes: one cauterization in the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or incisions under the two bones; and if there is more need, then cauterize sagaciously above the scalp with each small cauterization.
Of the tears of the heart within the eyes.
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three cooked nights' worth of drink; afterwards rinse his head, and make a cauterization on the middle of the olive cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" cauterization on the two scalps, one spot under the hair; and take care not to cut the artery. And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization which is called "olivare". And that is the form:
And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the two scalps as long as the scalp is; and do not leave your hand off until one-third of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
Of the hair which points at the oil. Never happens that the hair of the eyes is converted downward and points at the oil, and then one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Or cauterization by fire commands the patient to leave the hairs until they are long and equal; and if they point at their birth, then restrain his eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
When they grow and are even, then the patient places them in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on paper over the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and it begins with the sign below the hairs; then he puts damp cotton soaked in egg yolk and musk mallow on the eye, then heat the cautery whose form is...
After cauterizing on the figure you signed bit by bit several times, so that the burns are laid out; and the sign of the health of the work is when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus three days, then put damp cotton in butter until the scabbing is removed; after that anoint with ointment until they are healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened then restart the cautery on that same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, so cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural height, and be even, and do not prick the hair into the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment form like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so it doesn't cool down, then apply it on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on paper over the eyes; and if the patient holds only in one eye, then you must work on that one, and if in both alike; and put damp cotton under the eye in egg yolk; and the patient's head should be in a healthy state and place your finger showing above the medicine, and press gently three times whenever the patient feels the burning of the medicine, because he feels the burning as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the burning is past, then lift up the place of awe, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if so, it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the place or where the medicine has not taken effect, until your work is even and your eyes are in order; then put on damp cotton in butter until the burned area is gone, after that treat the place with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work by great vigilance that it does not happen to the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on that place which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after that treat until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to these be your constructions; and do not respond with the right way to one who has study of this art.
It seems like a new chapter or section starts here. The phrase "de la cure de fistule par cautere" suggests that the text is moving on to discuss a different medical procedure, specifically the treatment of a fistula (a abnormal connection between two organs or parts of an organ) using cauterization.
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterized according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and take hold of the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he remove his head; after that put damp cotton soaked in egg yolk or persimmon juice on the eye; after that heat the cautery which is thus: and is shaped like the comb of a vulture, together with the cautery; if you see, so it is pointed from one head to the other, and if you see, so it is also like a tent; but notwithstanding, this one that is shaped is worth moving for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the purulence, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and draw out what is inside the bowels; after that put hot cautery on it, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nerve above the eye, so that your hands do not go mad; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then restart the cautery once more, and if necessary again, and leave it three days; after that put on damp cotton in butter, and the treatment of drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the rest according to what will come in its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand by fistula, and cut open the place; after that put in the incision one subtle camphor whose form is... and make it to the quantity of one third of a pound; and hold your hand with camphor firmly, and do not move the patient's head until the camphor melts and flows to his eye; and it is necessary that you put damp cotton soaked in egg yolks or awe on the patient's eye: the camphor so artfully opens the place of the fistula, and heals by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body of the nerve according to what is fitting for its own place.
It seems like a new chapter or section starts here. The phrase "des crevaices en levres" suggests that the text is moving on to discuss a different medical procedure, specifically the treatment of cracks in the lips. Many times occur cracks in the lips that are called "pils", and even in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks with what we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing knife according to this form:
And put it in those cracks hastily until it comes to a point; after that treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
It seems like a new chapter or section starts here. The phrase "de l'aposteme de la goule" suggests that the text is moving on to discuss a different medical procedure, specifically the treatment of an abscess in the throat (goule).
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l'uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;
of tooth movement
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then put the patient's head in your own; after warm up the cautery from which the shape will come later in this manner as if you were putting a cord around a tooth; and place hot hastenly inside the cautery and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and resume the cautery according to your desire; after fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let it stay for an hour and then rinse.
And in this manner the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, whether it is hot or cold, and medicines do not work, then there is need of a cautery in two ways: the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end in a iron or earthen spoon; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and wet it with melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do many times until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and then put one hot iron so that the fire comes to the gum of the tooth.
The fire cautery together with the butter cautery is such that you take a cord of iron or earthenware, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; after heat the cautery, so that the shape will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this many times, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the excitement of this cautery, and then rinse well; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofulae are of fluid and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then warm up the cautery as comes later, with two openings for the fumes to issue from one side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and then apply wet cotton soaked in butter until the swelling is removed; after care for the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture prevails on the channels of the throat, and likewise when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines; after make a cautery at the root of the neck, and take care not to come too close to the neck, and do not burn the skin but just slightly. After make another cautery at the jointure of the collarbone to the top of the spine, and that is the cautery called "clavicle", from which we have the shape before; and care for the wound as we said before until it is healed.
of consumption When all and every disease of the throat are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and the disease is old, then make two cauterizations on the thorax in the armpits; and another cautery between the breasts; and that is the cautery called "clavicle" according to the shape which was said before.
And if you see, make a cautery in piercing on the entire cautery called "points" from which the shape is before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to thirty or around there. After care for the wound according to what was said before, and be the cauteries at three rains according to this form:
And therefore are the cauteries lighter, because you make three in one go.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After be careful with the patient on his back and sides; after lift the skin that is inside the titillate (or numbness) of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then warm up the cautery which has two nails like this shape:
and cauterize the skin so that it is pierced up to the sides, and the figure of the cautery comes together with three cauterizations; and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery which has three nails, because the figure of cauterization are six cauterizations; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and that is the shape of the cautery which has three nails:
And sometimes it is joined upon this one nerve, for which there are eight cauterizations.
After place the cautery perpendicular to the broken seal; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle cautery or many cauterizations in piercing. For the joint has been reformed, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient is healed.
of the pleurisy cautery
The ancient ones said that one should make pleurisy cauterizations with aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and long as your arm; and wet it with oil, and put it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the thorax and the neck, and two small cauterizations a little below in the part that is under the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly to the rear; and one cautery in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the breast outside the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but rather make it openly like when smelling.
And they say that someone ancient used a fire cauterization similar to a razor, and heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and the pain is then gone, just as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse in accordance with what we have said about the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three manners of cauterization that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauterizations in a row, following the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cauterization that we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization, and let the patient be mindful on their back;
And another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key which is near the mouse, or where the patient's ribs come to the left side, and be the elevations that you lift the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizer should be according to the width of the body.
Then put the two handles in flames until the key is pierced from the other side, and then take out the cauterizer, and thus there will be four. And if you see fit, then cauterize the entire cauterizer with three handles. After that, cure when it has taken on a purplish color after a long time, and this is better than the other cures previously mentioned.
of dropsy
Cautery is not good for dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary to make four cauterizations around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the chest; and let the cauterizers be well close to the key of the key.
After that, let the cauterizer stay open to get a purplish color after a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will come together with the aid of God.
The form of the cauterizer for the belly is the key that we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is put here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish pus, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn. And do not enter too far in, lest the yellowish pus should flow forth, and let the cauterizers be according to this form:
After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cuticle; and let the cauterizers be long, one under the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizers open for a long time without healing, until the pus comes out; after that, cure with the other cures that we have said.
of menstruation
When a discharge from the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by manners of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong vigor, then make one great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken here before about the stomach cauterizer, at the circulatory cauterizer; and three subtle cauterizations around the belly, each one a small key, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cauterization on the wrist, and one cauterization on each elbow, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are ancient and consist of cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind beneath the aluminate, a little bit here and there, in a triangular shape, and one cauterization under the belly. Two shall be.
and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then one makes a great cauterization on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse at all the key of the cauterizer; and leave the cauterizer open for a long time. After that, cure until he is healed.
of the choleritis which is called "thelul"
When you cut into the choleritis, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and then put it entirely ablaze on that choleritic cut; and let your hand be there until the cauterizers come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood will not flow; make this once or twice, and if there is much choleritis, then cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with ointments that are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize a great cauterizer on the navel, it will have greater aid.
of an improperly treated wound
When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When a fistula comes to someone and is inflamed and discharges putrid matter and corrupted humors, then you must prove the entire tent with great subtlety, and be careful that you know the exact depth of the tent. After that, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cauterization until those corrupt flesh and humors are burned, once, twice, or thrice, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then be careful about these places, and do not make any wound except in a charnel house, and think that it is not perilous; after that, cure the patient until he is healed, and if the lesions are sealed and the matters are removed for a long time, then know that the lesion is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the lesion is torn and corrupted the bone at its root; and thus as one of those things that we will say in its place.
From the disease of the kidneys When pain of cold comes to the kidneys and great windiness, and does not take on a womanly form, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on the kidneys from one side and another at the cauterized clave that we have mentioned before; and if we were to cauterize in mid-air, there would be three cauterizations in a line, and they will do more great aid.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery on the part outside of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one to the right and one to the left, each being as long as the length of a foot; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizations be clave-shaped according to the form mentioned earlier.
Of the womb When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for this reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are late; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that one make three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in the fire cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations be clave-shaped, as we have said.
Of the groin
When the viscous moistures descend to the groin of the hainche, and because of this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints of the departure are found, then you must cauterize the patient on the groin of the hainche with one cauterization resembling a circle, and sign before the joint around the groin as it turns, so that the groin be inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those which one has cauterized in the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations of the olivaire, and let them be as deep as all the layers; and cure it until it is healed.
Of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the groin of the hainche, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
After that, you make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is: that you cauterize on the groin of the hainche three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make a good depth and great, and leave between each cauterization the width of a thumb, and be the cauterizations olivaire; sometimes one makes a cauterization in mid-air above the chief of the hainche, because of which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize at the cauterized circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hainche; but make it in this manner so that the circles contain all the hainche, and all the fibers of the layer are burned.
And that is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hainche and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg. And if it reaches as far as the thigh and leg, then make two cauterizations on either side where the patient says that the pain holds them, and one cauterization above the ankle three thumbs to the left; and let the cauterizations be cutellaire, and let the fibers of the layer be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the toes or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, then make more; and if it is known that the pain is below the kneecap towards the thigh, then make a cauterization at the cutellaire or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave out so much of the cauterization as to burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more great annoyance and contraction for the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and left it so that the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet also, and was pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a purge of the belly which led to his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And be heated until it is entirely red and gives off an odor, then put it on the swelling of the wounded thigh, and be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once .i. cautery again and leave for three days; and then grease with butter, and let the wound remain open a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery because of the fear of his regard, and if we see one who uses it; and nevertheless these are good cauteries which can be endured by those where it affects.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, either from falling or percussion or from too great evacuation, or from similar signs of expanded cold matter, none of these likenesses is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be rid of fetid pills or other similar things, which one makes on the back, there where the pain stays, three lines marked with enche, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and make the cauteries according to the "poins" cautery; and if you see fit, do .iii. cauterizations or .iiii. at the middle hinge of the cautery clamp in this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have stiff backs when they rise, and fear; and you find in the lower back and in no other spines.
When you see this and it is being cured, then cauterize it with the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
So that the cautery will prick each part of the spine equally. And if you see fit, then cauterize around the spine with the "poignant" cautery .ii. lines or .iii., and let the points be close to one another. After the cure, leave it so long as it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in a place of nerve spasms.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of joints is from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which physicians properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need to prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery all over the point that one claims "point". And if the pains come just up to the knee and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each kneecap .iii. cauterizations or .iiii. from each part, all over the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, then make more, but do not keep your hand there longer than until the sparks of the fire are burned.
And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are on the hands, then make points around the wrist .ii. lines; and if there remains pain on the shoulders, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the ribs or just to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and administer medicines. For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the itch of the scalp
When itch comes in the angles, and the boils descend to the groin and it is newly, then it is necessary that when you see it being cured, he does not move at all that day; and that he uses things which loosen the bowels, so that the wind descends from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath as long as the boils are repaired, and then cauterize at the enche below the itch on the bone of the shoulder, and make a sign like the middle of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with the form that is as follows:
until it is white and gives off an odor. Then reset the boils to their place; and have him hold your hand so that they do not return; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion underneath him and a servant above the hips, and another above the breast which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue doing so until you reach the bone; and beware subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that through this the patient does not die or suffer another harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless. It is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and those of great people also great according to theirs; after .iii. days, cure the wound of butter so that the scaling is removed; after apply other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for .xl. days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be stopped long enough, so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go into chambers.
And after .xl. days, when he will want to get up, give him a well-made bandage and wrap it for .xl. more days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and when he follows this instruction, then he is entirely healed. And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in its chapter. of the itch of the belly
When itches come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cautery of the same kind according to its quantity, and let the third spark of fire be burned; after cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the three angles according to this form:
but sign the first one at the starting point and make two lines on either side of the itch, one above it and one below it, and put your hand in the middle of the entire cautery. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more scattered.
from ancient pain in any member When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or being hurt, and that pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary for him to be cauterized with the fire called "poins", and the cautery should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twists and pain. If he is healed from the first cautery, that's good; if not, start another one on top of it, for such cases are when the member needs to change nearby, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
of sickness
The illnesses are often helped by fire cautery with great help, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and do not leave nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then make .v. cauteres on the head: one inside the head to nine inches, and the other towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and so that the scales come out and the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it was before.
And if the illness is spread everywhere and it is manifestly dying, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries on the head, one in front of the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back, and one large on the croup and one other below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the flanks, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are behind the last vertebra, so you don't burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when I do more cautery, the more it brings aid and profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain during the cautery as the healthy person feels, because the body is already too corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron. Afterward, cure the wound with farina mixed with honey and other cures until he is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines, ointments, and poultices, and it is not healed, then one makes cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauteries be a little bit inside the hollow of the knee; then cure with unguents until he is healed. And sometimes make a cautery at the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and yet no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine does not bring any benefit, then one cauterizes with a cautery a little bit deep, according to the quantity of the hollow of the knee, until the discharge is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with farina mixed with dates and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and with blood from colander and almond, each one in equal parts; and mix everything together, and tie it up in a cloth, and apply to the wound as long as he is healed.
The cure of chancres by fire
When chancres come at the beginning and you see them stop, then cauterize with the fire that seems like a circle, all around the tour of the chancre. And yet wise people say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and yet it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen some time; and it is more right to cauterize all around, with the fire called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot die
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying, either because of the superfluity it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, very old) and he has little blood or because of the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize all around with many small cauterizations in a row; afterwards leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization of which this is the form:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has pierced the knee, and be such that the patient feels it outside in this manner that the flow of the purging is alleviated. Afterward, cure until he is healed perfectly.
The cure of fire with iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a rotting of the member, for it rots the members just like fire dries out wet logs. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer cautery together with fire, then heat up small and large clavicle cauterizations according to what is necessary at the place where the disease is; afterwards cauterize from all sides until you have removed all the corruption, leaving nothing but what is corrupted. And then leave it for three days, and apply warm oil on the burned places with a poultice, so that the eschars of fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone. Afterwards, cure with unguents bringing forth flesh. If you see after three days that healthy skin does not appear, it's good; and if not, then start again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places. And this rotting has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but nevertheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
The hairs which come to the feet
Many times it happens that at the feet because of external causes a disease appears which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large swelling that hurts the foot. And the treatment for this disease is in two manners. It's to know cautery by fire and hot water. Cautery by fire is when you make one cautery on each toe as if it were a pen nib, and it should be made of good iron to be able to penetrate the nail from all sides and have subtle margins; after that, you put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the top of the nail; and then let it sit for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a poultice with wild marjoram crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out from its roots. Then treat the area with ointment, gradually removing flesh until it is healed.
And if they are converted by external causes within the body, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring hot water cautery; and it is in this manner: take a clay or iron tube, or a pen nib, and place it on the nail and all around, that is to say, hairs growing; and place the tube so that it surrounds everything, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the margin of the tube comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water flowing deeply to the root; and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will uproot itself entirely from all its roots. Do this again with another one, until you have reached all those within the body, then treat them with ointments which produce flesh.
The cures of trembling
When some people tremble because of cold or numbness, or quartan fever or other causes, then it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one on the belly, and one on the olive-shaped area of the stomach; then let the trembling cease, and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
of foul boils
Sometimes on the body appear boils or foul pustules that come from corrupted matter. It is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by fire, or of long aristolochia root, or a lenticular cautery. And sometimes one must cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but the superfluous parts from which they come are broken down and healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times it happens that great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes from external causes, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And whenever this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them tightly until the blood is calmed under your fingers, and no more flows; then take up to the fire small and large olive-shaped cauterizers, all red ones, as many as there are; then take one, great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place it on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery so long until the blood is staunched.
And if it starts bleeding again when you lift your fingers off the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauterizers that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is staunched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is below, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well staunch it oneself, especially if the artery is large, unless it be by one of the three manners we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to staunch blood; and let it be tied and strained correctly.
Who will bring about staunching by binding tightly with cloth or putting hot things on it, or similar things, if there is no benefit unless a little.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and staunched; and make inquiries ahead about those things which he needs for cauterizers and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases in which it is necessary to make a fire cautery or apply hot medicine, and the wounds, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go through this chapter by the same way so that one may find more easily what one wishes.
And therefore that I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater care.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to act foolishly. For many kinds of people come to these cures. Some come with their illness so severe that they will die quickly from the ferocity of their disease, and from the great wickedness of their malady; and one should fear such things. And among these are those who will give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly, but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and hold; and use prophecy and indication in the cures of your diseases to which salvation is converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement and droiture, and se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauterizations, which I have described from the beginning to the end, so that you may find more easily those things of which you will have need.
full of water from the head
Know that this sickness often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife holds too tightly the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown to us.
And I have never seen this sickness other than in children, and all those that I have seen died; and therefore it seems to me that it is not worth bothering with such treatments.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be borne; and believed so much moisture that he would die, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the skull, between the skin and the bone; and the treatment is such when the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut into the head a gap wide; and it should also be as long as two nuns, until the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not come to you: then it is necessary that you cut into the head three cuts according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture outward. Then close the cuts with cloth and powder, and apply vinegar and oil, and leave it so for five days; then release it, and treat the wound by tenting and ointments, and let the head drain evenly, and then feed the patient dry meat of a fat animal with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens up and the moisture gathers; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Cut then the place where the abscess opens up and the moisture gathers, and make an incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery; and note that there is a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
of rheum
When it happens to someone a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the pit, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is the cauterization with what will be applied to the two arteries.
It is necessary, when you see them coper, that the patient bend his head back; after, he should rub the place with a rough cloth as long as the arteries appear, then extract the patient's neck to the extent of one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the places on both sides are afterwards the ears, and they are answered; then mark the places with a pin, then cut one and the other with an acut spatula of two parts, as long as the incision comes down to the bone, and it should be by the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in the same way as two do across.
And when the vein is cut, blood will jump out continuously from above.
And if the artery does not open to the sense, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space with three fingers, then mark it with a pin and cut up to the bone; and what needs to be done about the blood is that it should flow out in an amount of .vi. c., and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of the skull, cut so that abscesses will not come there, then drain the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When ancient migraine comes, and sharp headache, because of the moistures of tears and heats in temples and old forgotten things and similar cases, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and all that does not help, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have counted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back his temples' hairs, and feels for the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little responded except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responded, then extract the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and soak the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which there is the shape:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then train it upwards with pincers, and separate well the threads that are below each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it to the point of the unguent, then cut from that part according to the quantity of two inches. For if it is not cut, blood will not jump out at all.
And drain the blood of .vi. c., down to .iii.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double strong silk thread, so that no bleeding occurs before the wound is sealed, and there will be a flow of blood; then cut off the superfluity that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the area with the cutlery knife down to the bone until the arteries are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have a fever and is of warm complexion.
For cauterization is help to finish the moisture: that's why it is of greater aid to moisters. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when one removes them, be careful to apply medicines that make flesh grow and tents, until they are healed; and if without any doubt from the artery as long as you work there, hasten to cauterize by fire or employ the leaf of vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you don't have what's present, put a cloth on the wound so that the blood congeals, and raise the wound with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as necessary. And what is most important and lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting into two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to ward off heat for a longer time. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less heat. And it should have between the two knives a space of about an inch, and then when you have signed for cutting into the two joints, and you must use the hot iron on one side as far as the bone, and cut the vein in both joints; and let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not connected with this cautery from top to bottom; and that's the form of the cautery.
tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that is done there, and you see the face of the patient growing red, and feels a buzzing sensation in the forehead as if it were trembling; and thus oil are held tight and moist so that the hairs of the papieras have fallen, and the papieras are scorched by the heat of the tears, therefore this cure is needed.
And they called it the ancient "cure contuse", and is that you do to the patient who has this disease on their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be as two fingers wide in the middle of the forehead, going down as far as the nose, and the other two as one finger wide on each side of the papieras, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are on either side of the papieras; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the size of three fingers across in a straight line.
from the incision that is above the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the keratin that is between the two incisions right up to the suture that is on the bone, then do the other side from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then pull back this spatula.
then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called "culterelle", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other side, not at all sharp, and that's the form: And place the sharp edge towards the fatty part of the keratin, and the soft edge towards the bone, and insert it as far as the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears from the keratin, and then do the other side in the middle incision up to the other incision; and then extract the blood equally, and express the place where the blood has been taken; then put a tent of old cotton into each incision, and cover with wet cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and ale, and guard that no abscesses come; and on the third day loosen the stitches, and administer great quantities of lukewarm water, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes' discharge
When anyone comes with a great and accustomed cataract, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakening the sight, and the papieras burned; and the hairs fall out, and the forehead is filled with great pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and that cataract do not come from a single vein, and the true cure that is there, is this.
And is that you instruct the patient to lift their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another one on either side, about a finger's breadth. And start from the temple incision on the left side to the right side, and let it be an incision all the way up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, then stop all the bleeding with a sponge, and then suture between the two lips of the incision and put in old cotton and linen tents; then cover above with wet cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and take care to prevent abscesses from forming; when it's done, then it's necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then cure with things that make flesh grow.
In the same way: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of aloes, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to promote flesh growth everywhere.
of the cleaning of the ears
All that comes out of the ears is one of the three things: or grains, or beast, or stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as jays, beans, peas; or something flowing like water and ale and similar things.
When something like a stone or other thing comes out of the ear that doesn't belong there and doesn't grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, distill some violets' oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make it sweat with condiments, and block the nostrils when the sweating comes, and wrap the ear with cloths or wool; and keep the ear above. Many times this cure is effective; and if it's not effective, then administer extraction with subtle pincers, and that's the form:
If it doesn't come out with pincers, that's good; if not, then administer extraction with a fine silk thread; and if it still doesn't come out, then make a chain of lead and insert the head of the chain or the ear canal tightly, and block what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then pull it back firmly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it still doesn't come out in this way, then take a glue that birds use to make their nests, and put some instrument that is sharp enough for this purpose, and wrap a small piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and pull it back. And if it doesn't come out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear before an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and extract the blood according to its natural virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or skin depends; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it as far as you can, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healed. And if it is a boil that is inside and swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one spoonful of gentle remedy according to this form:
and administer an incision of that boil. But do not do this when you think the boil is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with subtle forceps and gentle pressure, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
Then in the ear where water drips into it, it is good for the patient to use condiment first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be placed on that ear itself where the water drips. If it jumps forth because of this, it's fine. If not, then take many pieces according to the length you should hold them tight and light, and heat one piece in fire; and put it in the patient's ear, and slide up with another piece from the other side, and strike on another piece on the ear that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this piece by piece until all the water comes out, and thus it will come out entirely; and if you see, then take one reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end into fire until the most thick reed is burned; then redo on the other side of others as many times as the water comes out, just as we have said in the chapter.
In the extraction of an arrow, if it is from a small body, like a sparrow and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is from a large body that can be felt, then administer an extraction with forceps; and it is the thing most easily removed which is in the ear.
In the extraction of earwigs in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary to look at the ear towards the sun: if there appears any worms, then extract them with subtle forceps; and if none appear, then take the cane of which this form is the shape:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle end in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck strongly all the way along the cane; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop around the cane with cotton as I said in the chapter; and if they do not come out entirely as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the destruction of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to the shape which is the form as you see:
And it should be made of broad silver or bronze below to one small hole, and above to press the distillation with a well-made instrument of bronze for this purpose; and if you see, take a scraper and wrap it around the pointed end with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and what you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane should be in the ear; then put the scraper inside all the way to the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little warmed by fire so that you can distill it into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
From the stopping up of the ears
No child is born without a perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stopping up of wound or birth of some growth inside the ear, and these stoppings come sometimes quite deep into the ear so that one cannot see it; and sometimes happen a little bit further out the perforation, and one can see it well.
That which comes quite deep and cannot be seen is of grievous sores in many dispositions, and in that one can see, it is necessary to put the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity apparent, then work with all this instrument according to the shape.
And be gentle and cutting before and behind the entire ear, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opacity is of growth or flesh of the ear, then hold it with subtle forceps and cut lightly, until all that flesh is completely removed.
And if the opacity is quite deep in the ear, then take a subtle scraper and lightly heat it by fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you feel the opacity that the patient feels pain to hear, cut lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on vitriol broom; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put in another moist tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure him until he is well.
And if the bleeding comes from the wound, then dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are found in the treatise on distillations.
On the wax of paper
That which comes from the eyes of paper when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you stretch them with tenacula and forceps, and cut with a spatula made from its roots; then put on the surface vitriol broom.
And if they shed without shedding, then cauterize with a lenticular subtlety, and the cauterizing after the incision is worth nothing; and many times repair, but no thing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not come back.
On the Hellebore
Many times come from the eyes of paper things that resemble Hellebore in shape and hardness, and because of this is called "Grandine", and it's a gathering of moist substance on the paper above and below; the operation is such: take care if the Grandine moves to one side and then the other, and it's a light thing to know; do then the incision of the wide part, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with forceps, and cut. If you can't cut without piercing a little bit of paper, don't harm the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble it with a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it's small, don't apply any force, because the ointment will restore it soon and bring forth flesh.
Et if the stone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then reverse it and let the stone be pinched, and the edge and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it does not matter; and when the stone is crushed, then release a stream of salty water, and care for the place where the wound opens up so that the patient becomes well.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is excreted in threads on the papers above, and this happens more often with children than with anyone else, and it bothers them greatly about their eyes, and they come to catharsis at mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush into their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep, and are their papers below their eyelids moistened by the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place to your chest and feel the exinach between.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient puts their head on your shoulder; and then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your chest on both sides, so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make a small incision in the middle of the moist spot, cutting a slit of moderate size, and not larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein; and make the skin firm until you reach the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, the exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a white fatty lump.
Then take it away in one piece of cloth wrapped between your chest and the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and make sure you do not tear into the incision, or you will reach all the way to the eye and hurt it.
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then open up the incision slightly further until it appears; then take it away as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and put them on the place, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who sweat and put something on top to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then care for it until they are well. And if an abscess comes to the place, then treat it with poultices soothing it until they are well.
of the hairs of the papers
When hairs grow on the papers that are not natural and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of diseases such as habitual tears and moistening of the papers and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is the cure according to three ways: or by fire cautery together, or by medicinal water according to what is before or in this chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, as I will say.
You should put the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper from their eye to your left hand; if it is converted, that's good; if not, take one needle and thread above all; and be this done near the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow near these hairs, and guide the thread above all the paper, and turn it at the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs added, to the entire spot, from the great tear well to small; then take out one thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then sew on top of the paper a figure like that of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the paper is divided into all.
And if there is someone who needs to cut a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is moistened; then make on the entire spot above two lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear well to small; and it should be one of the incisions near natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle into one of the two corners of the skin, then pull out all the thread; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle to all one piece of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the excess thread stick on both eyelids to any sticky things, if you see doing this; and if not, don't bother, then leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then care for the wound without stitches or constraining things, because the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is tedious (as the ancients said), and it is works without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sew the paper with a figure like that of myrtle, as we have counted, with three unthreaded needles according to the shape which is here:
then cut what goes over to small equal forces according to the shape which is here:
And if you are unable to hold the tweezers and the things are not equal, then take a needle with one thread and put it into the figure; and put another thread at the great tear, and the second thread at the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your chest; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and care for it until it is well; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary to use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make a hole in it according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spot are; and cut at the two ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what goes over from the paper of the eye, and strain the two cauterizations from both parties together; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and turn black and fall away, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, then apply force, and cure until he is healed; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prickle with hair; and this is the form of the two canines that you will make according to this figure and according to this length and width:
The works are such that you take a fine needle and insert one thread of soft and subtle silk; then assemble the threads and bind one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another thread of fine silk briefly, and bind the head of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and be in the sun so that the works are declared, for this is a subtle and delicate work; then insert the needle into all the chase along the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you pull it out above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and bind that hair in the chase if there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs grow forth on all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not grow forth with it, then pull the chase underneath all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes forth from below and you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it rest for two or three days, so that the hair grows back in its place and the flesh is formed above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural sheep, and be lifted with it or leave it as you please, until it is extended and then lift it.
of the pouring of oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or the pouring of oil comes into the eye, it is in two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of the work in it is that you open up this swelling, and separate the lips of it, and put within linens, and tie it so that it becomes healed; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but you work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the juice of rose or althea and flax seed be cooked, and ointments of liquid myrrh dissolved in some oil, and wrap it up in a cloth, and treat this way.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care to ensure it does not harden in the form it was before; and this work that we have said is nothing other than a remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in the form it was before.
of the flesh which comes into the eye
This disease which is below and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and incision and cautery and similar things; and the way of treatment in it is that you take a needle with two threads, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from left to right until the threads come out on both sides of the flesh; then extract the flesh above the entire needle, and apply force with one spatula wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is necessary, that's good; if not, then take a scraper and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts inside the paper; and be the edges of the two incisions at the two angles of the incision you have made, and be the angles so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter with no "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its borders below what ensues from the paper; then join the two severed parts, and sew them together with one thread of linen; then treat this as we have said with softening medicines and cloths, until he is healed.
And if the disease comes from incision or seam or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then sever between the two lips of a cloth, as I have said; and one must do the treatment in accordance with the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine of all their power so that it returns to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
of the sudden tearing of the paper
When this swelling occurs in many cases in a similar manner to the paper above being bound with white of egg, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a scraper underneath the paper, and lift it up; and let it be at the pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the fine spatula, which is not too tight nor too loose, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too tight or damaging the eye; and make your incision, from which you are cutting this assembled thing, slightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let it be completely healed, and sometimes make a salty water in the eye, and lift up sweet water, and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a cloth of linen, and place wet wool on the eye in abundance; and after three days use the colic remedy and similar things until he is healed.
of the inflammation of the eye
Know that the inflammation is in two manners: it is nervous and similar to a hard syphilitic ulcer, and another which is not nervous but is similar to white moisture congealed, which when touched with iron and cooked slowly at pincers, one cannot do; and both similarities begin near the great eyelid, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your lap, then opens their eyes; and lifts the paper to your hand, then coils the inflammation at pincers with small doubleure, and raises it up; then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or cow, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the inflammation, and make it pierce to the entire length of the needle, and tie the inflammation with one thread and raise it up, and scrape off all the hair on the side of the inflammation that follows the prune and silk up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the eyelid to all the fine spatula and small forces; and leave the natural skin or eyelid so that through the incision the body's accustomed tears do not come; and sometimes the inflammation is only on the onion and thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft spatula of what it is the form:
And take care that the spatula does not touch the fleshy part and break it, and that the prune does not pierce; and after incision, pour a little bit of broom oil into the eye, and make a litargire compound from the celandine, and let it be until the next day; then cure all as needed until he is well.
And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle in, and the unguents cannot enter, often this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and as I have counted in the division, and if you see it covering, then work on the patient's oil and take the spatula slightly firm according to this form.
And reapply the nail above subtly, and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason approaches quickly, then distill from your mouth into the oil a compound made of litargire, red celandine, and broom oil, and stop the oil until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same act, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as if an abscess cools down, then apply milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is well, then resume the work as before, until it is well.
And if the appearance of the skin on the wound is harmed in the oil by great harm, then suspend it with an unguent, and cut off a part but not all, so that no more wounds come; then distill into the oil red celandine compound.
from the skin that grows on the prune (eyelid)
Some men's eyes are born with red skin, and it covers the prune (eyelid) and tightens above the papillae and turns towards the back, and appears like a pomegranate rose; and the work is that the patient places his head in your hands, then works on the eyes, and cools all that skin with suitable unguents, and sustains it with force; then cuts off the first skin, and goes on cutting to the razor's edge until the end, and be careful not to bleed the oil at work; and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the nail and in the small forces that one removes the scab, just as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is completed and all the skin removed, then apply oil of broom or distill red celandine compound and similar corrosive medicines, and place on the eye a cotton cloth with an egg yolk, so that it becomes sure against hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and blood cools down, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work until he is well, and thus make all the skin removed from the eye by this similarity.
But it is necessary that you ease the cure of each weak oil by the natural way; and by the accidental way, in iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from this work.
of veins of the eyes
Scabs are red veins that are covered on the oil, and tolerate with their work and weaken the eyes all the time. It is necessary then at first to look if the oil, in which the scab is, is healthy, and there is no other disease except the scab; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head in your hands, then suspend those veins with all the unguent according to its wisdom, and be the unguents subtle double according to this form:
And be two unguents by degree in one body according to this form:
Then coil the unguents with gentle forces, and remove the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins removed from the oil; and be careful not to bleed the oil at all points of the spatula, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil a green and red compound to corrupt what remains of the scab.
And if you are unable to coil all of that in one hour, then make an embalming on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and be assured against hot abscess; then resume according to this manner which is before, until he is well; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The doctor names this "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by fire and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a plan in you that you cut open on the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take it all with the instrument of which this is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron into one sharp point, and be pointed like a razor as it is in this present form:
And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some time, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
If the bone is sound, and skin grows, and the body of the bow is sound, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemed, and bad accidents come, know that he is well; if not, then there is no other plan than to bring back the fistula to the neck according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron and burning medicine, and when it is uncovered take one force according to this form, and be the point of iron at three angles, and the rod be softened until the end as you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the wound, and withdraw your hand from the eye a little, then turn back to the force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what the veins in his neck do if he holds his hand on his neck; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the skin grows and hardens the surface, then the matter goes to the neck; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the discharge of the eye
When the eyes are fully open and do not come from blockage or dimness, it is necessary that you attend to the patient; then bind them with a poultice made of aloe, encens, sarcocolle, and oil, and then strain the eyes; and apply it above with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is this: take soft cloths enough, double each one fourfold, and then place one on top of another according to what the eyes have need of; then strain above with a firm bandage, and begin again with poultices without wounding; then remove the poultices and let the eyes be strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, it is necessary that you strain them much; then remove the ligament after a day and a night, and if you see the eyes repairing, it is good; if not, begin again with the poultice, cloths, ligament, and poultices until they are healed.
rupture of the vitreous humour
When disruptions occur in the vitreous humour, then it appears, and comes forth like a grain of resin, and it is unbearable to see; then if you see it covering, the work is such that you put an awl into the root of the part below up to the point above, then put another awl where there is one double thread from the edge of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut the loose end of the thread and bind a part of the vitreous humour around, and strain it well, then extract the awl and put on the eye a moist linen cloth in abundance of eggs; and let it be until the threads tie with the vitreous humour, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humour each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes in front of the eye, and drain the moisture from the albuginea and descend the eyes, and enter soon after; then strain them until they are healed.
from the bottom of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but the lower part of the eye which is assembled in the eye, resembling a clear water flowing down, and it is not actual water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is this: you make the patient sit on a well-prepared seat and straight-backed, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and gently move it until you see the lower part come up to your eyes; then it will be placed and will not descend and will be restored to its light, and the patient will see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is a clear water, and if the descent of the lower part is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and place it on the corneal tissue one drop at a time by the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the lower part emerges; and when it has emerged, distill hot water mixed with honey or fenugreek into the eye, then be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
tears of the eye
We have the likenesses of tears in division and what is necessary to pierce; so work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and gently hold the healthy eye and strain it very firmly; then place the paper over the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument under the cornea by the thickness of a nail in that spot of the eye at the part of the lesser eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand so it pierces into the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the nose-ring; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the brightness of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument just above where the tears are, then press down one path after another. If the tears descend now, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short while, and if the tears rise up again along the second path, put force with the instrument, and when it is placed and does not move, gently extract almagda by rotating your hand little by little; then return to tears with a little bit of silk thread, and leave that in the eye inside. Then put on top of the eye a poultice or moist linen cloth soaked in rose oil and abundance of eggs, and tie it with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, place on top a comb made with an abundance of eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have too hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
And then pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too far in front, but make a subtle pause, then insert almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a bed with soft covers, where he sleeps on his back in a dark room; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then release him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put the bandage back on up to the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this in the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you delay this, because the tears rise quickly.
If apostemes come again, then you must remove the oil before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then remove the sight and put on his face a little ointment to cover it for some days, and remain in that dark house. And then gradually leave the house little by little, and turn back into your own affairs; and know that no disciples should meddle in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in their land they perform an almagda operation, where they make a cut and let water flow out, but I have never seen any such thing on our earth nor read about it in old books; and by chance this is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because he who does not know them will see; and they are truly made of earth.
And the heads of these are of the same subtlety, and the ends in three angles shape.
of the flesh on the knee
Sometimes the flesh on the knee appears to be joined or separated in various ways, because some of them look like scorpions at many joints; and if there are such or it has flesh enchanted with a flux of color, and soft flesh with good color. In that one of these flesh parts which is soft and not enchanted, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the juice onto those flesh parts, and treat them fiercely; then do what you can to support it with a subtle sharp edge from one side, until you know that entire flesh part is completely loosened.
And if there remains any part that cannot be cut off, then work on it with all one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if it does not bother you, or the abscess is dead, then follow the sequence as it should be; and if it's malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize as much as the blood is stained and all the flesh parts are loosened, then pour oil or wine on the knee.
If the knee works and moisture comes just up to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not come as it should, know that there is flesh born in the bone above, whereupon the instruments do not come to cut: then you must take one thread of linen a little thick, and be it bound with hands, and have between each night's space one or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in their knee at their power, and treat with odorant as much as it comes through the knee down into the mouth; and many times do this to children at school, and it is a light thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the knee in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and know one after another as we are on the thread. Do this until you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then treat the thread, wipe out the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the knee as before; do this three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put the knee in a linen cloth for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, whereupon one distills oils and medicines into the knee.
And it is of silver or earth, resembling an open lamp, like a cask, and lead it thus; and if you see, then make a closed cask, and the instruments be full to purge the head; and have one handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the knee
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the head of the knee, and grows and becomes great after a while, until it is seen as something to behold; and because of this, you must cut it off at the beginning, and remove all that remains, then put on the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting it off until it is great, then take heed if it is hard, with a flux of color, and poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touchment, not of flux of color, and you see that one can remove all of it, then empty the patient and remove the cutting without fear, and cure the knee with dry and binding things.
when the knee is cut off and bound
Know that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, more than in some men. It is necessary then to do what happens to any one, if you look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips to a seam, then cure as much as it is healed; and if the lips are already split from one side to the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their keratin until they bleed, then join the two lips to a seam, and strain, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and frankincense powder; and put on the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster binding, and leave it as long as it cures by itself, then cure with oil as much as it is healed.
The manner of the seam is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
Many men have abscesses inside their lips that are hard, resembling grains of millet, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut each one open, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply the lip after the incision with vinegar powder, until the blood is stopped; and then anoint with oil, and cure the lip with dry things as much as it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times a joined flesh grows on the gums that the ancients call "albulus"; then it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the bow or blood flow; then put vinegar powder or other drying and constricting powders on the wound; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it off again, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and this is the form of the instruments for cutting.
of the ears
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, raw and rough excrescences that are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, and green, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; then it is necessary that you sit the patient in your hands, and make his eyes be in your sight, and remove the teeth or excrescences as they appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and verdure, and yellowing and other discolorations, until they are purged; and if one removes what is at the first stage, it's good; but if not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because the scraper used to remove teeth has other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
When you treat the tooth with its pain, you should delay pulling it as long as you can, for it must not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance, almost to the point where one has no excuse to regret. Then when the patient is forced to pull the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain about the aching tooth. Many times did pain afflict the patient, and thought they had found a saint's tooth, and had the good tooth pulled; and yet the pain did not depart because of this, until the bad tooth was extracted, for we have already made this clear to those saints; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape all around the tooth with a very fine spatula in order to ward off the gum from all sides; then move it to your hands or with subtle forceps at the first notch and notch, until it is well extracted, then firmly grasp the forceps; and let the patient's jaw be in your saintly grasp between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take one of these instruments and insert it on each side lightly, and then move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and bleeding, it is necessary that you fill it with cloth, where the perforations are; and then strain it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break while being strained; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And do well to watch that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and the patient will return worse than before with greater pains from the root of the first one. And beware that you do not act like ignorant saints who, by their haste and recklessness, break some time the carriage, and do not bring what we have recounted; but sometimes they bring great diseases through the roots that remain, or through the carriage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the wound with wine, vinegar, and gall; and if bleeding occurs there, which often happens, use the liquid of vitriol to stop it; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, to which one must first bend the teeth, are long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be of thick limbs so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth to hold the forceps.
of the root of the tooth When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you put a damp cotton ball or two on the wound for one or two days until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the jaw seems to be like a careful nurse; and let them be made inside also like a file, and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire gum around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a paline, by which there is the shape:
And be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, by which the shapes come after:
And if one helps with this instrument that has two jaws, by which there is the shape:
and other instruments that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great forceps, by which there is the shape:
And this instrument should be so strong that it cannot break; and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments that are not counted; and wise master surgeons find for themselves their own instrument, according to what their work and the disease shows them, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if one breaks the carriage or some other bones, or it is possible, then one seeks out instruments as I have said, and helps with gestures, by which there is the shape: And be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then restore the wound with medicines suitable for this case, and if there is in the bone a putridity, and it is small, then resect all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural shape in the body, and the form is ugly, and especially in maiden women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly formed after the previous one, and is not in its right place, and cannot be straightened or filed: then cut; and if it is adjacent to the tooth, take this instrument which has the shape, and is similar to a small beak, and be made of well-forged iron with an edge.
And the file files slowly piece by piece in a few days due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it appears that one can file it, then use a similar file as this shape:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth slowly piece by piece over a few days, so that it does not move until it takes shape; then smooth it out at the end to any scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and bleeds the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth are loose
When the front teeth loosen or fall out due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without chattering, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, but this does not work; then they need to be restrained by a gold thread, for silver threads become green and putrid, but gold ones never do; and the middle thread should neither be too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are misaligned, take the thread and tie it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the ligatures between the moving teeth, as many as there are or more, until you come to the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the area up to where you started, and strain your hand subtly and gently, until it does not move; and have a secure tie at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the ligatures with forceps, assemble them, and re-point them between the healthy teeth, and place them so that they do not hurt the tongue; then leave them thus tight as long as possible, and if they come loose or break, restrain them with another thread; and this will remain and serve thus for all time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two moving ones, as you see:
When the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place gradually, piece by piece, as we have said; and do not intervene unless you are a wise and patient person, and sometimes make the shape of a whalebone tooth, and put it back where the defect is, and hold it so as we have said, and it stays and serves thus for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or is natural, as one is born with it; or by accident of a healed wound; and the works are such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous ligament of the large, until the tongue is freed from its dwelling, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it's due to sudden wound, so put an unguent and cover the ligament with a broad one; and be sure that the opening is not too deep for the artery below; and when you have finished, then lift the rose-colored water and ease, or cold water, and place under the tongue a linen tent; and each night, wrap the patient's mouth so the wounds cannot clot. And if bleeding comes, put vitriol powder on the wound; and if the blood flows, cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
And if you see that it is green or black or hard, so the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards blenchor and there is moisture, then pour on the unguent, and make a subtle poultice with spathium, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the blood flows at your operation, put vitriol powder on top until it is stanchied, then return to your operation as long as you are finishing up; then lift the ease and silk water, and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes an abscess called "godath" comes inside the throat, which are properly called the two almond-like swellings, and when you cure them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then beware: if it is a hard abscess with small sense and greenish color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, just as for the bleeding of blood; but let it remain until it dies, and then you will divide it, or it would burst on its own; and if it has a whitish color, and the root is subtle, have prepared an instrument to cover it, but first see if the abscesses are calm and appeased. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with their head in your hand, and work the mouth and take hold of the serge between their hands, and press the tongue down onto the entire instrument, so that it takes its shape; and be made of silver or subtle iron, just like small knives.
And can you press the tongue onto all this instrument and see the abscess, then take the unguent and insert it into the almond-shaped swelling, and draw it upwards as far as you can; and do not touch anything with cloths, then cover it with the instrument, so that it takes its shape, which seems like a force; and yet the head is curved, one side to the other, and are very hard, and is made of iron or lead.
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with forceps, so that it takes its shape:
And be torn from one side and the other; and when you have covered one of the almonds, then cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and with warm water and ease, and if bleeding comes, gargle the patient with hot water, or grated apple skins that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanchied; then cure it as long as it is healed; and sometimes abscesses arise in the throat other than the two almonds, so cover them then in the same way as the two almonds similarly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely one abscess of small sense; and I had well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit which was obstructed, nor eat or drink, and would have been dead if she remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was so high up that it had already passed through two openings of the mouth. I hastened then, and inserted one unguent into one opening, and drew it forward, and took out a large portion of pus; then refilled the other opening with unguent, and worked on the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I inserted the unguent into this abscess, and covered part of it, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the conduit of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut away at that abscess over a long time; and the abscess recurred repeatedly, and filled up the space I had emptied, until it became very large; afterwards I drained it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it continued to grow; and I left those parts, and only God knew what happened after me.
of the olive oil
When the swelling descends to the olive oil, and it is inflated and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below large and rounded, it is called "olive". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cover it; and the one that is rounded and assembled, and is not long; and it is sanguine or of red color or black, then it is necessary to eschew the incision on it. For there is great peril above the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, to make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue onto the instrument that we have made a reminder of here before; then insert the unguent into the olive oil, and draw it down, and cover it with one or two instruments as I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary to not cover more than the superfluous part that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, you will cause harm to the voice, and to the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it as long as it is healed. And if the patient has fear of covering, then it is necessary to use a trick at the cauterization of the sense with fear. The manner of the cautery is hot water. It is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses their tongue onto the instrument that we have said in the chapter on cautery, and conspires with hot living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using this instrument, which takes its shape:
And it has a head or hair that one applies the medicine to, just as the hives of a beekeeper, and places the instrument on all the medicine above the ulcer; and the patient should lie on their side with their chest open, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and lungs. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the ulcer for the amount of time equal to half an hour, until you see it is numb and the effects of the medicine are calmed; and if you need, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton in a tube above, until the cotton covers the ulcer; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to begin the medicine cautery again, then begin it again, and after the cautery, surround the ulcer with cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse everything around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and cared for gargling until one is well.
This cure is safer than incision, not to mention the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them into one pot, and add oil, and let it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with firm earth, and inside the pot have one instrument made in this manner: And it should be made of silver or clay, and one of the keys is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the ulcer through the tube until the ulcer is dead; after that, repeat often until the ulcer dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the abscess' heat, for many things happen then; and do not do this except at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put inside it an eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the steam to weigh on the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Many times it happens that there is a lump at the throat or spine of fish or something; so it is necessary to treat what you can see and press the tongue on the sun over all the instrument until you see the thing move; and what does not open up and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing escapes through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or one quarter of dry bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, then pass it through; and when it comes to the light, it will harden, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And the instrument should be curved at the top so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the top raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglote, lest all go wrong, nor push the bone inside; and move slowly so that the patient puts the instrument in, for it is necessary or the thing to be forced out; then put it down, or pull it out along the entire instrument evenly, until it is completely out.
of the mucus of the throat
No matter how often the medicine is applied, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun, after you press the tongue onto the instrument that I told you. And if you see mucus, pull it out slowly with a small hook or fine forceps worth for this purpose. And if this does not work, take a tube made of horn and insert it into the throat of the patient, then put the tip of the tube into the warmth of the tube and do this often. And if the patient is kept in cold water all day, then take a full view of cold water, open the mouth, and spit out without swallowing, and move it to your hand many times; and as soon as the mucus feels the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asafoetida at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the ulcer; do this many times, for it will cease without trouble. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot with hot coals, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole put the keys of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes only to the mucus; and the mucus will now flow, and if it does not flow, then repeat the fumigation many times; and allow the patient to be thirsty, and eat salty things and all, and do not drink water; and thus it is necessary that it flows out by this government.
And the shape of the instrument used to remove the mucus is such that when you can see it, it resembles curved forceps for moving into the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and has lime-like roughness, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and look at this form:
the chapters on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is similar to itself, and that which holds moisture. And the second way is for those that are on the flesh. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of the fatty part are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced until the pus is mature according to its completion; and there are some that need to be pierced when they are hard and do not die according to their completion, such as those that occur near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves it so long that it becomes putrid around it, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, causing contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is on a principal limb, and you delay perforation until it is matured, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is on the fundament, one should pierce it as soon as it is dead; and one must not pierce an abscess that is hard without digestion being completed, except for those that are near the fundament, lest it become a fistula and be lengthened inside, and thus cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l'oure de la perforation de l'aposteme qui est meur selonc l'acomplissement, and that is when the pain is assuaged, and the departements of fever, and the diminishment of pain and heat, and of debate and of setting right the head of the aposteme, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit in relation to the aposteme, or more dependent on its place, and where it appears to move; and the perforation be long in the body, and if the apostemes are at hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal or where there is no pain.
In those that are swollen, according to that member. And when the aposteme is in a charnut place, it's better to leave the perforation until it's confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before then, the body would be lengthened with venom from him, and full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of him. And for any aposteme that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need it. It's necessary that you make small perforations in small apostemes, small cuts; and in great apostemes, great cuts, and many fissures according to the appearance of the greatness of the aposteme; and if there are such apostemes where you must sew a seam, and cover; when it becomes as flat as a piece of cloth, and is exhausted, then it's necessary to do as one does with babies: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, as apostemes of angels; and if there are such where you make a rounded cut, and other cuts and similar covering.
Those who do not have a head, as if the aposteme is soft and superficial, it's necessary that you pierce thoroughly; and when the aposteme is large, and has coiled great bowels, and you pierce, don't pull out all the bowels in that hour, but pull out one part; then stop the aposteme until the next day, then pull out nothing more above; do this by degrees many times until the bowels come out altogether; likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the hopes sometimes shake with the issue of the bowels, which might cause the patient to die, and you wouldn't notice. Then, therefore, this chapter should be studied with great caution, and when you have pierced your aposteme, stop the wound, and see if the wound from the aposteme is small; and if it's a plain cut, sew tents of linen or old cotton; and if it's a large aposteme, and there are many cuts, it's necessary that you put in each one a tent so they come together against each other; and if you have sewn into the aposteme a part of leather, and wrapped it around, it's necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen rag without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs at your work, apply cold and soft linen, and wet one cloth, and place it on the bleeding site by many times. And if the bleeding persists, apply governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it's in winter, and the sites or apostemes are very nervous, it's necessary that you put up moist tents and cloths in wine and hot oil; and if it's in summer, and the sites are fleshy, it's necessary that you put up moist cloths in water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; then release the aposteme and apply ointment and care, as is necessary, until it is healed.
And this should be known universally in the treatments of apostemes: now I have told you how one should proceed with the treatments of apostemes, and see here the chapter.
of sores
Where the cure of the chief comes forth small apostemes, and are manners of ours that are in threads, just as a spider's web; and there are many similarities. Some are fat and such that have moisture like poults; and some are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make counter. And the work of cutting so is that you test each one with an instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, let it be done above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, scrape off without leaving anything behind the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns again if you leave anything; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will be done to those who remain of the night. And then start the cotton again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with ointment as is necessary, until it is healed. And if the aposteme holds a fat night, cut it according to this form, from the long one; and let go your fingerings, and scrape off from all parts, and put all your care in pulling out what lies beneath; and if the artery makes counter, do as I told you afterwards. And similarly do with the aposteme if it is stony, and of cutting and curing as I told you.
And the cut above the stony and moist aposteme is lighter, for they are full of blood. And if there are some of these apostemes or chief that have no moisture, and one of them was an aposteme that I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the aposteme as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had been made to any, one would have gotten just as much a wound as from a stone. In other apostemes coming from the chief, except those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent place, so that the bowels may come out; and care for them as necessary.
of scrofulas
Many times these apostemes come at the neck, and below the shoulder blades, and sometimes in the armpits; and some times they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and are tangled together. And each scrofula is properly inside its own fold, just as the nodule and the aposteme of the head, as we have said; and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see one with good disposition for cutting, and is similar in color to the body, and is quiet on each side, and is not inflamed; and it is not too deep; then it is necessary to cut it above, and scrape off each part, and make the two lips of the wound as fingerings, if you need them, just as we have said in apostemes of the head; and proceed little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that there is no swelling or trenching, lest your hand escape, and you see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, so put vitriol or some powder that stops blood in the wound, and bind the wound; and leave it until the abscess is pacified and the wound is softened and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work until you have completed it; then examine your deed if there are any small scrofulas left, so cut them off and clean them. And if there is a vein in the root of the scrofula that is large, do not need to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread and let it fall without harm; then treat the wound with old Egyptian cotton dipped in oil.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you attend to cutting the root of it, and pulling it forward, and sewing it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, perforate there where it appears moist; and perforate it thus like the one mentioned before, by depending, then apply tenting with oil and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment to promote healing until it is sound.
of swelling
The old ones used to say and talk about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
To those who have swelling, it is necessary that the cut in the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and this is not done by them, because all the veins and the pores of the patient are hot in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both sides. When the sickness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to escape the peril that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we wish to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the incision of the syphilis, not in the cartilage;
and they should be suitable for the cutting of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire opening, then cuts the skin as far as it will come to the channel; and avoid letting out blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the syphilis, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm in the channel which jumps forth through the broken place and by the failure of the voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour is passed about which one doubts strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew it all together without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this just yet, until the throat is entirely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the fault is going astray. Then cut off the epiglote because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and for this reason the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the pore;
and I was called to cure him, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that she had not cut any vein or guided it far beyond the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was sound.
and it happened to the maiden that she regained her voice, and returned after to her usual condition.
therefore I say that in cutting off the epiglote there should be no fear.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of a jasper, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural one has no cunning.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which resembles fat swelling, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not necessary to work hard to make fire except in one who is small, and test and search thoroughly at all the intimate places; if you find it just like a small swelling, and cannot be cut by any vein, then cut it off, as one cuts out noses, and treat it throughout its entire head, if there is no blood. and search thoroughly, and cure it as necessary, until it is completely healed.
of noses
Many kinds of noses are, which I will describe all the likenesses;
and it is necessary that I tell all the difference that is between nose and exit.
I say that the exit is hot and feverish, until the ebullition has passed, and the purulence is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the nose there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains a syphilitic abscess, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins just like a jasper, and becomes large;
and they are according to two likenesses, or fat, or moist, and very much in color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the nose, that you examine and inquire first by all the instruments which are called "intimate", according to what its form comes or according to the chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you take the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers and fingers, until you know that the instruments have pierced the kernel, then according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the foreign body, and take care so it does not jump away.
If the moisture is clear or cloudy, regardless of its color, then proceed as I have said for other abscesses.
and if after extracting the foreign body no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, then proceed in a cross shape, and grasp it with pincers, and lightly scrape off each part and keep the skin or flesh intact as you lead it out with the needle.
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it apart in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, then the abscess will come back many times.
and if a small part remains and the blood troubles you, then apply the wound with some corrosive powders and keep the wound open, and put hot things on the abscess to soothe it, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
and if the abscess is large, then cut off both lips of the wound and cure it with remedies that touch the skin.
and if the vein swells up and is contrary to you or another obstacle hinders you, and you are in a hurry, then apply the broken vitriol, and let it remain for two or three days until the wound heals, and stop the bleeding of the blood; then return to the needlework that remains from the thread.
See here the shapes of foreign bodies, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small; and among them, there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and among them, there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, in order to encircle abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorceries, and they are made of citrine stone, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most valuable, and are more proved to be black in order to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
and they are three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the abscesses.
The shapes of the probes are many and similar, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and there are also probes that have two abscesses of three kinds.
and there are also probes that have three abscesses, and they too are of three kinds; and there are also probes that have two abscesses, and probes with only one abscess, and they are all of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these is to cut, and there are some that do not cut much except from one side, with which one scrapes the abscess, so that one does not touch the vein or nerve.
and among these foreign bodies are the threads that are wound around in strips, so that the patient is not aware of the opening of the abscesses.
and they are three kinds: great, small, and middle, as you see.
and one does not use them much except in certain places such as joints, and arms, and shoulders, and at angles, and in similar places.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling an extractor of fistulas, according to this form, with which one stops the bleeding.
and it is put sometimes in a place where the wound heals by closing the veins and arteries, and sometimes again according to this great form.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must proceed according to this form of the line b up to dot-g. then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound that touches the skin, then sew together the two lips of the wound with a seam, and cure it until it is healed.
and if the breast droops down and is soft because of its size, like it is with women, then make a cut in two places above, through two similar slits. so that one end is joined to the other at the end of both, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line b up to line g. then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the bleeding of blood, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive oil. and leave it until the remaining fat and grease are gone, then cure it until it is healed.
I assume this is the title of the section or chapter in the text, which translates to "About Abscesses of Armpits".
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are types of hard scrofulas or those with edges, and among them are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture then need to be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with oil suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then do it as we have said in cutting open scrofulas, and if the wound yields pus, then apply fire cauterization as we have said before.
I assume this is the title of the section or chapter in the text, which translates to "About the Rupture of the Artery".
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sewn shut, then many abscesses come forth, and it also happens to the vein that swells up and becomes abscessed.
and if one recognizes it thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep in the front. and when you feel it at your fingertips, then you sense one estrangement; and when it is due to the vein, then it seems to be going away in appearance.
and it is folly to cover this abscess and especially when it is under the armpits and around the breasts and in the neck and in many other places and it is very great. It is necessary to apply the iron treatment, and he who is at the head should also apply it, and in him who has an artery swelling above the long skin.
It is necessary to apply the iron treatment, and he who is at the head should also apply it, and in him who has an artery swelling above the long skin. then work on the shape of the scars, and part the artery nicely from the skin, so that it is uncovered.
then put a needle underneath and make it pierce until the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then puncture the place between the two strings of an introducer until the liquid that is in it comes out, and loosen the abscess.
then apply the treatment as you would to a boil, until the string falls off. then treat those with ointment that are suitable for this, until they are healed.
and if the abscess is for the sake of opening a vein, then it is necessary that you moisten with your hand as much of the abscess as you can to all the skin. then put the needle underneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be one double thread, so that you draw it out to the other side. then tie the abscess, as I told you, or join one of the two parts to the two heads of the thread.
and if you doubt that the threads will not come loose, then put another needle underneath all of one thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
then cover the abscess until the excess fluid comes out, then cover the excess fat of the skin and leave what is tied.
then put on one damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments with tents and ointments until it is healed.
of the abscesses of nerves
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses of nerves also come when they are inflamed, or from too great a labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the joints and toes and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it occurs in many dispositions without pain.
and when one strains strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the very depths of the body, but just under the skin.
and it is swollen on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and the one who has abscesses in joints should not be treated with iron: by chance there would be contraction.
and he who is on the head or forehead, file the skin to the spatula-like. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cover its root.
and if it is large, then suspend it with an awl, and scrape it, then open it up and sew the wound shut along the seam, and treat it until it is healed.
of great hanging boils Sometimes it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere at all, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its resemblance to those things, and it has subtle roots and great swellings; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and in them ran a moist fluid.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work of incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist and of a subtle root.
so cut them open with a wide spatula, and the fire cautery is in your presence. For when cutting comes too many great hemorrhages of blood, and if the liquid swells up, then hasten at once to apply the cautery.
and if you see the patient trembling and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one thread well made, and bind the fungus as we have said, and let it be for two days.
and then bind it tight, and do not cease to bind the thread of cloth as long as you cut the fungus, and choose by it with great labor; and if the roots are large, then be afraid to cut even more for the belly, but you can well cut half.
then cauterize it so that it does not relapse; then treat the wound, and take care that you do not cut the fungus which is of a foul color and poor sense and with a rough look.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancres hereafter.
when the mouth is full
If the appearance of the mouth comes from the cautery of a wound or a gash of syphilis, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, just as it happens in other ulcers, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windy humor.
and if it is from the ulcer of syphilis and by the discharge of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open of diverse discharge. And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers it will rebound, and then return, and by chance it may be stopped, and greatly increased at the entrance of the bath and from great labor.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all; and if it is due to blood, then it appears by these signs as the abscess being large and hard, and fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is due to windy humor, then it is sensitive to touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or windy humor. So it is necessary that you leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his lower back straight and be stretched out in a straight line, then sign around the belly. then command him to sit gently between your hands, then go around the place you have signed on all the surrounding area, then extend the top half of the abscess to the great incision;
then work on the extended half of the abscess above the ligature, and press your thumb index, and make the intestine move; if you find it caught on the ligature, then release it, and push the intestine to the outside of the belly.
and if you find the bowel, take hold of it at the incision, and cut away the superfluity.
and if the artery makes you contrary or the vein, go gently around, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads on them, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing it.
then draw the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place be as long as it can be, and choose the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and can be done, then dress the wound as needed, and shape the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and can be done, then dress the wound as needed, and shape the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then dress the wound as needed, and bind the wound.
of the sore.
We have said in the division that sores resemble chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid treating with iron; and we say that the sore breaks out in the marshes, and great caution is needed in the treatment, and the ancients say that when a sore is in a place or can be raised like a sore on the breasts, and in the armpits, and in similar places, and one should remove it entirely when it begins; and when it is large and old, then it does not need to be approached, for I never saw anyone recover from it, nor did any doctor before me.
And the operations, when it is in a place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient of black bile; then make him sicker if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient one good place to do the operation; then throw away your needles or sores, and shape the sore from all parts, and remove it from all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the wound with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you contrary to the operation, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then dress the wound with another dressing until it is healed.
of dropsy. We have said in the division that the signs of dropsy resemble each other, and how the gathering of water is done, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and that which is treated by iron: it is only slight; and one should not touch with iron in these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore, when you are treating this resemblance of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as indigestion and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient to be of strong virtue, and he only has dropsy without any other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should operate thus: lift the patient upright onto your hands, and have him press his belly by pushing out the water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spine according to this shape: And it should be cut into two parts at a point, and yet not so long that it can reach up to the intestine when you put it in, and not hurt it.
then look if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if it's necessary, you should cut upwards from the belly .iiij. inches below the navel; and if the dropsy is caused by liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly .iiij. inches; and if it's due to pleurisy, then it should be on the right side, and it's not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluidities don't flow towards that weak part.
then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and push it through, and lift your hand to the entire spine between the skin and the sacrum as if you were shearing like the length of a fingernail or around; then pierce the sacrum until the spine comes out at the eighth vertebra, and that is the place of the water, then treat it freely, and push this instrument which has the form: And it resembles a silver thread, and is made of lead or light clay, and is in the lower part .i. small perforation; and on one side, .iiij. perforations; and .ij. on the other side, and .i. on another; and the ends are cut like a feather, and that is the form of the incision which the writers shape the quill:
at the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, now descend upon the instrument; empty then half or one third part, for if you empty more than it's necessary in this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls unconscious, or approaches death.
but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now because of the key which closes the perforation that is on the sacrum, about which I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering these things, and draw off a small quantity of water.
do this every day, and take care not to let the water flow so much that there is more than a small amount left. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then his cure will be nothing but a sepulture or sandy grave, and by excessive sweating or bathing and sun exposure, and if he becomes thirsty; and the cure of desiccative medicines should last until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
of the stopping of the penis No child is born without a hole in the penis, or the hole is small, or it's not in its place. If this is so, one should soon have it pierced at every interval. One makes a small opening in the pertus and ties it with a cloth, and holds it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to urinate, then the opening is opened, and urine flows, and then it's put back; and by chance, there's no need, because the urine that comes forth neither loosens nor leaves the opening. Those whose hole is small should be treated with a cloth plug, as we said, and it will expand. Those who do not have the hole in its place are afflicted, because no one is born with the hole at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot excrete because the material cannot come out to the edge, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then he takes the head of the penis and presses it similarly to the shape of a feather, so that the hole opens up as it should; and take care not to disturb the blood that comes out many times, and if there is any, stop it with what stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of boils on the penis Many times these boils come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are some that are malignant and others that are not; therefore you should take them with a subtle poultice, and press and clean all of them, then apply wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with divine ointment until it is healed. And if the boil is malignant, with foul color and discharge, it is necessary to apply a cautery. When you have cleaned it out, and the boil is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the boil that is inside first; and when it is closed up, then cure the one outside. For if you cure them together, the head of the penis will not be certain and may be pierced, and blackness and corruption will come into its place and in the groin; therefore it is necessary to cut out everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made with honey and flour from the rind of green pears and vetch, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization is helpful in two dispositions together: that is to say, at the bleeding of blood, and at corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a cloth tube into the penis and have the patient urinate through it; and when the foreskin has been loosened at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or it has become so from a wound or abscess, then it is necessary to scrape off with a sharp instrument, until the bond is loosened and the head of the penis is delivered from all parts.
and if this is a grievous thing to do, it is necessary that you scrape off with a small feather some part of the head of the penis and skin; then desist for a while between two, and put on a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not become raw again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; although when we do this work of our own will and properly with children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not circumcise their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision around a half-inch, with great force, and with all a new knife; it was hot because there are two skins, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Now the recovery is to cut, and it is the double pain, and at the purification of the skin around the wound there is no assurance as to the tip of the member; and at the purification of the flesh by chance the iron escapes and runs the work, and many times they are born thus as if they did not need purification and I have seen this.
Of the purification that is done with force to all the fibers I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in all parts of the soul's tension; but that the fibers be well stretched around the skin; and the manner of the first operation is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything more than simply wrapping the thread around the penis, and then let him enjoy it in all ways that you can. then make him stay between your hands straight and point the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then cleanse well the ordure that is assembled there, then tie the wound with a double thread, then tie below one piece to another strand; and hold it with two strings by the second layer at the pouch and the indicated finger, and cut between the two strands, then lift the blade quickly and pull out the head of the penis.
then make him stay between your hands straight and point the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then cleanse well the ordure that is assembled there, then tie the wound with a double thread, then tie below one piece to another strand; and hold it with two strings by the second layer at the pouch and the indicated finger, and cut between the two strands, then lift the blade quickly and pull out the head of the penis. then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on top a cloth soaked with a yolk of cooked egg tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it there until the next day, and cure with another cure until it is healed.
The form of the forces for purification is this: two fingers should be held and should be pressing, and should be the fingers as large as the middle finger equally.
the error of purification is when the iron inside bleeds at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the flesh makes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it at your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it takes three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then leave it until the abscess is appeased, and scrape it lightly; then cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis so that it will not be harmed in any way.
Treatment then of the joint of sudden powder wound, as we have said or treated of powders, and if it is coped beyond measure, and it goes up, so it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
Retention of the urine.
Retention of the urine is caused by calcification of stone, or blood frozen, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to stone in the urethra or bladder neck, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and have his feet placed on the back, and stretch out his belly from above the back, and restrain the patient's anus as much as he can; and then the bladder neck is constrained to express the stone above, by which means the urine is released.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", by which means: and be made of silver subtle and light, like the feathers of a bird; and be 14 inches long and half an inch wide, and be pointed at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at the head, and put the head of the thread into the siringue; and cut off the excess thread and stop just at the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and hen's egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moistened oil of olive and dry water.
Then gently put the siringue into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the buttocks; then insert the siringue forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel come just to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide or sheath is twisted; then pull out all the wool thread and thread, and the urine follows the thread, then draw it forth, and make the urine flow.
and repeat the siringue until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
of the diseases of the bladder
When fluxes or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then make all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and that is the shape:
It is closed and has three perforations: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the holes are shaped so that the medicine comes out in such a way that it stops the penis well without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and insert when needed.
and when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the kettle in the moisture, and pull on the handle that is there; so pulling the moisture to the kettle, and then push hard on the handle again; and the moisture will go in, and come out now to the bladder, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the shape of the subtle syringe with which one cleanses the bladder: thus:
And it is made of silver or antler, and the handle is higher up; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see cleansing the bladder into it, then tie it between two breasts formed by a double thread, and heat one part of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the syringe into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder with all the moisture flowing smoothly, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and punch it around in a circular shape; then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it into the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture flows to the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between stone in the kidneys and all the signs, and what kind of stone one should operate on; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hairy, and grates the patient's penis, and it bleeds many times, and then swells up; and many of these stones jump out the foundations; and it is lighter the healing of children until they are three years old, and it is much more grievous in old people, and it occurs in middle-aged men, to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by cleansing, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and turn them upside down and move them below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes rises up from the high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his hips, so that the bladder is entirely sloping downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then hurry now to cut on top of the stone. And if it doesn't fall when touched all over, then wet your two middle fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child; or your two index fingers, if the patient is young and accomplished; and put them in the foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your fingers, then guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press on top of your fingers, and push it out to the outside where you see cutting.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand above to hold the cauls; and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the cauls in the part where one makes the incision; then insert the spatula copant, which has this shape:
And make between those who is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but beside the left side of the navel; and it should be straight above the stone, and your hands should be at the fundament, and be the shape of the traverse so that it is wide enough on the outside, and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too great.
By chance, the pressure if the hands which are at the fundament, will jump away without effort; and know that there is a stone here where it has angles, and margins: thus it is grievous to extract; and there is one that is smooth, resembling a slope, and rounded, from which the issue is easy.
To that stone where it has angles and margins, make the shape larger; and if it does not jump away, then you must extract above the pincers which are like a file at the top, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you push under one instrument with a curved head; and if you cannot shape it thus, then widen one small hole and if the sand decorticates, then tighten with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, then push the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it forward, and the small ones afterwards if there are multiple. And if it is very large, then you must make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out elsewhere so that the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless strive to extract, or to break apart with pincers, as much as you can until you pull it apart piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and put on top one damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then resupply the patient above his navel, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove it, then rise up very well the wound of oil and water, then anoint with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if hot apostemes come to the wound and corrosion, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that, which is known in such a way that it does not flow with urine: then push your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it.
Then lift the wound with vinegar and oil of silex, and help him in all ways that you see, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two hips, and assemble the medicines on the wound.
And if the stone is small and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck in there, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I said before, that you cut it many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure. I have already tried it thus.
Take one iron rod in the shape and let it be fixed at three angles in one furnace:
Then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the rod into the penis gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand little by little, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon after the urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. Then it will be broken, and jump away with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then bend the penis towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it away, and untie the thread, and clean out the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
of women's stones
It often happens that stones are lodged in women, and if it does happen, then the cure is grievous, and is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that no well-informed woman can be found who will reveal herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone in a woman's body is deeper than in a man's, therefore it is necessary to make a more profound incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands it, then it is necessary that you take a well-informed midwife, and find one who can truly help you, and if you cannot find one, then seek out a subtle and chaste mirror; or present a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command from the examination of the stone.
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her finger on the fundament and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then force it down under her finger, and command her to push her finger into the wound with the patient, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until she comes to the root of the hip; then cut above the stone at the root of the hip against the middle of the groin, where it appears more plainly; and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and make the first incision small.
Then push the rod into the incision, if you feel the stone so far along the wound that the stone can come out forward, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; thus know the likenesses to know the issue.
And if the blood overflows, then put vitriol on it and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then come back to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work.
And if the blood overflows, and it's from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the wound and strain of tents and bandages, and don't start again with these things, and leave the stone alone, nor pull it out at all, lest perchance the patient would die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone is worn out.
of flesh hernia
Fleshy hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white discharge, which is below the key of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white discharge that we have said; and this does not happen unless there is no.
And the origin of this fleshy hernia is weakness that comes to the testicles, and it spreads that material.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it declines to yellowish, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and it happens more than that.
and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is white discharge that we have said, then there is a swelling, one long like the shape of an egg, and it does not open up the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it is a swelling with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white discharge, then it will be well sensed; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try to experience it all around the quarter, so that its shape appears as before. Accordingly, then, what comes after the quarter judges what is inside.
Accordingly, then, what comes after the quarter judges what is inside. And when we cut it with iron, then the patient should be cleansed according to our power and the replenishment of their body; then the surgeon sits on their back, on a thing one pace high, and puts many cloths underneath.
then sit on their left side, and command the assistant to sit at the right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the key of the testicles;
then take the spatula left, and cut through the skin of the testicles from the long side to the finger-like part, and make your incision straight while cutting through the skin of the testicles just up to the white discharge, and scrape it off subtly according to our power.
then pierce the white discharge thoroughly with an aqueduct to one large perforation, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers and lift up the white discharge upwards; and do not touch the key of the testicles, but only the white discharge itself; cut it out in pieces similarly on both sides, so finely that if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
and if the egg jumps away from your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white discharge; then assemble the two leaves of the key of the testicles with a seam, and cure it as you do other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the dismemberment of blood; then cut off the testicle to all the suspended parts, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled into two parts together, know that they are two hernias; then cut off the other part similarly to what you did with the first one, then stop the bleeding, and put a soft cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound.
and put another soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of the two testicles, and place it above doubled cloths, and tie it with all the strings according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and employ them with carded wool according to this appearance, and let them be assembled by stitching in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the corners takes up to the foundation just to the back, and the other at the finger-like part; and the other chief above the two armpits, and let it be all assembled into a restricted circle within the loop of the breech.
and sometimes medicine this hernia with a fire cauterization in place of iron cutting, and it is that you take one subtle cautery cultellaire, and cut through the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white discharge containing water is exposed.
so take the cauter in this form, and pierce that white discharge with your fingers, and scrape it off with this subtle hot cauter.
And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and guard against dismemberment of blood, and more so than the works of iron.
and if nothing makes you contrariwise, or an abscess forms or dismemberment of blood or anything else, then treat what is making you contrariwise, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is frightened and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs that we have said that fleshy hernia is laid.
so make the patient sit on one high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below to all the spatula wide, and put the perforation of the long body; and let the holes be large, so that all the water flows away.
then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remaining water flow away, then cure it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not let the water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a pin or the instrument with which one treats the water of the dropsical, as has been described before; and enlarge one pace the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after 6 months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this hernia there are more fearful conditions, therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and it is by many cases.
It's to know that by bitter or hot superfluity, which spreads to the testicles, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the flesh; and it does not find any pain, and it is a grievous abscess
and by chance there are grievous abscesses that are pale and stony, and of foul color, and sometimes they come from a bruise or an inflamed vein.
When it is due to a bruise of an artery, it is known by the warm abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not concern that you touch it.
The one who is caused by an inflamed vein is known by its appearance at the expression of feeling with your fingers.
and it can be well done on this appearance and on other limbs; and you cut the key of the seams, then lift up the swelling and draw out the white ligament, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the swelling.
If the swelling is already bound with these limbs, then it is necessary that you draw out the swelling and cut the ligament.
and if it is in the ligament or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension and cut it again.
And if the birth of the limb is behind, then it is necessary that you cut all and draw out the swelling, as we have said.
And when your work is complete, apply the wound with damp wool in rose oil and wine, then care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscess of the seams
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a berry, with the softening of the seams. and if the patient complains greatly when he walks.
and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as the one before.
and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bind the suspensory ligament of the seams down to your fingers. to all the vessels that are near the groin, and tie them tightly with a thread, and stretch them firmly.
then cut at the spatium, making a wide incision through the thickness at the point where the vessels are uncovered.
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert an awl where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first location where the vein came in, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them straight through, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures.
then care for the wound as with others that are opened in this way, so that no vessel is cut that nourishes one of the seams.
for by this it does not come to harm, and if all the vessels come to view, then it is necessary to draw out the seams from all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the ligament The events of this case are due to the section that comes from the ligament, or the extension above the belly in the part of the inguinal region, therefore the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the seams.
and this rupture is from the ligament or from its extension, and it comes in these two manners of many causes: either by percussion, or by jump, or by bray, or by lifting a heavy load, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is from the extension of the ligament are that there is a gradual increase, little by little, over a long time, and it does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal down to the very bottom, because the ligament presses on the intestine.
And the signs when it is from the section of the ligament are that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing underneath the skin close by, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body being torn apart from the rupture of the ligament.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the intestine, and are retained in that way, and cause great pain to suffer from the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, therefore one should take precautions.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to insert his hand into the wound and bring out the intestine, if it can be brought in. then lift it up onto your shoulder between your hands, and raise the hips.
then stretch the skin above, and cut all the skin of the seams from top to bottom. then bind within the folds of the garment strings according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the eyes can issue.
then scrape away the ligament that is underneath the skin of the seams, until the white ligament is completely uncovered from all sides.
then place your index finger on the seam in which the ligament is located, between the white ligament that is underneath the skin of the swelling and between the second ligament.
and depart that which is behind the swelling, and between the second ligament; then move your hand to the right into the seam of the coils, and lift the white ligament up high on your left hand, and raise the swelling all along the ligament towards the garment. and instruct the attendant to stretch the swelling upwards, and loosen that which is above behind the ligament.
and ask your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped around or white ligament, and if you find anything, then bind it to the belly underneath.
then take an awl where there is a thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it in the back part of the ligament, which is after the skin of the coils, after the garment, then cut off the knots that appear from the threads, as long as there are 4 threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the ligament, which we have said is underneath the skin of the coils, with a strong tie from two parts. then wrap the knots of the threads and bind them together from two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter into them, lest an abscess should not arise. and place the ligament above so that it is according to the first long ligament two fingerbreadths of that one, and after these two ligaments leave a space of about the thickness of a hen's egg under the key of the scrotum.
and after that, shape the other according to the roundness that an egg bears; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the scrotum, until the sac comes out and the bowels, as we have said before.
then anoint with moistened linen in oil, and place on wounds, and I anoint the ligament that we have said. And at no time is the white sacrescent part that we have said, after incision, cauterized due to fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and leave the ligament until it takes care of itself; and if it does not come out quickly, then warm water is risen, and place on what we have said, until it comes.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is healed perfectly.
of fleshly hernia
In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones say that it is made in the same way as the recipe that is together with the life, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting above and below lightly.
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
At no time does hernia come out in the groin, as we have said, and open up the swelling; and none of the intestines go down to the scrotum, and if some do, it is very little, and repair every hour.
and even if it remains too long in this position, the wound or sac will open up until the intestines come out.
and this happens through the extension of the sac which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and inflated the swelling and opens up.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before; and at no time is it cured with iron in this manner.
and is that the patient lies thus on his back between your hands, then cut the swelling of the hernia inflated to a width according to the quantity of three fingerbreadths.
and then extract the sac that is below the skin which surrounds it, then take the right and place it on top of the swelling apparent from the sac.
and press it to the bottom of the belly, then sew the two swellings apparent from the sac on top of the right and sew one and the other.
then extract the top of the right, and do not cut at all from the sac or stretch the egg any other way, as I have shown you in the treatment of the recipe for the intestines.
then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the sons, have the midwife and treat the wound until it is healed.
The sac is constrained, and has no appearance in the hernia, and the cauterization is more fruitful in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it is a wonder to behold; and when one wishes to treat it, one must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin above the natural skin. Then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see fit, sew off the superfluous part of the softened skin at three or four seams. Then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed, and the thread falls away.
of the punishment
Know that castration is ordained in our law, and because I would like it not to be spoken of in this book, and is only necessary for two ways: one is when the apothecary responds correctly when asked to explain and treat; and the other, because we often need to castrate certain beasts to help us, such as rams and goats and cats and other beasts. I say then that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one where we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the scrotum are softened and relaxed; then taking hold of them with our hand, until they are remitted and no longer felt. Concerning the castration by cutting: it is necessary that you mark the beast, and press the skin of the scrotum to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut on each testicle one cut, when you have well circumcised them; and leave a small portion of the sac and the subtle sac which is over the vessels; and this manner of castration is more fruitful than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction something remains of the scrotum, by which the beast desires lust. Then treat the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is in two ways in men: one way is that between the two scrotums appears as if it were a figure of a woman's nature, or he has hair and sometimes urinates excessively. And the other manner is in women, who have on their thumb as if it were a male organ and two scrotums. And the treatment for men and women is that you cut off all the excess flesh, and treat it like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
of tetany
Tetany is a swelling that grows on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it just as large as a hand, and this is the treatment. It is necessary that you mark off the superfluity of tetany with your hand or with thorns, and cut it lightly; and do not go too far in cutting, lest bleeding ensue, then treat it with another cure until it is healed; and there is another swelling that arises at the mouth of the marris, and fills up, and by chance bursts forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said to treat tetany, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratic (or epilepsy)
Erratic is when the natural behavior of the woman is not perceived, or if her periods are small; and it is natured by birth or accident due to disease that comes forth; or it is caused by a swelling or subtle sac or esophageal sac, and occurs in the marris, or on the sides, or below, or wherever; and hinders conception, and childbirth, and by chance has no flowers to have; and recognition of this is by the gaze of the bailiff. If the swelling is apparent, it should be done at dawn or dusk. If it is due to subtle sac, and it is near the two lips, you must hasten and thus: put your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spread out her legs; then have the two lips form, until the subtle sac is removed, and cover the swelling; then take linen, moisten it in oil, and place it on the swelling, and have the woman rest at home each day, so that she cannot move. And if the swelling is hard and esophageal, you must cut it off like a mulberry leaf. If the swelling is of natural flesh, you must suspend it with thorns and cut it; and use medicines to stay blood, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and in combination with egg-white; then administer a bandage of cloth, so that the wound cannot close; and thus be long-lasting, and administer a tent of linen to dry; then be cured by other cures until it is healed. And when flesh comes forth from the marris, you must cut it according to this manner, unless it is enchanted apostemes. For an enchanted aposteme in the marris should not be touched with fire.
from hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without any normal covering, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the likenesses of these things, and their signs, and I will say here those that can be cured.
abscesses of the thigh
abscesses of the thigh come in many manners, such as chancre and boilous abscess and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary then that I speak about the hot abscess that comes to the thigh, which is not one of the abscesses that surround a bow; and if you wish to know how to work with iron, look first whether the abscess is swollen at the beginning of its onset, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red and you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it subside as long as the pain subsides; and then have the patient sit on one seat, with two small seats or he leans, and support him on his back and assemble his feet to the parts behind the leg; and be his groins expanded, and put his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good bandage; then place the ball of the thigh towards the right costal area, and administer the instrument for working the mouth of the thigh, from which comes the form; and it is necessary that when you administer this instrument, you insert the first rate to know the depth of the thigh, so that what enters into the instrument does not come further in than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, one must cover the depth of the thigh with cloths, so that the instrument does not grieve; and it is necessary that he places the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one works on it gently by hand, then it is necessary to close it at the head, at the spatula-like let; and when the bow is empty, then it is necessary to put into the wound moistened tents in rose oil or green oil; and place the tent away from the wound at the depth of the thigh, and place behind the thigh and on the pointed linen cloth, well moistened with water or herbs cooked; then cure after two days' ointment, as it is fitting, until it is healed; and sometimes one opens the thigh and the wound by a syringe of water and honey, and then by water or roots of lily and aristologe long cooked; then return to ointment. And if the wound is reopened in the thigh, it is necessary that you take care not to work with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
childbirth
It is necessary first to know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs, when you see the woman hastening downward, and desiring to give birth; then the child hastens to issue forth; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is below the crown, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly, so that the child may issue quickly; for when it descends above the crown, the secondine follows with it, and the marris are relieved of its superfluities by good purging; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes between her feet, or above the body or hands, or on her belly, or in some other way, and is converted by chance to the back, and by other evil figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid her.
If the child comes forth above its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her virtues are weak, then have her sit on a stool or that women hold her; and have her nature be anointed with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then pour the balm between her breasts, little spatula-like in form. and split the secondine, and cut to its length as long as the moistors that are in it flow; and press on the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to catheterize the woman with fenugreek and sesame oil mixture; then have her press and stretch with conditions, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now the child has issued. And if the two hands come forth, it is necessary that you gently pull them out piece by piece; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child has died, then cut off the hands at the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, and pull it out evenly.
the issue of the child between its feet When the child comes out between its feet, it is necessary to pull it up. and then turn it piece by piece until it is even.
then take one of the feet and stretch it piece by piece.
until it reaches the groin, then instruct her to press, and have her stretch with conditions. and jump forth, if God wills.
And if it is not forth as we have said, then turn it piece by piece until it is according to the natural figure. For then it comes forth easily.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take musk-scented powder and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all together in one mortar. and put it on the woman's nature, inside and outside this balm. then have her sit in hot water down to the navel.
and when she is moistened below, have her take a mercury collar and put it on underneath, and leave it for an hour. then have her sit on a stool, then have her stretch and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press on her belly, for the child is now jumping. the issue of the child between its knees When the child comes forth in this form, then put the balm on its hands piece by piece.
From the birth of the child which comes forth from the womb with one hand during labor. It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then let the woman get up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then let her lie on one bed, and lift up her legs properly;
then administer the poultice which I have recounted;
and if she does not deliver, then let her sit on one stool, and then strive to bring back the hand; and follow the child according to its natural form, and make it cry out, and instruct her to grasp as long as the afterbirth issues forth.
of the child from its mother's neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back It is necessary that the nurse takes hold of the hand, then turns it slightly and gently.
and when it is even, then applies the natural poultice of oil and ointment, as we have said, and instructs her to move it slightly.
and when you have done this, then let her sit on one stool, and instruct her to grasp; and make it cry out. of this same manner for the entire afterbirth
of this same manner for the entire afterbirth When it comes forth in this way with all the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth at your finger's length, until the moisture is drained.
and if the child stretches out its face and neck, then cut from the mouth so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
then put the child in, as long as you have placed it so that it is necessary, and instruct the woman to grasp sometimes:
of the birth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens often. Two are a rare thing, and do not live unless one name applies;
I know that they are multiplied, and are deprived by the placenta which divides them, which is tied to the mouth;
and sometimes they issue naturally as one child does, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, then follow the cure as we have said, and be a subtle nurse, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do thus as it is of value for their salvation. of multiple children
of multiple children Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of God's glory,
and it is necessary that the nurse knows all this, for sometimes similar things happen to her. so do according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman for a dead child or afterbirth, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to use force of hands; it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound virtue and has no accident or does not fear death;
it is necessary that the woman be stooping forward on her back, and have her knees bent down, and her legs lifted;
and the servant takes hold of her by two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated on the descent of the child;
then anoint the mouth of the afterbirth with moist oils mixed with the poultice of althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then grease the nurse's hands with these oils and poultices. then put them into the afterbirth lightly, then take one or two leeches that are suitable for this purpose,
and beware if the child is prepared to descend upon its head; so place the leeches in his eyes, or on his neck, or in his mouth, or on his palate, or under the beard, or in the navel, or near the ribs;
and if the descent is on the feet, then place or prick them and make the edges of the skin moles.
and it is necessary that you hold the leech in your right hand, and put the hook between the two fingers of your left hand, and anoint all his hand lightly, and place the leech on any one of those places which we have said, until it comes to the empty place.
then place another leech opposite it, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch them equally by moving from one side to the other, so that the extractions may come out, and let the leeches be teeth-like to hold in place, as is its form:
And if one part remains, then anoint the nurse with some oil on his fingers, and put them in that part, and treat the other part;
and if there is none left, then put this leech or more high up, and do so until all comes forth fully.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to constriction, then it is necessary that you wrap it in a cloth, until it comes out completely;
then cut at the joint of the toe or at the ankle, and do so in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the issue, or has an aquiline nose assembled; then it is necessary that you put the spatula-like spine between your fingers, and shape the head and extract the aquiline nose; or you will round it at the instrument which is called "almidach", from which comes the form with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and do thus naturally so if the child has a great natural head; and then treat the bones with pincers,
and if the head jumps forth and it is strained to the navel, then be split open, until the moisture that is in the afterbirth comes forth.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture flows.
And if the child is on its feet, then the attraction is gentle, and the directions to the mouth of the marriage are gentle.
And if it is swollen in the belly or breast, then you must extract it with one wrap of cloth wrapped around your hand. and make an incision in the belly or breast, as long as the moisture that is there persists.
and if the other limbs are broken, and the head remains. so that the barber puts his hand into the very depth of the marriage, and draws it just to the mouth of the marriage. then he puts one or two threads on it, and pulls it further.
and if the mouth of the marriage is narrowed because of a hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to work on it. rather it is necessary to administer things moist and greasy. and the administrator applies ointments, and gives in water that is softening and moistening.
And if the child is on its side and you can put it equal, then administer what we have said to the living child.
and if one cannot do this, then draw it further by parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, administer what we have said to abscesses that come in the marriage.
and if bloody discharges come, it should be put in water restraining, and administer other remedies.
And I saw a woman who had a child dead in her womb, then she consulted one other on that child and brought the dead child to life again. After a long time an abscess came in her belly and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to cause great turmoil.
I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the wound from bleeding.
I put on an ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another did. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I cleaned the wound and pulled out many bones until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived for a long time like this, and every now and then a piece of flesh would fall off.
and I have not forgotten this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to put aid there.
about bringing the marriage back to its place.
Hereafter comes the form of the presbyter, to which we give books; and to two turnings at two joints of two lines. However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the fist should be one and a half palms wide, and the edges of the trees one palm, and from long a palm and a half; and between the two lines there should be two joinings of this same fist, which should be fixed in one and the other, a half palm long or a little more.
and these two joinings are inserted in the mouth of the marriage so that it can open when one turns the two combs.
Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, should be made of fist-shaped ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers. and have at two joints two joinings, just as you see, one palm long and one and a half palms wide;
and when you see the marriage open with all the instrument, then make the woman sit on one bed, her feet stretched out and her legs apart. then put the two joinings joined together in the marriage, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you have done with pincers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marriage, until the barber does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted and multiplied in their forms; and when the mirrors have prepared them, the work is then more hasty and higher among men for their quantity.
So do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, because their needs are not at all excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, then you must instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her exhale slowly, and hold your hands on the mouth and navel. and if she starts because of this, it is well.
If not, then take one pot, and make a hole or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marriage, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialine, and centaury.
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put one end of the pot or hole and the other end into the mouth of the marriage.
and let it stay until the vapors come inside the marriage; then make her exhale, as we have said. If the secondine starts hastily. And if she remains after this treatment and is not fully cured, then instruct the barber to wet her left hand with sesame oil or muskallage of alethe, and then put it in its natural state.
and if the secondine wants it; and when she has found it, then take hold of it and stretch it a little bit at a time straightly, so that the marriage does not become dislocated during the extraction. but it should be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; and it will come out and become dislodged.
And if the mouth of the marriage is narrowed, as we have said, the cure is to exhale and perform a fumigation with herbs.
and if she is not cured by all that we have said, then beware that you do not force it to come out.
but what is at the mouth of the marriage, you must tie it to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with oil of tetra-pharmaceutical ointment.
so it will bring her relief and recovery, and come forth; but nevertheless, when she has passed this stage, a bad odor will come up to the stomach and head, and harm the patient.
Therefore it is necessary to make suitable fumigations for this: some of the ancients have experimented with the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman to retain flowers and secondines is this:
And it resembles seeing a chain, and one places the thin head in nature, and the wide handles above the fire;
and the fumigation is above the coals, and the woman is treated until she is exhausted, and another one begins again.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle abscess: Therefore it is necessary for the doctor to pierce that abscess at its root, and not to pierce too sharply or suddenly, and be careful not to touch it.
then apply a moist linen in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until they are healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, put a thread of linen cloth through and let it stay for several days, and then remove it when the child wants to go to the chamber.
And sometimes this abscess comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; therefore it is necessary to cover that sudden abscess: if it be cured, as we have said about the linen thread.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow bigger than those that come from beside the foundation or in the space of two parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and brings forth moisture in white or subtle blood.
and sometimes these fistulas burst open; and they are known by this that there is emission or ejection or ventosity when the patient makes an emission, and by chance one jumps out suddenly.
And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to nothing of the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula bursting at the foundation, and not bursting: and it is that you push your index finger or foundation, and push in a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if it has tortuosity, then I push in a thin thread of linen or one hair of a horse, as far as you feel the thread or hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no emission or ventosity or pus, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; then hasten to cure.
And when the fistula bursts just to the bladder or just to the urethral conduit of urine, then the urine jumps out, and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is pierced just to the joint of the thigh, then the thread comes out just to the level; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around it, then it is that it comes out again with blood, and it does not help by medicine or by gentle application with ointment.
and in these burst-open fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of foolish mirrors that meddle with it.
In those that are not burst-open and are not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experimented.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts up his legs until they are above his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly. then push in a thread of iron or linen if there is tortuosity, as far as you know where the thread comes out.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you push in your index finger.
if it feels then that the thread has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the abscess or flesh, then know that it is burst. so one cannot heal it.
It is said that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;
and the help one gives is that one cauterizes the subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before. and push it all hot into the fistula, as far as it comes to the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred things are burned, which are similar to a bird's feather.
and then treat with moist threads in butter, until those charred things are gone; and then treat with ointment anointing the wound and closing it.
If he is thus healed, that's good. If not, there is no other way to heal him.
and if the thread goes in and does not pierce just to the level of the foundation, and there is a thick covering between your finger and the thread of flesh or abscess, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering ends from the heat. then cut at the beginning of the fistula, and push in ahead of the thread, and then apply the cauter after, as far as it comes to the top of the thread.
and the thread will be delivered and fall; then scrape off those charred things that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
And if the blood flows forth, and comes between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicinal agent quickly.
For the fire cauterizes two things: that is to say, the burning of these charred things, and the drying up of blood and the scorching of moisture.
then treat with moist threads in butter or mixed broth, as long as the wound weeps blood, and the charred things are gone from the wound.
then treat the wound with ointments that close and seal hard flesh, and the medicines are dry.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back again.
And if the fistula comes just to the very foundation and is separated from the body, then push your index finger or foundation in and investigate this.
If you feel the thread and there are two of them, one is the cloth or abscess or char, which is very close to piercing, if there are no forces except for the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
You burn it as we have said, or you cut to the bone, or if you can, put tents and care for it as first.
and do not go too far into the depth, lest you cut through the tent that holds the foundation, and the evacuations will come about without your intention. then care for it, as we have said;
then care for it, as we have said; by chance if it will be clean, or you remove that covering and wash it when it is cut beneath the foundation, or by tent or other appointed instrument. then cleanse the sore flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it were a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are thus: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation near the skin above. if you take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And I put one twisted thread into two, and put the tent all over the thread in the fistula as far as the top.
If it is pierced on the edge of the foundation within, then draw out the thread from that puncture, so that you put your two or foundation.
and pull the top of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and hold one to another, and leave it for one day or two.
and hold it sometimes, until the threads cut through those flesh parts that are between them, and break.
then care for the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not open, then make it open in all ways that you can, unless it is too far down.
For it does not behoove to cut through the tightening so deep, and then care for it, as we have said, until it is clean.
The shape of the spine-like spinous bone from which one makes the fistula is much rougher at one end and cut off. and on the other side not, therefore one does not cut there what one should not cut, as you see here:
Ulcers are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, like a kernel of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in short time blood flows. and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture.
and in short time or a little bit of yellow water or a little bit of blood comes out, and they have the color of flesh.
and the care for those who have them within the foundation is that you instruct the patient to sit on a stool or chair, until the foundation comes forth, and the threads appear. if you hurry, and hold it with pincers or at your finger, then cut it at its roots.
and if the ligaments cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them on one cloth or cotton or a piece of camlet. and draw them out to your two hands, then cut them, and powder with some hot powders that are in place of cautery. or you burn them as it is said or written in the chapter on cautery, then care for them with other cares until he is healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, then purge the patient with a bitter and harsh purgative to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly.
when the patient is prepared, and if the threads are above the foundation, then the care is light. and it is that you take them at your finger or with pincers, and cut them, then care for them as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you bring the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then pull the thread up and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is of the size; and hold the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and draw out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for correcting the excess blood.
then put a moist cloth on the foundation in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave him until they bleed, and when they have stopped bleeding, then care for them with ointment and other care, until he is healed.
of the wound of the devil or foundation Many times it happens that a wound appears in the intestine, and by natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use.
It is necessary that you scrape off the skin above at the point of a spine or at your finger, which does not let it moisten. then care for it until it is closed as it should be.
and if it cannot close, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until it is healed and scraped. then care for it until he is healed.
of the tremor Formic is a small, foul-smelling appearance above the skin, and goes deep.
and sometimes it turns the flesh cold, and one feels it just like a person dying of tremor, and comes to all the skin, and more on the hands than elsewhere.
And the care is that you take a cord from an ostrich feather or a strong goose's feather, and put that cord on the tremor, until the circles mark out the tremor all around. then turn your hand around the whole cord until you cut all around the tremor, and put it deep, and extract the tremor from its roots.
And if you see, then do this with a cord of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and pulling up above.
do not pierce it, but hold it to the two and press it And if you see, then burn the tremor, as is written before or in the chapter on cautery.
of the form of the purgative Sometimes one makes a purgative of silver or archite, or melted iron or cloth; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments according to the way they are brought together.
Those to be treated with care in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
The form of a colostomy is both small and great if it is above wide; or the bellies are tied according to this manner:
and it has an obstruction or the bellies are tied, as you see, and the head is pierced from within; and has two holes on one side and one on the other.
and it is tied or the bellies are wrapped with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes.
and has between each hole one span of space, then put into these holes one strong thread twisted in ten or eleven times around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it with an instrument in front of a strong thread, then colostomize; and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the colostomy with oil or egg yolk or similar thing, then bind it lightly.
then press the ministers with his two hands together until it is all visible, then extract the colostomy, and lift the patient's legs to the appearance.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then tie it as tight as you can; and if he sleeps for an entire night, then it is a greater aid.
And if you colostomize him in the disease of bowel obstruction, and the medicine hastens to come out, then continue it until he is healed.
And if hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then make the colostomy just as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle colostomy when the skin is stretched tight.
of wounds
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell the treatments by hand and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by cutting with stone, or the edge of a sword and knife, or a lance or club or stick, or similar things;
or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head that are simple, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from cutting with stone or similar things, and the skin is altogether torn and the wound is large. and you doubt slightly about abscesses hot: if you make it heal quickly with the head's own medicine itself, even if it comes out with blood from the wound, and let the healing go against the injured part.
and instruct the patient to take repletion of wine and large meats.
And if he doesn't want to heal, then diminish his meat and not drink wine or eat flesh.
and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come, a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or wine alone.
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh and still full of blood, and has not been affected by air or powder, which I will say a little later.
and if the air has changed it, then put on some ointments until he is healed.
And if the wound is great like a cut with a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, just as I will say about wounds of the belly, in the chapter on suturing.
If the wound is open to the bone and pours, and holds on only by a little, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as cooked testicles and wheat, also like pigeons, and similar things.
And if you find or skin rotting, and it is not at the bone, then cut out all the rotten part and clean it, then treat it.
and if he has an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stayed by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it severed, then tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which solidifies even when air has changed it.
And the manner of the powder is this: take equal parts of incense and blood of dragon; three parts of live coal; and mix the powder finely. and fill the wound, and bind it firmly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it remain unbound, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one never does this with coal alone, unless one has neither incense nor blood of dragon, but only when the air has changed the wound.
And if the air has changed the wound, even if it is fresh, then one must not put in this powder.
but put on some digestive ointments, or pigeons made of wheat flour, water, and honey, until it overflows. then treat it with other treatments until he is healed.
And if a bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers.
and I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there being no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or an artery is cut.
If it's the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substances of nurses are cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member
but make the medication thick, like chalk washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and wash the cloth also in sweet water, and other stones from mines according to this manner, and oily unguents.
And if the wound is large, then sew it up with threads, then apply a dressing until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is broken and full of pus, then pierce or open it lower down;
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes from it, then bind it, and tie it, and cauterize as needed.
and if the windpipe of the throat is cut or the gullets, and the ducts are kept, by which the flesh goes, then sew up the gullet on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape. and then strain it gently, and leave it for some days, then treat it with dry ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it. and if there are fragments of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot take out until the wound has healed. and then loosen and open the abscess.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound caused by a lance or sword
If it is a wound from a lance or sword and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of gangrene coming from the wound and the patient is going to die: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder on it at the first hour nor bind it for the blood that does not congeal deeply. and returns to the heart, and kills the patient. but put attractive ointment on it, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more. if it does not come with convulsion, nor bad trembling of the heart, nor any sign of death. and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with tents and other treatments, until it is healed.
and if it cannot heal, and he works, then know that there is a fistula; then treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a cut by sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then treat it as one would for those in front.
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone and has broken pieces, then scrape the wound, and remove the fragments that are loose. and if they are not loose, then leave the wound to heal, and loosen the extractions.
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
of the great wound, sometimes the intestines burst open or the intestines themselves, by which the introduction of contents;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse than a small wound to treat a large one.
therefore one should put the intestines back in slowly, not all at once. because the intestines swell at once when they feel cold, and then enter more slowly.
and therefore it is better to treat the medium wound, because one should return the intestine to its place just like with others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches happen in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch for other wounds on the body and the two other stitches that are proper are common to other wounds;
and all the same they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes out, and if a thing must be put back, it is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said. or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: soak a sponge or one cloth in lukewarm water only. or you cook in water of aqua composita, and cypress, and spike. and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed.
and sometimes it makes the wine restraining, and it becomes wet that it only serves to deflate.
And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked with marshmallow and melicote. because of this, the entrance is loosened to a small extent.
and if it cannot enter, then make a little hole in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids.
and the first treatment is more important than the cut, unless there is great necessity for it.
and this is the instrument to split it:
then cut inside the curvature and do not go too far, and look at the shape.
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes out, then put it back in its natural shape to its proper place. if you can manage it, for this is more important.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back. and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts so that the understanding is in this, that the injured part is higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to arrange what I say about great and minor wounds.
For small wounds, take what appears to you,
then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common way of suturing.
and this is the common way of suturing. and it is that you take a needle or needles, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave one or two fingers' width from the head of the wound and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two keys of the leather with the two keys of the scaphoid,
then strain it with a doubled thread around the needle on both sides, and bring together the two edges of the wound naturally,
and then leave one or two fingers' width, and insert another needle; then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this as long as you need needles. until all the wound is bound.
and the needles be minor, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be minor;
and it does not seem right to thrust the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
lest they pierce and open the wound before the suture;
and then cut off the ends of the needles, so that they do not harm the patient in their sleep, and I put tents or drapes on the ends of the needles to keep them from moving. and leave them so that the wound is sewn;
and this way of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles suffice.
The second suture is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the leather and the two edges of the scaphoid together with a needle where there is a good strong thread, and when you have pierced all these edges into three parts,
and when you have pierced all these edges into three parts, then pull the needle through to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews cloth;
and leave a space of the thickness of a minor finger between each suture.
this suture is suitable for men,
and I sewed a wound that an ox had on its belly,
which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm of great size. and the intestines were well two palms of great size,
and the wound was in the abdomen. I brought back the intestine then, after it had been four hours later,
and the wound was sewn up just in fifteen days, and I healed it, and he became sound.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not heal him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I put clean cotton cloth on top of the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he became sound.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
take the needle and thrust it from the outside part into the inside part;
when it has pierced the correct spot straight on, then tie the head of the scaphoid or costal ligament where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the other side of the inside part straight to the outside.
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as tailors do the pelts, and that you leave once the scaphoid on one side and then pick it up again on the other, until the suture is completely finished.
The second way of suturing, which Galen says properly,
is when they assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads of the scaphoid to the other head in this manner:
insert a needle or proximate head of the mirror, and make it pierce that place alone. and leave the two edges of the scaphoid; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part to the inside part. of the two edges of the scaphoid;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part to the inside part, in two other edges of the mirror that are on the other side.
and this is the second way of suturing and the most common one.
Galen says this phrase, and some bear witness to it,
one should sew the belly with two needles, or one where there is thread in each.
and one should thrust one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and knows that when the rupture is within the belly, it is a suture more difficult than those of other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even as the fire has changed it, then put back the intestine and the skin; then place on top the powder that fills the flesh,
then put back the intestine and the skin; then place on top the powder that fills the flesh, and if the fire has changed it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals. and cut off the thread, and be sewn the scaphoid and the mirror; then heal the wound as with others, until he is sound.
and if you don't have medicine, then put it on, as soon as it begins to spit brown water. and stir it two times a day until he is healed.
For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, so it is necessary that you moisten linen cloth lightly in temperate heat oil or rose oil, and put it around the wounds and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or purulence in his bowels, and many times this happens, then catheterize him with black wine vinegar, and similarly if the purulence comes just to the intestine;
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is more easily cured than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the putrefaction of the veins, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approaching of its nature to that of dogs.
And if the gut jumps out of the wound, then put it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned green or black, then it is necessary that you tie the part that is black, so that no more blood may come forth. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the tie, and put the two ends hanging from the part below the wound until it is full and ready to ease the extraction when the guts fall out, and the wound bleeds.
of the flux of the bowels
When the intestine is rough and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people,
because I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, and there came forth the excretion and the belching;
I applied a cure according to what I could, and did not cease from subtletizing until he was healed, and the bowels were sealed.
And when I saw it seal, I doubted that the patient had not evil in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better disposition, eating and drinking;
and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a way: take fresh cloths from great tests, then gather up the lips of the wound, and when the cloth has opened the mouth, then put it on the two lips,
then put another cloth after in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely wrapped;
and sew up the wound. That head soars in the intestine, and does not bring any harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a way: take the head of this thread of intestine which is quite worn out, and then tie to the head of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted, then pass the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tighten it in the flux;
and this way of sewing with cloths is no more than according to the path of trust and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the greater intestines, then there is no remedy nor health, except by subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be Know that all wound or abscess, when it ulcerates, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it has formed and flows with blood.
And a fistula is according to the verdant node's fault, hard and white, or where one does not feel pain, and it also flows like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes it pours forth clear blood, and at other times thick. sometimes little, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and there is no scar, is not except through one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard scab inside and above the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much blood; or the bowels are corrupted, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because of the property in the region being slow to digest, and slow to heal, and flowing by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicine in the division.
Or it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistula which is done by hand work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the bladder, or to the intestine, or to the kidneys, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of difficult healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come just to what I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and if you see it with certainty, take a tent of earth or iron, if the fistula is straight, and clean it;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a fine tent of cloth, because the plover folds its movements around the tortuosity;
and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot well search it by touch. if you cleanse it through one of the perforations,
because the moisture so short from one perforation to another and cleanses it;
then you should bleed according to your power, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and it is cut extremely deep.
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it;
and once you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein; or in any of the places that I told you, cut according to what I told you.
or in any of the places that I told you, cut according to what I told you. and remove the bad humors and corrupted juices that are inside; and then care for it until it is healed.
and if the fistula is well opened in the right place, so it is necessary that you cut extremely deep, as far as you can. then put moist cloths on in medical poultice and tie them just to the top of the fistula.
then put moist cloths on in medical poultice and tie them just to the top of the fistula. until the medicine dissolves the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then put unguents in gentle manner on healthy flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said.
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. If veins or nerves do not injure or main principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the flesh until all corruption is removed. then care for it with gentle remedies until it is healed.
and if it is not healed and returns to being inflamed as before, know that you are not yet finished enough.
and uncover and cut until you reach the bottom. and remove all the corruption, then restore the place.
and if it is thus healed, that's good. if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to proceed; and there's no other remedy except through natural decay.
and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can extract it with pincers, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this.
and if there are many bones, then remove them all, leaving none behind.
and if moisture makes it contrary and there is no error or fear, then cut the moist flesh and bone, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then apply the wound with gentle poultice. and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and then they will be easier to remove.
and if it is a large bone, such as the one in the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all blackness is removed. then restore the wound;
and if there is great part of the corrupted bone and it comes just to the level of the marrow. then it is necessary to scrape and cut all the way to the corruption, and then care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body,
until the matter came to the leg and was swollen with a large abscess, and he had no reason to believe it would not open.
but the doctors, driven by their foolishness, worked so much above that the abscess opened. and in it corrupted a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and many perforations came that all flowed with foul liquid from the body.
and many doctors applied treatment for about two years, and there was no improvement in the art of healing,
until I was called in, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated. and all that flowed from the perforations had great power. and the flesh of the young man became red and had a citron-like color.
I put a tent in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations.
and I found that some were opening into others from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened, and cut in one of the perforations until I uncovered a part of the bone. and it was corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone inside.
I scraped away what appeared from the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for what I removed.
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but could not heal.
and then resumed, and uncovered the bone as before.
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and scraped it away, and then removed it, and ceased trying to heal the place.
but I could not until I cut around a palm's width of the bone, and then removed it to its very marrow. then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and closed quickly.
and it was no longer necessary to continue the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure. and out of fear of death that I had for him. For through the evacuation, he often bled, but he was healed entirely.
For through the evacuation, he often bled, but he was healed entirely. and in the place of the bone, a hard flesh arose, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or contraindication whatsoever, neither to eat nor to come.
and stretch the top, so that you can remove the corrupted flesh below. and uncover the flesh above the skin where you see the hair growing, lest it wound the flesh. and place a glowing iron or a heated plate below the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to stay and see as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and then wait again.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part; so uncover all the flesh; then place a glowing iron below,
and then stay on one side and the other until the corruption is purged away to its length in a pot, as we have said;
and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint and stay on the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut it;
and if the corruption is in the fingernail of the hand or in the toenail, then that is very strong indeed; but nonetheless it is necessary for you to question that corruption as to how it opens up; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but not so as to cause opposition from the vein or nerve.
and know that the instruments and the fires for cutting these bones are many, according to the structure of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each kind of operation;
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the manners of diseases; so think about the instrument which you need according to what is necessary.
of fire The shoulder can be dislocated due to internal or external causes;
and when you have tried medicinal treatment for that corruption and it does not help, then it is necessary to cut off that member up to the point where the corruption comes; so that the patient may escape either by death or by evil, which is greater, namely the defect of the member;
so that the patient may escape either by death or by evil, which is greater, namely the defect of the member; and the sign is that the member becomes black, so it seems as though it has been burned by fire, and after that blackness, then this corruption of member spreads to member; and takes over the whole body; so you must hasten to cut off.
and if this is due to the sting of certain venomous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and viper and similar ones;
if the corruption is at the head of the joint, then cut it off and do not give him space to reach as far as the hand.
And if it reaches as far as the hand, then cut it off at the wrist, so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, then cut it off at the shoulder; and if it passes beyond the shoulder, that is death. and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
and so too with the foot: if the corruption comes to the first joint, then cut it off after the second joint;
and if it reaches the foot, then cut off the entire foot; and if it climbs up to the thigh, then cut off at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die quickly.
and the manner of cutting or staying the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one minister down from one tie, and another minister up from the other tie, and you uncover the flesh that is between the two ties with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed;
then cut or stay it, and place a linen cloth on either side, so that the blood does not touch the healthy skin. and another wound and abscess comes to the patient soon.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, then cauterize the area hastily, or put some restraining powders on top; then return to your treatment until it is complete.
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in his own foot:
he got a blackness that seemed like burning fire,
and that corruption came first to his ankle bone of the foot, until it reached all the way up to the foot.
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off his foot and was healed;
and long after that, the corruption came again to the joint of his hand, and he came to me.
and I put on him things that would cause repercussions after purifying the body, but the corruption could not cease.
and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not wish to, because I had hope of reperfusing the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die. because the man's virtues were weak; and he became despairing of all, and returned to his own land. and then he hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed.
and I have this tale only because it is done for another's need.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a hard flesh and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus. and then bursts and opens, and the pus jumps out, and leaves the flesh as white as a vessel. and the skin that is above is also smooth as a delicate piece of cloth. and do not reach as far as the bone, nor as far as the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain".
but if it is so long that it reaches as far as the bone in front, then it is called a "fistula".
and the skin is like this: you cut that skin all around, and similarly when it is smooth as a piece of cloth. and does not hurt because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will hurt, and the corruption is not in front, And the skin is covered with flesh, so treat a pustule thus:
Look to see if the breasts are large and the nipple that is in it has a foul smell, Then apply Egyptian medicine which is made thus: Take aloes, and oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take what you need from this, and mix it with water and honey, and use it to fumigate the breast, and restrain the ulcer; and let the medicine sit for two hours, then strain it out by expressing;
do this many times, until the breasts are purified and the foul odor is removed;
and never once use ashes' water for fumigating; when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes from the vine's wood, and pour water upon them;
then let it flow, and use it to fumigate, until you know that the breasts are well purified;
and if the patient cannot bear this, nor the Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes; so make a fumigation with water and honey, or add a small amount of litharge to it; or you fumigate with honey and sweet wine, which the honeys have the property of purifying and cleansing; and the wines make the skin clear;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts are well purified; so fumigate with what brings forth flesh in it;
and take defined plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you fumigate with some medicines and unguents, the properties of which I have said or to treat unguents;
and if the ulcer on the breast is small, and the plug from the fumigator cannot enter into it; so enlarge it with a small iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or balsamic ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, so cut and leave just one small opening or enough for the fumigator to enter;
and if the ulcer that discharges milk is above, then cut or make it lower than where it is. For when the milk is in full flow, do not let flesh form; and if you cannot cut beneath the breast as you see; so prepare it in such a way that the milk flows down to the lowest part where it is;
and if you cannot cut beneath the breast as you see; so prepare it in such a way that the milk flows gently down and does not leave any of the milk behind; and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
and apply it on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then cut at the strongest spot of the ulcer on the breast, making it one small notch larger than the first; then apply a soothing ointment on another cloth according to the size of the ulcer, and put it on the breast ulcer to ease the milk flow, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days, once.
and that which is on the breast ulcer, is often removed in order to stop the milk flow, and knows what comes from the milk, whether it be venom or a little or enough or digested or undigested;
and take care to see if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not;
and when your medicine has been thus applied and you see the nature that appears on the breast ulcer, so know that the breasts are already healed, and are approaching health;
and then loosen it in the morning or on the third day, and when you remove the dressing; so change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts discharge undigested milk after many days, know that the breasts are not healed. And if subtle poisons appear late after a long time, do not despair of health;
for health is approaching. For there are men whose flesh takes time to form in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested milk jumps from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healed;
and if the breasts take time to clear up and are inflamed, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue; as defined ointment, for it has a great part of vinegar, and this is the last medicine;
take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and rose of old wine equal in substance;
then cook it and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked to increase. when defined ointments are not present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue it to a cloth, and put it on the breast, and never once administer it with aristology for a long time; and roots of lily of heaven, which is also like wheat flour and centaury;
and roots of lily of heaven, which is also like wheat flour and centaury; and use it with simple or compound medicines: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I said, and use it; and if the wound is long-lasting and is not healed by this treatment;
and if the wound is long-lasting and is not healed by this treatment; then know that corruption has gone deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or causes stiff limbs, or breaks tendons; so apply the treatment for fistula, as we have said before.
of the apostema of the lung
Fulness is an apostema that arises under the lung of the finger pulp of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps it arises in other toes;
and when it is neglected and not taken care of, then a foul apostema comes; and runs and discharges milk until it reaches the root of the lung, and perhaps even all the way through.
and comes the corrosion all the way to the bone, until there is a stinking pain, and the head of the shoulder is wide apart, and the color is faint.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help. so you must remove all the superfluity that remains of the swelling. then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is very great help if the bone is sound, and the swelling is sound.
and if the swelling pushes into the flesh, and begins to prick, and bleed. so you must put the rule under the swelling that pricks the flesh. and tie it up tight, and cut away that subtle and lightly-skinned flesh. and put on the remaining skin medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it away and treat further, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the shoulder bone corrupting, then cut it away in one piece just as was said before. then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is festering and bound, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first. then cut the swelling of the spatula-like part by cutting across above.
and beware that the cut does not come all the way to the skin that is under the swelling, for the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The shoulder joint that arises in the hands of some men by chance is all fatty. and by chance there is a place where it has bones, and sometimes it has swelling.
and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or in certain parts of the shoulders. He who is born in any part of the shoulder does not move. and he who is born at the joint of the shoulder, by chance moves;
the movement of one who is fatty is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula-like instrument.
He who is born at the root of the joint is hard to cure: it's best not to cut it.
In one who is born or has a swelling at the back of the shoulder, you must first cut away the skin all the way to the bone. then cut the bone with a suitable thread for this purpose, then treat it until it is healed.
The swelling that comes to the shoulders together comes by birth, or by sudden injury, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
You must cut away that swelling, and then the shoulder will repair itself according to its natural forms. then put between two tents or moist cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not swell. or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wound is closed, as it should be.
If swelling comes to any of his shoulders with the palm, then cut away that swelling as it should be.
Of evils
Wounds are great and swollen lumps full of melancholy excess that come to many members of the body.
and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and who work and carry things than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to them sometimes purging with oil of cole, and then heal them with the balm of basil.
The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is when you cut and then drain the black blood. and the other manner is that you open the vein and let it bleed all out.
The cut is according to this manner: first arise the leg of hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned out. then strain the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap. then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision.
then lift and let out all the black blood at your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtue can endure.
and then tie it off, and command him to keep eating flesh and drinking black oil.
and start the evacuation and healing again when the veins are full and it hurts the patient.
The alleviation of pain is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs. then put it in a bath, and raise the leg of hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins.
and if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then cut into the vein of the long part at the top of the kneecap, or in the part below the ankle.
then apply oil to the skin, and scrape the vein from each part, until it appears when you touch it.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord.
then tie the thread underneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then anoint it lightly with oil.
then cut into another place above the three shoulders; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. then lift it up with the thread, just as you did, and anoint it with another oil, just as you did first.
then cut another incision, or more if you need it, then lift it up and cut into the shoulder of the foot.
then drain it and lift it up to the second incision; then draw it out from incision to incision, until it comes out all at once, then cut.
and if you can't drain and lift it, put an awl through each strong double thread. and tie and drain it, and put underneath one thread, and turn your hand to the left and right, until it comes out. and be careful that it doesn't cut, for if it cuts, one can no longer drain or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
and when you have drained it all, put on the place of the wound a moist cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and care for him until he is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and looped together all at once, and it's not straight, as we have said, so it is necessary that you cut it obliquely, but do not cover it up; and treat it as we have previously said.
so it is necessary that you cut it obliquely, but do not cover it up; and treat it as we have previously said. The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut through, so that it opens up the vein.
and it is of great curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of civil blood
This vein is placed in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it occurs in another part than in the legs, and this happens due to the purulence that comes from under the skin,
as if it came inside the body like snakes and worms, inserted between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the skin changes color and the vein begins to come out, like a root of a plant.
When the lump appears, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of linen cloth, from one inch to two and a half inches, and tie it.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it seems to be coming out from behind, wrap it around the cloth and tie it. and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root until it is all out. for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause abscess and purulence at the same place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little until the very end, and no part of her remain in the body.
and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with five or ten paces long, and one man came to me, from whom it issued 10 paces long, and when you cut it, it bursts into 1 vein or pore, and penetrates right down to the bottom.
so that all comes out; and let the matter inside be emptied, and apply to the place medicines that prevent purulence for some time, then cure it as you would abscesses.
And sometimes this vein goes to the joints of the foot, or into the foot itself, and it comes out in many pores, and from which it jumps out; then cure it as we have said before.
Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "disease of the ox", because it often affects oxen,
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down through the whole body. and one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes and jumps out.
and it is caused by purulence of certain humors, such as come from worms and serpents and lice and ascarids or the belly.
and one doubts of its malice, for when it goes through the body and climbs to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and treated, one cannot be sure except when it goes:
so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong cord tightly.
then cut above and treat the wound, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire above, until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near to the eye, then hold a mirror under it sharply, and cut above, and treat the wound.
and it is necessary to use the patient in purgation of the body with soluble medicines to purge the bad humors poured out.
and beware of meats that cause purulence.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and about an hour later, I saw it rise like a worm on the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, just as bright silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little later it ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
then she told me that it was winding around the body again, just as I saw it.
I was very much astonished at how she was moving from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner before. However, I had seen many cases where the pain would move from one place to another, but I had never seen it like that in a woman;
and I thought to myself that it was because the woman's body was dry and her veins were uncovered. and therefore that windiness appeared constrained;
and did not appear according to this reason in those who are delighted and have moist bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see the disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then tie above and below quickly, and then cut above until that constrained windiness comes out. and cauterize the place; and if you don't see it at your hands,
then cure it with those things that resist windiness, such as stinking pills and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Of Arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
The diversity of them is that there are those which have great points, and small, and hairy, and soldered; and of those who have two corners, and of those who have tongues, and of those which have fragments; and that which falls in any member if it falls according to two manners: or in principal member, falls
such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you next, warn: so it is necessary that you be warned against the extraction of this arrow, for many die afterwards in various conditions; and when this bad sign does not warn you at all, and the arrow is not in the deepest part, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps out the sinciput which is above the brain, is when there is blindness and deafness and swelling and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of gall; and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and jumps from the moist white wound resembling polyps, and also jumps as if burned charcoal;
and if this sign warns you, then hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it's not too deep.
The sign of the shaft when it hits the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not at all empty; and perhaps the shaft moves as if polyps, and in black blood, and comes with coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: know then without doubt that death is present.
And the sign of the arrow that does not pierce the womb is when foam-free it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow hits the covering of the chest, it is on the little ribs; and pours out great gall and great pain and breathes heavily; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food jumps out of the wound.
And if the arrow hits the belly, and there is no hope of passing anything through the intestines, then there is no hope for the cure or the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the face and shoulders and throat and arms and shoulder and aid and spine of the back and fore-arm and calf and knee and legs, and similar members are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because that happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to one man whose arrow hit him on the eyelid in the root of the eye: I tried it, and pulled it out on the other side under the fatty earlobe, and he was healed without numbness.
And I pulled out an arrow that hit him in the fatty eyelid under the paper-thin skin below, and the arrow was bent, and I could not pull it out except for the tip towards the wood, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bowstring, all of very light iron without ears; the joint was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arab arrow with ears:
I filed down the barbs, and made it subtle until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I pulled out an arrow from one man whose it had struck in the belly, and thought he would die;
and after it had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all; I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see one man whose an arrow has hit him on the back, and the wound is bound up above;
and the arrow remains inside, and does not change his natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
And if you see one other man whose an arrow has hit him on the face, and the wound is bound up;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
And I pulled out an arrow from one of the king's princes, whose it had struck in the eye; and was slightly bent to the right side; and the arrow was entirely bent.
I was summoned for treatment three days after it was struck. I found the wound to be very narrow.
I searched for it with all a subtle tentacle, and did not feel it; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on the place an ointment attracting and digestive, because the flesh did not swell; and I saw the arrow's tip.
and I saw the arrow's tip. I put on the ointment for many days, and the wound healed above, and the patient remained thus for a long time.
so that he felt the arrow one day inside his eye; and he told me. I put on the wound a medicine with corrosive properties for many days, until it was open.
and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which was bent at the place; then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it passed beyond the boundaries for three months,
and then it fell out of the wound and I stuck in tongs, pulling it from one side and the other, and it could not come out.
then I did not stop subtlety and extracting with tools, until I got it one day with well-made tongs, According to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so I will follow it, and restore the wound.
And the doctors judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your cure on what I do not say, for books cannot learn everything;
but wise masters know well a little thing, and about what is present and failing, and true nine works, and nine instruments, for the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not emerge from members where they are fixed unless according to two manners: or by the way in which they enter, or by some other side;
and that which jumps out to one side where it enters is an arrow entering the fleshy parts, and sometimes it jumps out now.
And if it does not jump now, then let it stay until the flesh is surrounded, and the exit is eased;
and also if it is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, then let it stay thus for some days, and move each day;
and then it jumps out, and if it does not jump, then pierce all around one subtle furrow, until the flesh around is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is embedded in the flesh of the body and one cannot see it, then search for it everywhere. and if you find it, then extract it with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then make it wider until the wound is great; and extract the arrow if you can, and if there are ears in the arrow where it stays.
and extract the arrow if you can, and if there are ears in the arrow where it stays. so cut away the flesh that is fixed from both sides to as much as you can; and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can extract it.
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can extract it. and do it subtly so that you don't break the arrow, which would be pulled out more painfully.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the flesh around is softened, and then extract it, for the extraction will be eased. And if the haemorrhaging of blood makes you contraindicated, then apply what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting into the nerve and vein, and devise how you can extract the arrow without danger.
or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and put the patient in the shape he was in when the arrow hit him. for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot, then put him in accord with what the signs show to you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or shows some sign of it, or the skin is swollen in front so that one can see or feel it in an unusual way:
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it for a while, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it through to the entire head;
and if the head breaks off and you need to administer binding, then apply one instrument that is toothed, so that the point of the arrow enters into the bristle of the instrument; and then push it through.
and if the arrow is broken, then apply one instrument with an entering point, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as seems fitting.
And if the arrow breaks or stays or is lodged in the belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is close, and you can cut above, then cut.
and take care not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the form:
And there are many kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of common veins of the body Of veins through which one is cleansed, thirty-one, of which there are sixteen at the head.
that is to know: two batons that are behind the ears, which are called "herbeches"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose. and the two jugular veins that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lip above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherics"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it is located on the left side, and the common people call it "the vein of the head"; and the median one is called "Fasce", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it "the vein of the heart"; and the basilic one is located on the right side. and the common people call it "the vein of the belly", and it is above the scapula. and it is that one used for bleeding, which appears openly above the armpit.
And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the auricular and annular veins, and it has two branches.
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is located below the fold of the right armpit, and the second saphenous one that is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "nesse" which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The bleeding of the veins that are after the ears helps ancient catarrhs and migraines; and the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head,
and the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head, and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two little folds depending on the head: which then bend towards your back and where you feel the pulse under your back, it begins to swell;
then take the lancet and pierce below the vein just up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein above. and cut and peel the skin and the vein well two fingers' breadth across, and make it come out of blood until you see.
then strain and bind it, until it is clean;
and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth for ancient migraines, and headaches, and accustomed ophthalmia, and at the root of old tears to those.
and the quality of the bleeder is as I say: and it is that the patient tightens his neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse under your back, and then it begins to swell;
then lift the skin above the vein at the level of your backbone's index, and pierce the lancet below. and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done with two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then release the patient, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then put a cotton cloth on it.
and then bind it tightly, and let it be until it is clean; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The bleeding of the forehead vein is worth just as much as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the quality is that the patient tightens his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. then take the instrument called "fossae", which has this shape:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's neck and bind the vein until it is clean, and never once allow a wide inflammation.
However, it is not good for the inflammation to be too severe; and the vein should not be torn in two, because the bone is close, and by chance, the inflammation may break through when it is subtle.
The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps those with eyes, and with ringworm, and with redness, and with ulcers in the eye, and with facial diseases;
and the quality of their bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck by twisting with some kind of ligature, just as before.
then bleed, and let the bleeding be about the width of a finger, a little longer than the inflammation is wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the inflammation is subtle, it may break through; then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind well.
The bleeding of the navel vein is worth for ague, and for feigned headache, and for facial diseases. just as migraines and redness that come to the face, and similarly when it is ancient.
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck, then presses his navel with your left hand. and take a subtle flame long, and stick it between the two nostrils, in the space that is between them. because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will start flowing now;
and don't go too deep into it, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is very quickly restored.
The bleeding of the two inguinal veins helps with the constriction of the uterus, and with the beginning of menstruation, and with many diseases, and with epilepsy, and with corroding, and with herpes.
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck below one and the other, just as we have said; and let the master be standing above the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat,
then bleed the vein of the length a little widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed.
then do the same on the other vein, then release the ligature, and bind the veins moderately. so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, when the wound is clean.
On the bleeding of the liver The bleeding of the veins above the lips so helps to clot in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and nose bleedings and around.
And the quality of the bleeding is to have the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I said. then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side. and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small dark veins. then grasp one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
then grasp one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then grasp the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the bleeding under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue so helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the uvula, and with diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks down on each side at a black vein.
then bleed one and the other, and do not go too far in depth, because below are the arteries.
The veins of the throat which are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
either by pricking with one small and broad flame of myrtle or olive, as they cut through the throat, and is called "anesil". and are large and subtle according to the largeness and constriction of the veins. The form of the myrtle flame is very well known, and it is large as you see:
And has need to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood visible, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and it is the form of the olive flame:
and it is more subtly pricked, and is for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The bleeding of the cephalic vein, which is one of these veins, so helps with diseases that are under the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly;
and it is necessary for the bleeder that he should bleed slightly, and beware of the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and blood comes forth in abundance, then it is necessary to stop it, as I said; and one must not prick the flame, but cut as with anesil.
And if the cephalic vein does not open clearly, then it is necessary that you should pull it out, and change another; or you want any part of it, or you bleed in place of it the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with the flame of anesil, as we have said.
And if you see the place where the bleeding is occurring, then it is necessary that you should pull out the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a sign, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the flame of anesil;
and beware that you do not cut into the artery when you see the place swelled, for it is an artery; then withdraw.
And if you see it come forth above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as often happens;
then bind the arm and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be careful, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the blood is not stopped and it flows, and it gushes out, and medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retreats; and stop the blood.
And take a strip of fig tree bark, and split it, and take one half and bind well until the next day;
if the blood is stopped, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping of the bleeding is not difficult in many dispositions for the small wound of the cut and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The bleeding of the vein in the middle so helps that it treats blood from above, and from below the head. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the bleeder to beware of the nerve which is below, and if he pricks too deeply, and finds the nerve. and it swells up and the bleeding may be stopped, but by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you should bleed from the instrument of anesil; and withdraw the nerve as far as you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it longwise.
The bleeding of the cephalic vein so helps that it treats blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed by pricking with the olive flame or the myrtle flame, because it is the most safe of all the veins, for there are no nerves or arteries below.
However, it is necessary to seek out the lightest place and not harm anything if it does not work the first time, and one begins again; and by chance the places swell up in some people, when one tries it for the first time, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the bleeding is according to your opinion.
The first thing that you should know about bleeding, is that it is not necessary only for the purpose of preserving health.
and to prevent diseases from coming. and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are in the throat: namely, the cephalic, facial, and basilic. and one should bleed at the beginning of prayer time in the morning, and after eating in autumn and winter when the signs of repletion appear.
and one should bleed either on the first or third day after 2 or 3 hours.
The wound that is administered to the sick person has no fixed time determined, but rather whenever need arises by day or by night, in all hours and at all times.
and it is not necessary to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying more than three-quarters of the way through her seventh month. And one should not heal the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be healed, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he cleanse the intestines with a light enema. if he has many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not draw off the superfluities from the intestines, which are harmful to the main members.
nor does one heal who is too full of meat, nor drunk, as long as they are in such a state, nor dropsical.
and one does not heal after passion of the belly, and vomiting, and purging of the stomach, and frequent habit with a woman, and travail, watching, and menstruating, and all that comes from bodily virtue, or by something of the arm or body.
then subtlety the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter a bath, unless something hinders it, to subtlety the blood.
and heal from the vein of the belly around the third hour, as we have said;
and keep that day free from labor, and toil, and luxury, and similar things;
and be laid and joyful, and let the doctor's hands be higher than those whom one is healing, and wipe the arm twice or three times.
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
and then wipe the place with hands until the veins swell and one feels them;
then moisten the doctor's finger with a little old oil, then put his right hand on that vein below the place where one wants to heal. so that the vein does not fade and fail when cutting. For there are veins that flow like strings to be cut, and those that are full of windiness. so that when one puts the finger on it, it withdraws the finger, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those;
and if he opens the vein, it is too narrow a wound, therefore it is necessary that the doctor be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens at first time, it is good; if not, then one must begin again a little below or above that place in haste, unless the swelling of the limb.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient is frightened, then one should leave it for a day or two and not bind the arm: in case there may come abscesses soon; nor enter into a bath, then begin again the healing if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtlety and you doubt that it will not be as much blood as you see, then trust in that very opening with all the right flow.
and work a little hastily, until the limb is swollen; for it often happens that way, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, then do not begin again to heal, and put a little layer of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and is more nourishing in this place than the cloth that the oil;
and thus administer the cloth of oil in each healing that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing is done with treacle and balm of earth, when one puts it on the limb; and subtlety the blood and divides when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not healed except at that time or the opening of the vein is small. so hasten, and put a wet sponge on the limb in water and seed broth, and strain it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains at the limb for some days with no blackness or greenish color, then it will not harm him. and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with the juice of camphor, mastice, or similar.
And often it happens that an abscess and appearance arise in the healing of the wound: put then your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad. So take care that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance the blood flow of the artery is cut; but apply one dry poultice to harden the limb, then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become subtlety; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for that person who is fat and strong, and has need of bloodletting, to have a larger wound, and the fingers be wide;
and for that person who is weak, do the opposite, and let it be healed little by little, and have it healed by cutting across, not by piercing;
and this manner of healing is safe from purging of blood and cutting of nerve, and is more worthy than the healing of the long or the wide.
And to that person whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in the juice of green apples; if he is overheated, then treat the blood three times or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, then anoint before the healing with moist bread in a mazer syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-odored syrup.
And if he pukes after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drinks broth of charcoal and a subtle aromatic syrup.
and use the other things that we have said in the chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to swell his arm and heal it another time, so it is fitting when it is weakened by great injury, that he heals it little by little, according to the quantity of his continued vigor.
And if he wants to swell his arm after the first healing, and he has strong flesh, then he heals in .vij. hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And if he wants to heal on another side, then he should heal in the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already overheated, and makes one feverish; so it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening as far as the pomegranate. Then you should apply all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse as he heals, so that death does not come in place of pomegranate. and this often happens when the healer is negligent;
and it does not happen when you want to loosen the arm and bring out blood the second time, and the opening is closed, unless you press strongly upon it; unless he is bent, then let him stretch out his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let him leave it alone until he heals the second time; or you should insert at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen at the opening of the vein issues forth. and put on one part of seal that has been put in water, and press upon it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, then let him heal in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein within the arm is healed in the place of the head vein because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the scab becomes red;
then it should be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then let him heal now across, not at all across or long.
and let the opening be wide, and let him heal well close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put his hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, then do not put his hand in hot water again, for one puts him more in winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of the saved part of the right hand is worth more than all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, so that one may see; and if the healing is across, and you close it completely all around, then it will not cause any harm.
and do not go too deep in front, for the nerves are beneath all of them denuded of flesh.
and then put the hand in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn blood as much as is needed, then put on the vein oil and seal to solder quickly, and so do for each part.
The healing of the left hand is worth as much to the disease of mice, and do it just the same way as I told you for the right.
The healing of the soporific is worth to all diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and thighs, and legs old, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his healing is that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks down. and lift above the ankle of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot there go out many veins.
heal then the largest or the one at the ankle that is worth more.
And if you heal on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below, and the healing should be across as when sewing; and let the flames be anointed.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the healer fails the first time, then try again the second at a little distance above, because the wound is salty; nor doubt the nerves, as we have said, and so do the same with the soporific of the other foot equally.
The wound of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its healing is worth to the pain of the groin when it is for hot blood.
And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters or takes a bath, and stretches above the ankle four fingers while twisting.
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then let it heal in all ways that you can, and across. and is worth more than when you close it, for the wound is clean, and it has healed in many hands.
and is worth more than when you close it, for the wound is clean, and it has healed in many hands. And if you don't believe me, then heal any vein that opens or is on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
and let blood flow as much as you see fit, and then loosen the bandage, and put on cotton and stretch it; it is now healed.
(The text continues with a new section: "Of the Healings of Ventouses")
Ventouses are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this ventosation which is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is all fire, or not on fire.
and two others on each side of the neck; and the ventouse below the chin. and the ventouse on both shoulders; and the ventouse above the elbows. and the ventouses in both arms; and the ventouses of both legs. and the poultices of the two shins; and the lancing does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh
and therefore one has not weakened it at all, as one would with a vein cure; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all fire or sense of fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to lance, or for habituation, then we will administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time;
for there are some who, when they need to be lanced, have a heavy head;
and there are some who swell up with repletion and redness on their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are some who swell up with a drop of blood in their mouth, and have puffed out the tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who imagine, and see through bloody water, and are wounded, and mortally ill, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we will then command to lance after three hours of the day.
The purging of the mouth also helps with the swelling of the head... that comes from above, and it is not necessary for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this lancing is in place of the purging of the head.
and it is not necessary for someone who has a cold complexion to use this, or if they have cholera, because this does them great harm;
and therefore it is not necessary for old people to use this, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who recover from this often become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to place the poultice a little lower down due to the doubt of oblivion.
The lancing in the neck is in place of the purging of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is worth it for the constriction of the belly, and to the tearing of the channel of the womb, and all over, and to repletion;
and it is necessary to apply a little pressure, because if she holds too tightly, she may cause oblivion or constriction of the stomach and heart.
The lancing at the two ribs of the neck is worth for the pains of the head, and eye pain and migraine, and to strangulation, and to pain in the roots of the teeth,
and it is in place of the purging of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the servant to stretch out his hand when placing it, so he does not compress the artery, and does not come forth with bloody discharge.
The lancing below the chin is worth for mouth disease and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the purgings of the two lips.
The lancing at the shoulders is worth for the disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The lancing of the sides is as good as three veins of the arm, because it treats blood from these large veins;
and command the servant not to pierce too deeply by front, because the skin is bare of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
The poultice that is on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases underneath, and it is necessary that the poultice be large and made of earth, so it can well draw out; and by chance, if they were subtle, they would break; and this would make great wounds.
The poultices of the legs clearly cure, because they draw out blood from all the body, and are worth for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and restore the flowers; and they take the place of the two shins and two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they cause dizziness in many dispositions.
The method of applying the poultice is that you first apply it empty, and then suck it temperately, and put it on hastily, and move it equally, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then pierce, and remove the poultices, and take heed in the disposition of the body, because there are some who have tough skin, and clear pores: thus it is necessary to strike once only, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to thin out the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to pierce a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we only suffice once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we often recommence; and if the blood is thick, we pierce in deep, and the end is that the heart should be pierced suddenly,
and it is necessary for one who has thick skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you anoint the edges of the poultices with oil that is aperitive and dissolutive: if it is in summer, with oil of violets, or with oil of sweet almonds, or with oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is in winter, with oil of parsley, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balmy oil, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
And if the person to be cured has tender skin and large pores, there is no need to apply oil,
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or another similar one.
And the person who has a lot of moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, or water of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities should rise with old wine, or water of sycamore, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar ones;
and it is not necessary to apply a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the application.
and it is necessary for him to guard himself when he needs to be purged and when he is being purged. And beware of that person who has a choleric temperament, and whose blood is too thick and inflamed. so it is necessary for him to take cold things, such as grapes, endive, and lettuce, and similar things.
and drink a little, and pork of the shoulder, and moist meat.
And that person who has a cold complexion, so take honey syrup and aromatic wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and drink a little, and drink a little, and small birds and wrens.
and the day when he will be purged, so he must drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some people treacle or muscatel at times before purging, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the blood be thinned out, but it does not need to be drunk by those who are hot.
The poultices that are applied without striking a blow are those that are applied on the liver, and on the kidneys, and podagra, and on the belly and the navel and the reins and the haunches, for those members do not bear to be struck there.
and one only does this in order to attract blood from member to member. just as we put them on the breasts when the milk flows; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put poultices on the belly and on the navel to reduce the member.
and it takes away the pain when there is inflammation or piercing, and by its attracting power it takes away the inflammation, or brings the piercing back to its place.
and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the kidneys when there is retained flatulence,
and these poultices are administered empty in order to suck only once; and sometimes they are administered with hot fire, and sometimes with cold water.
just as in diseases of the tear duct, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with hot water or cold water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
And it has two fingers of width and half a palm in depth, and it has on the border around the middle a small notch, just as for pushing an awl.
and it is of clay, soft before so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the member.
and it has in the middle a bar of clay or iron, to put a candle enclosed,
and they are great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the poultices of children are different from those of old people, and of thin ones from those of fat ones.
And one must thus apply this poultice to the member:
take the candle of wax or one linen thread, and put it inside the poultice across the bar that is inside the poultice, so that the light may be at the bottom of the poultice so that it does not burn the patient.
and then put it on the member, and the two fingers should be on the notch that we have said, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes out, and one removes the poultice.
and one takes the linen thread just as before, and renews it often, if you need it.
In the poultice then which is administered in disease of tear duct, it has no bar nor notch, and is only applied when it is filled with water, and is put on the member alone.
and that's the form:
Sutures are only applied when one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in bare bones, such as knuckles or nipples, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find sutures that are in clean water without stirring, then take them.
and put them in a vessel with sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cleansed with vinegar and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sutures.
and when they are full and tight, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put one there, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, then take the limb with ease, and then with water, very well, and then stretch it.
and if the limb swells too much after the sutures, then soak one cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the swelling subsides.
and if the swelling is multiple, then put on vitriol crushed or gall, and similar things, until it subsides.
or you put on the limb a half of peeled broad beans, and leave them until they dry out at the limb, which will now subside.
and if you need more, take other sutures.
And if the sutures will not take hold, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or drive a needle in until the swelling goes away. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they will dry out.
and when you see that they are falling off, then powder on a little bit of alum and burnt silk, or ash, so that they will stick now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a treatment for fracture and dislocation.
Listen, dear son, that foolish men who do not read this chapter will never see any of the ancient books nor letters about it;
and because of this reason is strange the science in our land, for I never found any good one.
and I know nothing of it, except through the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject, and through experiment, and through the habit of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are applied, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore fitting that we say the prologue of this book, summarizing the words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and rest upon virtue, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a breakage or dislocation or twisting or cracking comes to anyone, it is necessary for you to hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, if nothing else can be done, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old men;
or if the weather is not very cold, or too hot; and thin cholers, that is to say, cold fluxes, and flesh of hare and of kid, and does not drink wine, nor thin fat meats, and does not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about a warm abscess, or spreading of matter to the member; so revives the patient in his former government which he used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary for you to nourish the patient with meats that make a great healing, or if he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and pies, and pork belly, and eel, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For this nourishment brings strength and makes the breakage heal more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of old men and decrepit people cannot be well reunited or soldered according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as children's bones.
but don't worry, reset the broken bone with a thick splint that sets and joins the member together, until it is strong as it was before; and don't neglect his work, and therefore he should be nourished with big meats, as we have said.
And know that breakages are diverse in many ways.
For the breakage of the head is one thing, and the breakage of the ribs or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all the kinds of breaks. For there are breakages that occur by rotation, and others by flexion, such as the cutting of a feather to write.
For there are breakages that occur by rotation, and others by flexion, such as the cutting of a feather to write. And if with wound, and breakage in a small crack.
And each manner has its own method, and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory recalls in its place;
and it is known that the breakage of the bone is by twisting, and appears well by feeling, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor sounding at the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breakage;
but it can well have twisting, or cracking, or small breakage. So it is not necessary for you to move him with your hand, but set aside the remedies that come later and then restrain him subtly.
And know that the breakage that occurs by rotation, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary to put them back together now, so that warm abscesses may come;
and if warm abscesses come, then let him rest a day or two until the abscess is appeased; then set him back together so that he can move lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations of those who have fragments; then restrain him, as is necessary later.
And if the bone has broken pieces, and two parts are separated, whether it be in arm or leg, or that it is one of small members, or two strings, or one string and your hand;
and set the member in its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are dislocated, then reset by all means the additions in their place with your hand, and take care that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
and join well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel with your hand if it seems to you that he is not well: so adjust him nicely, and do not strain him too much, nor press as those who bring forth by their work warm abscess and contraction to the member, as we have often wanted.
And when the member is in place, so chastise the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it must be set in such a condition that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it must be set in such a condition that he feels no pain; and take care that it is set correctly, so that twisting does not come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I am telling you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: so it is necessary to envelop them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
and those that are big, such as thighs and legs: so it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and strong linen, for the wide linens encompass all the great member and restrain it from all parts equally, so that there is no gap.
then tie around with light cloths, three or four turns according to the member, and restrain your hand slightly on all the linen, then go up above the breakage and restrain less, so that the breakage will move away a bit.
and soften the linen a little and a little, until you take up a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another linen and turn it around again on top of the broken bone;
then go back to the part below the breakage, and restrain moderately, neither too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
then put between the linens and cloths, so that it is all even, then tie everything together with one bandage, and then put your well-made bandages on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing for the warm abscess, and which removes the swelling, and let it be like that for some days.
then restrain on your bandages, and be of the thickness of half a well-filled cane, or of gut which is used to make buttons, or of palm leaf fibers, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the bandage which one puts on the breakage be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and be as long as it is necessary for the member, whether small or great.
then hold it above the stars just as you did at the first touch, then lay it above a thread in harmony, just as you did at the first touch above the bridle.
the tighter it is in this case, the looser; and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
for if the thread is thick, like I have seen in the works of fools who make their own strings from twisted linen cord, and it's a great error, because the string cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it's not necessary that there should be less than two fingers' width between each star.
And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the stars after the stretching in their own flesh, then he puts under them poultices made of linen or ragged wool, so that he does not injure himself.
When the wound is with the bridle, and the bowstring is broken, I will say how to treat it hereafter.
And know that it's not necessary to stretch all the members on the first day of a broken bone. For when the members are large, it's not necessary to put stars on them except after five or six days, or more according to the safety of abscesses that often happen.
and behold the manner of ancient poultices to restore breaks, dislocations, and torsions: it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common manner of the poultice restoring breaks in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of poultice restoring breaks and dislocations and torsions: take aloes, ladanium, and myrrh, and asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mugwort, each 20 times; and mirre and aloe, each 5 times; and alechil 9 times; and make powder, and mix it with an abundance of eggs; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is valuable to many men.
Another manner of poultice that is valuable for torsion: take mugwort and visnag, each 20 times; mirre and aloe, each 8 times; asafoetida 6 times; Armenian balm 10 times, and pound well, and mix with water or an abundance of eggs, and administer it.
Another manner of poultice for joints and bones that have come out of their places, and calms the pain that follows, and helps to use the bone, and bridle: take new wool, and soak it in ale and cooked oil, and put it on the joint. This poultice does not restore, but it is good for calming a hot abscess, and properly removes pains.
Another manner of poultice that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig and leaves of terrestrial sycamore, and pound them together, and make a poultice.
Another manner of poultice for the restoration of bone breaks and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of visnag, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of vine, each one part; and pound, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another manner of poultice even stronger than the first, when abscesses that are hard to break come to restore the member. Take roots of visnag, and flaxseed, balm, melilot, and sansuc, and flowers of violets and camomile, each one part; and pound, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it except with a wax and oil ointment, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it, things that are slightly warm and dry, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of poultice that is valuable for wound and pain: take mugwort and human hair or bird quill, and visnag, and equal amounts, and pound them together, and make a poultice and the bandage.
And then loosen the bandage a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, do not loosen the bandage for many days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, you hasten and loosen the bandage, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge it into water, and lift up the place until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind with a cloth, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member subside, and be removed the pain, then resume the subtle binding and a little poultice, and do not strain it too hard as before; and bind subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling have disappeared from all of it, and you need poultice and binding again, then start again, just as you did first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not loosen it more than after three days or four days or five days or six days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the breakage sets in and approaches the union with flesh.
Then hold the member more tightly than before, and let its flesh grow fat, as I said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that there will be no nourishment for it. Then wash the place with hot water daily, every time you loosen it, and gently ease out a little of the binding.
By this work, then, the nourishment is cut off from the member, and hasten to do what fools' physicians do, which leaves the member twisted: that's bad, and it's painful work, and I see nothing else but tiring and working improperly.
of diverse methods of breaking Many methods of breakings are, and diverse forms, and the causes are assigned;
for there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the arm breaks off all the bone just up to the joint that is under the bone, as happens with an axe or a fist; and therefore this manner of breaking is called "hachure".
Or the sword cuts through the bone above, without piercing, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wounds from these two breakings are great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or splitting or breaking of the arm or leg bone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persevering break, which approaches just to the skin that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is opened in the bone as thin as a hair, and it is a small splitting, and therefore this breaking is called "capillary";
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone or by falling or by similar thing, and causes the bone piece to enter downward, and it is like when blacksmiths heat metal on their forges; so the stone enters inside.
And this happens more often with those who have soft bones, such as the head of an infant;
and this happens in all these manners of breaking where small pieces are broken off so that they are like that; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all manners of breakings by the stripping above them, and the probing that is attempted, and by the flesh that is corrupted which is on.
The capillary appearance is known by this: when the bone is uncovered and one rubs it gently above, then the black break appears.
In the treatment of the break, take note of the patient's accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and swelling, and numbness, and fever, and the eyes to issue forth and redden, and other similar things in more than one disposition, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you see no unbelievable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the skin under the bone be corrupted and the accidents that we have said come.
And if the break of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus: and it is that you take hold of the patient's head wounded, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and above the wound as gently as you can.
and if the evacuation of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess opens up, then bring forth the aid that is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased and you are assured of the evacuation of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two manners of work: one manner is that you cut in a narrow strip before, and this is the form:
And then put one other cutting, larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have multiple cuttings of diverse sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron indeed; and work lightly, lest you wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer cuttings with tarers, not too deep lest they penetrate outside the bone of the skull, and there should be above the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each comes into its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have tarers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tarers:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one tarer on the bone and turn it to your hand as much as you know the bone is pierced; then place the tarer in another part a little bit afterwards, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertubations, and make it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the joint.
And when you have pierced and cleaned the bone, it is necessary that you remove the roughness that remains from the bone to every other instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more slender and subtler than the other incisor.
and if there is nothing left of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; and then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And another manner of work is that which the Gauls say, which is more wholesome; and it is very strong, and this is their saying. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears most, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place underneath the head of this lenticular incisor, which has the form:
And do not cut from one side only, and the part is ague on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you cut lightly all around the bone, and take good care of the skin that is underneath.
if it is attached to the bone, then remove it lightly, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
And if the break of the bone does not reach to the skin, and the bone is cut so that it is only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to take away the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have in various quantities, in order to administer the most suitable thing in each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
So that you take away first with coarse scrapers, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease to do so until it is well.
In each of the other hair-cutting and breaking subtleties, it is necessary to bring about a cause according to its direction; and this is not answered by he who has set his study in this art.
And if the scab is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to trouble the scab, then minister above one other linen, and do not strain it too much except until it covers only the wound.
and leave it thus for one day or two days, until the abscess is pacified, then loosen it, and minister medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and minister afterwards medicines without mastication.
and take care that the wound is soon clean, so you do not leave any ointment, nor allow it to assemble again, for when bowels assemble above the skin of the brain, they will corrupt and putrid, and bring great harm to the patient; for when something biting is put on the scab, it will necrotize above.
Take heed then, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if no worse comes to pass except from the medicine you have put on, and that virtue has, then it is necessary that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and mix them with one cloth, and put it on the scab. then complete the treatment in the ways of treatments that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two bones above are broken, or one against another alone, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, except it bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you insert your little finger or probe into the bone, and put this breakage into your finger's indication, and push gently by degrees, until the bone returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the bone, and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the top of a rod about a foot long.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it similarly, and try to restore it as much as possible on the first day, if you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is pacified, then probe at the top of the bone with cloths of linen, if the break is in one part.
Or you probe another part on the other side, if there is a break there; and let the probes be so big that they fill the cavities of the bone.
And some restorers say that the probes should be moistened in butter, and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is well, but it is necessary that they are moistened in the concoction of almond oil, and flour powder; then leave the probe until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one probes the bone with goose feathers instead of cloths, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and the break holds, and the patient breathes through it; then do as you see.
And if the abscess comes to the bone while you are working on it, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a little pot of aquilong.
And if the abscess does not come, then apply an ointment by degrees, made from vetch flour and incense powder, concocted with almond oil, and put it on light poultices, and do not bind the bone.
and if the break in the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then bring it to suitable instruments for this purpose, then close the gap, and the cure of things that are torn apart and joined together, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this.
and if there is no wound inside the bone, then the cure of cloths, and put strips of linen on it, until he is healed.
of the jawbone fracture
When the jawbone is broken below, and there is no wound ahead, and the break is above only, and is not broken in two, except for small cracks inside, then one can recognize it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right side of the jawbone, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left side of the jawbone, then insert your index finger from the right hand, and probe the break lightly, and adjust it to the other hand by degrees, and put it equal.
And if the break of the jawbone is split into two, then it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it becomes equal.
And if the teeth move or are broken, then stretch them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put a cerate on the broken jawbone, and put a double cloth on it; and put a great well-made strap or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jawbone, and tie it as tight as you can, and tell the patient to rest, and feed him light foods.
And if you see that the figure is changing, then remove it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and put an ointment on it, made from flour powder with almond oil or vetch flour, after you have removed the cerate; and put a light linen cloth on it, and if the ointments are hardening, and the patient's disposition is not changing, leave it alone until he is healed; many times it heals in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, then take care that no piece of bone is removed; if necessary, remove it with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, then it is widened by fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, then apply the wound, if it is wide, and put on one of those plasters that are suitable for this, in order to prevent flesh, until he is healed.
of the forceps The forceps breaks more often in front of the shoulder, and the breakage is so according to three manners: or it is broken and separated into two, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a breakage with a wound.
And the work is such when the breakage is without wound, that you should have two ministers, one of whom holds the assistant that feels the forceps broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then put the breakage in your hands, so that it forms as it should be, and there be neither appearance nor wavering.
And if you need to stretch further, then place under the shoulder of the patient a rounded spear of cloth or linen, and make it thick according to your need; and straighten and lift the forceps, and hold the spear in your hand, so that you put the breakage in its proper place.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps forward because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lies somewhat on his hatred, and places under the shoulder one middle pillow, and has the ministers lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forceps is lifted.
And then direct the breakage to your hands, and if you find it debris-like, then it is necessary that you cut into it; and draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then cut with one of the instruments you have; but put under the forceps this instrument, in order to guard the socket.
and resemble a spoon, and is not at all crooked, and be just as wide as it seems to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, such as is the shape of the wound that you made when you handled the bones.
and when you are certain of hot abscess, then dress the wound, and if the shape is small, or you doubt it is hot, then apply the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
And if cold abscess comes, then soak one cloth in rose oil, and in vinegar, and in oil, and put it on.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you apply powder from the mill and egg white to the bone, and put on light stoppers, and place a spear under the elbow, if you need it. Then take a very great band of palm size wide, then put one double cloth on the stoppers and the dressing; then take a subtle steel three fingers long and wide, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is suspended. and put the steel on the breakage, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy arm, and under the sick arm; and wrap each part separately, and when you see that the bond holds the breakage properly, and you clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the bond loosens, then restrain it.
and make the patient sit on his back, and put a small pillow under the elbow, so that it will lift the assistant high; thus, the breakage of the forceps will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you will tie the arm to the neck, and only untie it if bad accidents do not occur, until 20 days.
then reapply the dressing if you see that it is needed, and tighten and loosen it thus, until he is restored; and she is usually restored in 28 days, and sometimes in less time for some people.
of the breakage of the shoulder
It often happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes separated from its place, and it is not known to be inflamed except by touch; then prepare according to the figure of the breakage, and set it right according to its natural shape, in all ways you can; then put powder of the mill with egg white on the separated piece, and light stoppers, and a double cloth on top; then place a large and subtle steel, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is any roughness under the steel anywhere on the shoulder, use those rough spots to tie it with linen bandages, so that the steel stays in its place; and then bind it tightly with a great bandage, so that the steel does not move from its place, and check the bond each day; and every time it becomes loosened, bind it again, and put the same steel on if it gets out of place, and make the patient lie down on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, then release it, and be sure, for it is not the bone that becomes loose quickly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes before and points under the key, then make sure it is secured, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breakage of the forceps to calm hot abscess.
of the breakage of the breast
The breast is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the back. And when it is broken in the middle, then it declines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks ease, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and shows the roughness on the broken bone, and it seems to be quite open.
And the restoration is that the patient lies somewhat on their back, and places a pillow between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of both sides to your hands, and does so in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then applies dressings and stoppers above the subtle steel of salt or other light material, and wraps it in a cloth, and binds it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the bond back around to the back, and tightens it properly, and rewards each hour the bond, and if it loosens, then tightens it again; and if it becomes necessary to release it for corrosion or itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hasten and release it, and remove the dressing, and addresses what has come to be done in ways of cures; then rewrap the dressing, and tighten it until they are well.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs does not occur except in large men after the back and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are flabby; and one knows this by examination of the back.
And the restoration is that you set the break even as it should be. And then apply an ointment and strain it with a steel tool if you need to.
And if the breaking of ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, just like pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and he will bleed at the points, vomit and spit up a great deal of blood, and this is grievous sickness, and the ancients have put great ingenuity.
And if some say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, in order to push the break away from within.
We do not do this unless hot abscesses come there, if it is necessary. And if it has come, then let it heal.
And some of us say that one should apply poultices on the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the poultice will draw away the superfluities from the place due to the weakness of the flesh.
And some of us say that one should cover the place with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to set the flesh even around it, then be cured with the cure of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone which pierces the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to incise above the place on the broken ribcage, and a tool should be placed underneath to ward off the pus; and then one must cut the bone and pull it slightly, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if they are large, and cure with ointments until he is healed. And if hot abscesses come, then apply moist cloths in rose oil on top of the place; and treat the place as needed for the abscess, and be cautious above the ribcage where it should be, until he is healed.
of the breaking of the neck
Sometimes comes a break to the bone of the neck, and it bends; and also to the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one constrains and pricks them, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if care is taken.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on top of the back there is ventosity and egestion without volition; and when one has soothed him on his stomach, there is egestion without volition. And when he is soothed on his back and he wishes to ease himself, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in their cure.
And if this accident does not occur, then the thing is more gentle.
And the cure is that you apply if there is hot abscess, then put oil of rose or oil of egg white on the spine, until it is pacified; then put a soothing and drying ointment on it, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until he is healed. And if some bones are dislocated, then it is necessary to cover with a poultice; and extract the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then cure with an ointment releasing fat, until he is healed; and if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the "joint of the knee", if there is one dislocated bone, take your pouch from your left hand, and place it even with your other hand at your power, then apply the ointment and steel tool on top, if you need to; then pull it out, and if there are dislocated bones, do so, extract the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the hip bone
It often happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, then there is hardly any diminution at the top; and it becomes long, and declines to the backside, and comes to the patient with pain at the place, and piercing, and swelling of what breaks.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand up to it, until you are above the breakage; and know what the breakage is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the top, then set that breakage straight, until it is in natural figure.
And if the breakage is of the length, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that breakage becomes apparent. And when you have set it straight, then apply an ointment, and place a wooden or horn tool on top, and strain the breakage so that it does not move; and fill in the place below the ribs, until the flesh is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if hot abscesses come, do not touch it, until the hot abscess is pacified, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and strain it as it should be, if there is no other bad accident; and that is the manner.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is what is between the neck and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two manners: of which one is that you take a piece of straight wood, full of medium growth, in this shape:
And tie the two pieces with two straps, and bend them upwards, and lift the patient onto a seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it comes into place, and has about halfway a curvature of wood, then bend on some heavy thing or have the attendants stretch it downwards; then place the mirror alongside the breakage, so that the breakage returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one swaddles the patient on his hatereil, and binds the hand to his neck, then commands two attendants to have one hold what is above the bridle strap in their hands, and the other hold below each link, and each stretches to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold one link below the bridle strap and above the bridle strap, and each attendant stretches to their part. And if the bridle strap is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one link halfway under the armpit, and another towards the back, under the bridle strap; and similarly if the bridle strap is on the back, then it is necessary to put one link slightly, without labor, until the bridle strap is even above its place and above the back; then put the bridle strap in place, as is necessary, and hold it, so that abscesses do not come there.
And if abscesses do come there, then do not hold it at all for seven days, and put a soft cloth soaked in oil of roses on the bridle strap, until the abscess is appeased; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you put an ointment on the bridle strap, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and wrap a cloth around it, and hold on to the shoulder and on to the arm, so that the arm be in its natural position, without any hindrance or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put on the bridle strap a larger and stronger splint than the others, with one or two spaces between each splint, and have each splint be so large that it passes the bridle strap three inches from each side; then hold on to the splints, in the manner I said at the beginning of this chapter on the bridle strap, more strongly and less moving away.
And if you see the setting of the splints and the binding, as we said, in the case where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it tied for seven days, as we said; then look at each three days to see if there is no itching or swelling that comes to the place, or if numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If this happens, do what we said.
And if no such accidents come to pass, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and put a soft linen cloth under the armpit, and watch each hour of the day or night to see that the shape of the broken member does not move or become loosened; if it is so, then address it through the power of medicine, and give him food as we have previously mentioned, in such a manner that the food be for the subtlest substances; and when he begins to recover, let it be substantial. And it is customary that the armpit and leg should be rewrapped after forty days from the start; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medicines of ointments to address the place. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, then wait a day or two before loosening.
I apologize for not catching that earlier! It seems like this is just a heading or title for the section, indicating that the text is discussing the topic of "the breakage of the arm". If you'd like to proceed with translating the rest of the text, I'd be happy to help!
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fascicles", of which one is small, and that is the one that follows the pouch; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little toe; sometimes only the large fascicle breaks, or the small one, or both together.
When the small fascicle is broken, the restoration and healing are light; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it is the small fascicle that is broken alone, then it needs to be slightly stretched out and put back in place.
And if it is the large fascicle, then it needs to be held more firmly; and stretch it out on a cloth, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the other fingers, and the little toes lower than the other toes, so that the patient is crossed over himself, with one cloth in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then have the attendants stretch the arm to the part below his hand, or to a link, and another attendant to another above. And then put it back into its equal shape, according to its best form.
And if in the break there are pieces, then put each one back into its place; and if there is none that is loose and can be pulled out, but you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint with wood or bone, as we said before.
And if the break has a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses arise, then apply a cloth made from rosed oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and bind the cloth gently above, until the hot abscesses are appeased. And then remove the cerote, and put an ointment made with flour of the mill and egg yolk on it; then apply splints, and have the splint of the breakage be a little stronger and slightly wider than the others; and know that there should be 5-6 splints or more, depending on the position: whether the break is in one bone or two; and bind more above the break than elsewhere, and always less moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the break be soft and moist, not hard or dry; and let the thread with which it is bound be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the link after some days. And if some bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water, until those itchings are appeased; and let the member not be too tightly wrapped or pressed. And then begin the binding again, and if the bandage is worn out and the bone is loose, and similar things, then address them.
And if you take note that swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little bit, and let it be like that for some days, until the swelling comes forth, and then bind it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then loosen them just up to 20 days or around that time, then tie their hands behind their back and let their necks be equal; and beware of movement and disorder, and sleep on their back; and know that this bruising is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand.
Know that on the back of the hand and in the wrists it often happens that breaks occur, and there is no other reason for it but that it pleases many times.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sit crossed and sit straight in front of him evenly; then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and stretch out the broken bones, and set them equal with the mirror, as long as they are well joined; and apply the poultice and bandages if abscesses do not come forth, then put a splint according to the quantity of the part; and be enveloped in one linen drap.
And if the breaking is on the side around the belly of the finger, then make a bundle of cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it tightly around his broken finger; and then stretch it with a long cloth, and be the splint as soft as the flesh of the hand, and strain it, as it is necessary.
And if the breaking is on the outside, then it is necessary that you put a splint above and another below in the finger, so that the hand be open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the swelling between the fingers.
And if the breaking comes to any of our fingers, whether it is the thumb or one of the others, such as the index finger, then set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie them all together in a bundle, whichever seems better, or place a small straight splint on top, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and treat what comes forth, as I have said.
Of the broken toe.
The bone of the toe is often broken, and it can be seen clearly when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is to tie one bandage above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then stretches each of their bandages to their part evenly; and it is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the toe, then one bandage should be towards the knuckle, and the other bandages below the break. And also if it is near the knee, and then place the bandages beneath the knee, and stretch down; then set the bone equal to its natural shape with both hands, as long as it is according to its figure, and then apply the poultice, and bind it, if abscesses do not come forth.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it cool down and return to your work and care; the bandage is made in the same manner. It is necessary that you envelop the break with one bandage of doubled fabric in two or three layers, and let any excess material remain; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the ankle, and tie a long thread between the toe and the leg, beneath the knee, and let the ends of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and toe the bandage, and place splints on the break, and put one splint above the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and toe with soft cloths to keep the binding even; then begin to bind tightly three or four turns around the break; and as you go higher up the break, and less tight; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and toe, and tie three splints above, then return down to the bottom at the head of the thread, until you come beneath the foot; and strain it so it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, unless there comes abscess or swelling or any other similar thing.
And if it happens, then loosen it, and address what comes forth, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then it is necessary to wash them, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut the flesh, and pull forward; and care for it as we have said, until it is healed.
And at no time is the toe broken so that splints are put on it, as in the arm and shoulder; although, in this restoration made, it does not harm the patient.
And know that the toe is restored in 10 days, or a little less or more, according to the various complexities.
Of the swelling of the knee.
Know that in the swelling of the knee there is often a breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is only a slight fissure or a puncture, and has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and this is well known.
And the restoration is to put back together what is torn at its joints, as long as it can be assembled; then apply the poultice, and place a rounded splint if you need one, and strain it as it needs to be strained, then restore all the dispositions that we have said in other breaks, whether hot abscess or any similar thing; and put each accident in its proper place, until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "tibia" and the other is called "femur"; and it has all other kinds of breaks as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is complete.
And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg in all directions.
And if the small bone is broken, then turn forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and it can be seen well; and turn below. Then apply extension, and set it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it is necessary if the break is ugly and there are many pieces that the extension be smaller and more gentle; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d'une part et d'autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;
of the breaking of bones in the foot
of the foot does not come from breaking, but sometimes bones of the foot break and you must take care, and there is no more than a quarter in more or less conditions.
And if there is breaking of bones in the foot, and you see these bones mounting one upon another, then set the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and then put your foot now on their shoe, where the bones are lifted up, and press them so that they return to their places; then apply the plaster and bandages, and under the foot of the foot a small tablet at two full feet, then bind it to the foot properly, then that you have wrapped drapes around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days are passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, then set them right again, as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a splint according to its length, and be one pace wider, then put beneath the foot that tablet which I have said, and bind it properly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each toe a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the tablet beneath the foot; and let it be so that the tablet protrudes above the vent of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things that I have said about other breakages, since we have said them; and comfort each accident according to what is necessary.
of the breaking of the bone in the wrist
When the bone of a woman's natural shape is broken, then make her sit upright, and then incline her to the part of the back, and be held by the rear; then fill the ball with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then lift up the woman, and gently lift up the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or around: the breakage will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie it to the pertus with a cord, and fill the whole bladder into the nature; then blow strongly on the cord until the bladder is emptied inside: the nature will return to the breakage; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, then set it right again as we have said for the hand; and these breakages are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into it and intends my book. For the breakage signifies in many dispositions the right path of restoration: heed this therefore.
In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and put it in the thigh; then wrap drapes around and leave it for three days or so around, and it will be healed quickly.
of breaking with wound
It is necessary for him who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great or small, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he should be healed now, and the healings which we have said bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then apply vinegar, if you have no other remedy; and begin to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, lest suppurations do not come.
And if suppurations come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the suppurations are calmed down, and do not touch it on the third or quarter day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the surface uncovered, it is necessary that you set it at a slight angle with your hands, to a small extension.
And if the extension is not suitable for you to set it at an equal distance with your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the mire to take three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of breakage; and be strong and a little thick, so that it does not bend at all under compression on the member at your work, and be straight ahead, and thick from about halfway forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", therefore it is necessary that the curved fingers be placed on top of the apparent bone; and fill it once, until it returns, and be even one against the other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you shape the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then shape it with a suitable instrument, such as a chisel or saw, to your ability; and then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small scrapings.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So make sure it is in its place, then soak a cloth in black stiptic wine and properly apply it; and do not put grease or any other ointment on the wound unless it has oil, lest you bring forth putrefaction and corruption; then administer poultices when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and shape the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; and many times this has been done by foolish practitioners, and they have brought upon the patient death or corruption at times; and let the straining be softer and more gentle than for other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that some evil accident may come, as we have said, and you find pain at the spot, then do not put poultices on it; but wrap around, instead of poultices, hard cloths and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days a boil forming on the wound, then remove what you have put on top with all wine, and apply healing ointment to plaques, such as tetrafarmaceutical ointment and similar.
And it is necessary that you remove the splint twice a day, morning and evening, until the member is firmly set and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bowstring goes down lightly.
And if they cross over several days and it cannot be mended but returns to its bow shape, know that there are small pieces of bone, therefore you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these dislocated pieces which bring about that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the bone, or another manner of corruption, then you must heal it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar ones of the great members, do not pull it out, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it produces pus; by chance it may fall out after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then let it be.
of boils that come on the sores
We often see many times after the healing of a boil, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the member; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take heed then if it is fresh: if you administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, acai, and similar others, in the way that you take some of these things or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or with abundant egg white or with oil; and put it on the joint in a poultice, and bind it well, and do not loosen it for at least three days; then release it, and start another one until the swelling is gone; or you strain it onto a piece of linen well made; for the properties of linen are such that they remove all swellings from the members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut it open above, and make the superfluity apparent; or you give it to any surgeon until it is gone, and cure it as long as it remains unwell.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after the member weak and subtle, this occurs for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and it could not come to the natural nourishment of the member; or due to excessive inflammation; or due to very great movements, nor at its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make their body tender, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths, and give them joy and relaxation; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to great nourishment, and the inflammation often goes away with cold water, until the nourishment comes to the member; and revive it to its natural figure.
of the crooked member after healing
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, although it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say one should break the member anew, and many foolish surgeons have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come, and by chance death ensues; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then it is necessary that they be eased with hot water, or herbs that soften, such as leaves of violets, roots, and mallow, and similar things; and make a soft plaster, such as diacodium well made, and take the pulp of violets, and mix it with goose fat or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or take fatty figs, and grind them with hemp seed, and similar medicines that ease the swelling.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by constant and continuous friction with moist hands. And gentle movements should be made to the member every hour.
And if the twisting is hardened and durified like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then it is necessary to cut it all the way to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put attention and study into the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When a dislocation comes to anyone, then it is necessary immediately to put it back in place.
For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and by chance it may be reset with pain at the joint; therefore it is not necessary to move it to the point where it is swollen: many times this brings on shame and other pains;
However, when this happens, make the patient sicker, then leave it alone until the abscess has subsided; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then reset it slightly, and care for each member as the treatment comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
of the jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are a little moved from their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held, nor can one close one's mouth, and envelops one's tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in a few days.
And if it is complete and fully developed, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and put the mirror's pouch into one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other two hands be free to make equal; and command the patient to relax, his jawbones, and move them in all directions.
And the attendant puts it back into place, until it returns to its natural position.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jawbones are together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until they are reset slightly; nor delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset in place, and the patient's mouth closes well without any softening, then put wet cloths on top made of oil rosins and wax, and then bind it lightly with moist threads.
et the patient sleeps on his back, and his legs are between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he make any effort to ease himself, but takes light food, until the pains are gone, and the jawbones are loosened;
and then he eats and drinks lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth until the jawbone is well loosened and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their proper position, then fevers and usual habits come, and by chance, dissolution of the belly, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a deadly sign; and many times the person in whom it occurs dies within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the chest downward in its continuity and from the breastbone, and is dislocated sometimes forward, and it can be felt well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and stretches out his arms; then he presses the joint firmly with his palm, and it will return; then he applies the poultice and wraps it with a bandage, and holds it.
and the shoulder that is on the side of the back cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it does dislocate at some time, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the poultice and wrap it with a bandage, and hold it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and thus also is brought back the shoulder of the hip when it is dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one way is when it dislocates at the part of the armpit below; and the second way is at the part of the breastbone; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and more often dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for they jump forward hastily; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps away, and returns away.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or breaking, and the shoulder becomes swollen with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the armpit, and makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit at the point where the top of the shoulder touches it, just as if it were an ox; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move with any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you can find it manifestly at the point of contact.
and this manner of dislocation is not to be undone when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts his fingers below the armpit, and lifts the jointure forcefully up high to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it up high, then puts it back down; so it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within three days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the minister should gently soothe and calm him, just like a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and should administer it.
then the patient should be placed on his back, and a woolen pad of equal thickness, not too soft nor too hard, should be put below the armpit; then the assistant should place their foot on the pad, and lift the top of the shoulder virtuously, and draw the patient's hand.
and another assistant should hold the patient's head, so that it does not move down; then this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that he is reset in this manner:
and it is that you make someone who is taller than the patient to be present; and stand straight against the side, and put their shoulder below the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another assistant should pull the patient's hand down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then let him hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And it is reset in another manner: and it is that you put a long iron rod into the earth, so that the shoulder is as deep as a pistol, and not too thick nor too thin; then be placed below the patient, but so that it has a soft cloth on top, and the patient is standing with the end of the wood; then stretch his hand down from the other side forcefully, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod of two arms long and three feet wide, which has the head rounded so as to fit easily into the depth below the armpit, according to this shape:
then tie a soft cloth on top of the wooden rod, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it below the patient's armpit; and stretch one arm over the long rod, and tie the assistant to the rod, and hold the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm on a shoulder of an eschillon of a wide scale, and let the hands go down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is so, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that you put below the armpit a woolen sphere of equal thickness, then apply the poultice adorned with powder from the mill, with incense and white of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then hold it below the armpit comfortably, and turn the strap over the poultice, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he eat little, until the members are comforted, for he will heal sooner; and then eat more after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated from its place due to moisture that has come in, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you apply cauterizations at three points, as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and it relapses after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or relaxed; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast, or the shoulders, or the back, is caused by pushing and stretching with one's hands, and another type of treatment should be administered; and care for it until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes swelling in the member and tardiness of movement, then instruct the patient to take baths many times until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its natural state.
of the dislocation of the hip
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and it has become dislocated in all its parts, both before and behind, and the dislocation is not restored, because one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocate accordingly according to each figure. And when you join the sick hip with the healthy one, then it can be seen openly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as apostemes begin to form there, for if apostemes began to form there, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully restored, especially when it occurs at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and brings greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
And the restoration is such that when it can be restored, you stretch her hand to your two hands; and her arms should be spread out, and the hands of the patient according to the hip, around, above, and below, and bind the joint together with its ligaments, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when she doubles her hand on her hand, and binds the hip that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and know that two people should stretch the arm, and hold it steady with two people, so that it does not move at all during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double-layered cloth long and wide.
and when the patient has joined the joint to her hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and bind the joint firmly until it returns.
and when it is at the place, then put on a dry poultice with some egg white, and strain it firmly, and tie the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for several days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then reapply the poultice and the bandage, and leave it thus for several days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if it feels swelling after the setting of the joint, and it becomes inflamed, then bathe it and rub it gently, and press until it is relieved; or you put a sheep's fat poultice on the joint, and leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter the bath. and when it sweats, then gently rub the joint, and put the poultice back on, and then enter the bath; and do so two or three times, until it is healed; and if you see, then put a moist warm flaxseed with butter on top, and apply it; it will return to its natural state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand becomes dislocated, and the return is gentle, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place hastily, in the same moment that it is dislocated, before the swelling appears or an abscess forms hotly.
And the restoration is that you place the sick hand on a board, and stretch out your assistants' hands, and have them put their palm even with the appearance of the joint, and bind it until it returns.
Furthermore, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well at the place; then have the patient put the back of their hand on a board for extension and restoration. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient put their back of hand on the board, and your assistant put their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's good.
If not, then apply soothing poultices to calm the hot abscesses, and leave it thus without reapplying.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted.
and nothing is wrong with the patient except that his hands are relaxed, and he cannot exert any effort at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; and there is no other remedy worse than to strain by means of cauterization in this case, and perhaps it is not worth anything.
And when the hand is back in place, then put on the poultice that we have said, and strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then soak it in hot water, and rub it gently until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on one side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the belly.
Then stretch the finger, and bind the dislocation to your fingers until it returns, then support the tip of the finger, and guide it towards the part where it was separated.
and leave it for two days, and then put it back in place that day; and bind the joint with a linen cloth, as we have said, and release it each day, and make it move, and bind the joint again with a linen cloth; and do this often until it is straight.
and do the same thing if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same thing when it is dislocated on the other side.
Loosening of the spine's vertebrae
When the spine's vertebra or the neck is loosened, or there are several loosened, if there is no treatment, for the patient dies quickly.
And the signs are that the eliminations jump forth without will, nor can they hold it, and many times are softened any member, or both knees or two arms or one.
And many times the spine is twisted into four parts; that which twists at the back is called "humpback".
The treatment is to strengthen if the humpback has come from childhood; otherwise, there will be no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old ways of cures by great words, where there is no great benefit in all.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the humpback that comes forward at the chest, there is neither intelligence nor health;
and also that which comes straight in both sides, and one cannot cure it except by that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in one place even, and have someone press down under him, so he does not get hurt;
then insert one hot iron at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a cloth under the patient's armpits, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers know the cloths, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two hot irons;
and be well closed, the iron as we have said, and the physician put his palms on the spine firmly, until it becomes straight again.
And if it does not become straight by this treatment, then take a board three arm-lengths long and hollow out the bottom, and the patient should be on one side, and place the head of the board under the appearance, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the physician's feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it becomes straight again; and if you see, then do so with the turning stick that turns in one's hand.
And it is that you insert two irons at the head of the patient's arm, and on the feet two others, and have between each iron, above and below, a palm's width apart.
and have in each iron one hole, where the turning stick runs, and let the irons be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two irons is a turning iron, above which the cloth turns, and on each of the two turning ones are two small irons a palm's width long, to turn the turning stick.
and then tie the cloth that is between the armpits to the turning stick at the head, and the other cloth to the feet at the other turning stick, and each of the ministers turns his turning stick all along the cloth, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is straight, then place on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg white, and then bind with cloth, and then apply a poultice from a three-fingered piece of linen that will strengthen the vertebrae and the part of the spine to be healed, then tie with a cloth, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until he is well.
and if nothing comes at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medications with the poultice that we have said before; and sometimes one must administer a piece of gelly.
and sometimes there appears in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have presumption: by chance death might come.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come from anything other than dislocation alone, nor does it come like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is loosened according to three parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more loose inside and less so in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the afflicted leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the afflicted patient's knee appears more swollen than the healthy one, and the afflicted patient cannot double his knee over the fire. and it is the place that is below the swelling of an abscess hot, because the head of the knee joint comes loose.
And the sign of the one to whom it occurs at the front is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of the one to whom it occurs at the front is that his leg is well according to its completion; although he does not double his knee without pain, and if someone tries to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and holds back his urine, and swells with anger, and when he walks, it passes above the ankle.
And the sign of the one to whom it occurs at the back is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head of the knee joint is at the level below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you strengthen if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its condition, if there is no cure; and it is not necessary that he have presumption.
And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of the three ways of dislocation, then hasten that you turn the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you appear one strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one cloth tied on the knee. and the other minister stretches his hand above in this manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens it with a soft cloth on the knee; and another ties the head of the cloth.
and they all stretch up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to three similar things, and if the dislocation has been restored, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its kind. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should instruct the patient to place their hand on their good side, then put the bandage on the root of the hipbone, and the part that is below the armpit, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the armpit and towards the forearm.
Then take another assistant's arms, and encircle the thick part of the sick hipbone, and stretch it out far enough: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is more gentle than others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two legs of the patient together with a soft bandage at the two heels, and at the two knees, and let the sick leg be stretched one doight more than the others.
Then let it be hung from a beam, and be suspended above the ground two arms long; then instruct one assistant to encircle the head of the hipbone, and have another assistant hanging with the patient, who encircles the hipbone firmly, for the joints return now quickly.
And when the dislocation is far away, let the patient lie down as we have said in the one who has gilbositee, and stretch one bandage properly on the sick leg, and also on the thigh.
Then put two spits, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one spit between the patient's hips in the shape. and have wet cloths planted around, so that the patient is not hurt, then stretch each assistant towards him, and the physician put equal to their hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put it on the table and press it thus as we have said in gilbositee, and let the patient lie down on their good side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and put the physician's hand on the armpit of the sick hipbone, then press with the other hand, and let it stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in back, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards, nor lift up towards the earth, rather it should be as if the backbone were dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two haunches. and be on their face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and must not press on the joint at the table.
and will be correct when the patient stretches their legs and they will be equal; then adjust the hips, and put an embalming, and strain with a bandage, so that the backbone does not move.
and if they rest three days or four, then unbind it, and put the embalming on; and if you see that they are equal, stretch as before, and let it stay. Three days; then unbind it, and make it walk peacefully, until the members are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and backward, and behind; and does not become dislocated forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their hipbone, and if it does not come back to its hipbone, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and put your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take their knee with your hands and bring it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another assistant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it comes back to its hipbone slightly.
and put the plaster on, and make their leg return to its hipbone, and bind them together firmly for three days or four, then unbind it; and do not trouble the patient to walk, until their members are comforted.
And if the members are not straight, then administer stretching strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes strained and sometimes completely dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
the remedies are gentle, and one must stretch them gently with their hands when it is strained alone.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and have one assistant hold them firmly from above through the leg, on the ankle.
then draw the foot towards you to your right hand, and then to your left twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot gently upwards.
and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then begin again with the work, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on their back on the ground, and place one spit firmly in the earth between their hips, and tie cloths around, so that the patient is not hurt.
then take hold of the hipbone by one assistant, and have another assistant stretch out the foot to their hands or to a bandage, which they tie on the ankle of the foot. then stretch out each assistant equally, and the spits be placed between the patient's hips to hold the patient in place when one stretches.
then put the physician's hands equally on the dislocation, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, then put the plaster and poultices on, and strain firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bandage is not too tight.
then let it be for two days or three, and if the bandage has loosened, then stretch again; then unbind on the third day or fourth, and keep the patient from walking for four days. and if he goes before this term, it is not security that he will dislocate again.
And if an abscess forms there, you should calm it down, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
you must
When the tendons are dislocated, you should have them beautifully stretched without labor, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot or ankle, you should have the patient sit on one plain level or on six feet totally straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it recovers.
and when it is equal and there appears nothing, you put a board under the sole of the foot at two joints, then strain firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and make him rest until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times happen that the patient dies:
if you are not humble in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, rather than hasty;
and use at the beginning gentle and soothing things to abscesses that are hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset now the member to its place, so that the abscess that is hot may come.
and when the member is in place, then administer soothing things to hot abscesses, and treat the wound as it seems proper with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is fracture, and small bones are separated, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and take care to avoid entering a path of fear, as I have said, for this is worth moving you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of thy arm and thy body. Amen
