Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everywhere, thus the science has perished and decayed, and there remains nothing more of the foundations except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have changed. And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is set aside.
It seems to me that I should bring it to life together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall come together with the forms of remedies for cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands were found in our time, is the art of medicine elongated. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and of the moving and resting veins, and the origin of their issue.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the noun is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest they fall into error and kill men; thus I have wanted many times more than those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experiment.
Because I see a foolish doctor who cuts into the abscess of the scrophula or neck of a woman, and cuts into the arteries of the neck; for which so much blood issues out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large; if he removed it with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have seen that it was called for by the doctor, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they had removed it he would have died.
And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage there was a wound; and the doctor, ignorant of his craft, held the breakage on the wound as if by strong ligature, and did not leave it to heal properly, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be touched; and afterwards it became so that the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and release his leg; and when I saw it dislocated thus it was in a bad state and did not feel any pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was almost lost.
And I saw another wound that had swollen to an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not matter if one touches it with iron, unless it is in a place where one can thoroughly clean out what is corrupted.
And for this, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: it is to know whether there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you be on guard, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak evil of you.
Take your arms in consideration, and take hold of your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and let go of the diseases that bring grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish mirror."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the iron materials of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and includes the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and includes the forms of instruments.
Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid and the harm are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and from this speak the wisest men, and agree with them; and I suffer little from their words, for I reduce their length.
I say that fire cautery aids universally every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know hot complexions without matter, and dry complexions without matter.
In hot and dry complexions with matter, some said that fire cautery is of great aid; and others disagreed, saying that fire cautery is not effective for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Here is the translation: Because you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it many times through experience.
And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures and has greater goodness than medical burning cautery.
For fire is simple, and it does not come except to the member which is cooked, and does not harm another member if not named.
The burning medicines pass from one member to another in alleviating, and bring relief to the suffering member by healing the wound; and sometimes the patient is cured by chance.
The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I should reveal the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or you receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree at the time when the cauteries are to be made, and they select carefully.
And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the sudden injuries are often set right by the aid of cautery; and similarly, the cauteries are for necessary pains and hasten rather than wait for a longer time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think of it, dear son, as the foolish doctor; for in the disease that is healthy through cautery there is no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine which changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more than medicine by the haste of its value, and for the virtue of his work and sign.
And it is possible that the disease becomes worse at times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the excesses by the acquisition of food and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in a place where there is little excess and moisture, as cauteries dense for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but it happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered many ways of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works. Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of the foolish doctors.
The old ones said that cauterizing instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they didn't say this because of the quality of the gold and because of the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not make purification, but it's not true, for I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauterizing instruments of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they thus said.
And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has almost cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they make a fire; and thus there is enough of hindrance.
And for this reason we use iron cauterizing instruments that we have made suitable for our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter of the main joints just below, because it will be easier to find the way.
For the olive cautery
The cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there are two things that one does by reason of a disease called "soda", and by reason of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of multitude of dreams and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solutive medicine modifying the head, either 2 or 3 times, according to what the strength and age and custom of the patient can suffer; and then make the head of the patient clear.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and let the two moles come, if it bleeds from the gums, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", for this is its form.
And put the cautery on the affected place, signifying with ink, and make it descend and extend your hand slowly and steadily while turning; then lift your hand suddenly, and re-examine the place if you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread and wrap it in soft cotton inside, and put it on the affected place, and let it stay for three days; afterwards put a moist compress on top; and let it stay until the wound is clean; afterwards cure the wound of the injury called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
And thus said the old ones, that when you leave a wound open for too long, it purges more; and therefore it is of no help to you.
And some of these said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the opening is burned, and then reset on what is burned of the opening, and be cured.
And others said that one should leave the cautery so long on top, and press so hard that it draws out of the opening as widely as the veil that women put in their hair, because the humors issue forth badly; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew.
And these two manners of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and it seems to me that the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and mending for me, and that is why I use it sometimes in assembling health.
of the old pain of the head
When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, one should use the remedies of iris and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and applying plaster; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not worth it.
Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it not be too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little that we have said above.
Here is the translation:
for the fire of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and other cures are done that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit: then you do cauteries according to eight ways, that is to know medicine against the ague and fire.
The cauteries of medicine against the ague are that you take a dozen of ashes, and remove the bark and recook it; then make the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can replace the dozen of ashes under the skin; and when it will be replaced, bind it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then unbind it and apply fuers to the dozen of ash, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a cotton plug in burre so that it can suppurate.
After the treatment of anointing, until it is healthy; and if you see that it does not work with any of the combustive medicines that I have written or in the twelve treatises on combustive medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of the material which is its form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the thickness of the skin be burnt; and lift your hand so the artery does not become hard, which is defective, and decorates abundant blood.
Afterwards put cotton in the wound of the vein, and put it on the place for three days; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then cure the place of the ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and beware not to touch the artery in this emigration which is not ancient.
of the migration
Here is the translation:
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice against the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound at the top of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on extracting an artery, with the cautery that has .ij. burnings; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
from the pain of the ears caused by cold.
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form:
After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you elevate a little above the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the wound; and it has .x. points around each ear; after curing the wound until it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply fire cautery to similar things that come from dryness and numbness of nerves.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves with flux and evacuations of the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with .iii. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the .iii. lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery at the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the blood is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the similarity of the cutting that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cuts be a little larger; after curing the vein as I said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is an old condition and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then make three fire cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last fire cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and so be cured thus as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this disease, you must give the patient large pills and mondified cyril, clarifying the brain; afterwards, reset the whole head of the patient, and place on the occiput an emplaster of sinapi written or treated in the book of emplasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If it is thus, good is; and if it is not, make three fire cauteries in the head descending to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure as the others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if the mastery is, another on the three horns, and cure until it is good; and be the cauteries called "olivare", as I have said before.
from the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and what we have said before; afterwards raise the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and behind and above the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst heat is gone, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until it is healthy, and make the cautery which is called "olivare" that we have said before.
from epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first clean the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it's an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew mundifying foods to clear their brain often with good meats; afterwards they recover the head in the middle, and make a cautery as we have said before, and make a cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo cauteries as I said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and thus make olive oil cauteries in the manner that I said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excess or corrupted and gross humors, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said to one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is the declining excess that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clear their brain according to what has been said before in the division.
Here is the translation:
Where you apply the fire cautery, make points all over the cautery. This method of cautery softens the brain equally; and then put cotton wool in the burrow and in grease of a hen.
of the sweat of the eyes When the sweat comes first to the eyes through the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing clarifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times a day.
After he commands to clear his head, and make him cautery in the head, and make him .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descents of the sweat are in the .ij. eyes together, or in one, if the descents are in one; and cover all the cauteries all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the length of the temple; and beware of the corruption of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of cloth as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of cautery how you will establish it; and no one has ever made cautery or operated beneath the two last ribs.
because of the course of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear in the shape of the chief defect; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold rheumatic fluids, then I do the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the aforementioned chapter: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or operating beneath the .ij. bones; and if there is need for more, if one cauterizes above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
because of the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit him, then give a drink to the sick man .iij. nine cochies; after he raises his head, and make him undergo cautery or a thousand golden cauteries; and make .ij. cauteries of the cautery which is called «clavilis» on the .ij. sorcis, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not cut it. And this is the form of the cautery which is called «clavilis»:
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called «olivare». for it is its form:
And if you see that they make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. sorcis as long as the eyelashes are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as much like the flower of myrtle as possible, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk-like perfume on the eye, then heat up the cautery in the form of this:
After cauterizing the figure that you have marked little by little several times, so that the heart is relaxed at that spot; and the signs of health in the vein are that you see the skin retracted, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then I put moist cotton on a poultice until the inflammation is reduced; after treating with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same spot, as you did previously; and if the hairs are deficient, so cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The burning medicated cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow so they are large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and lively chalk, of each one ounce, and mix them well together; and do it hastily, so it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, then one must operate on one, and if both alike; and put beneath the eye moist cotton in a poultice; and the head of the patient should be healthy and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press little by little all the times that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for it feels biting also like fire. When you have made the cautery long enough, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the mordication has passed, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted as if it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the lever or the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are at a point; then put cotton moistened in a burst so that the bitter heart is calm, after curing the lever of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And it is necessary that you take great care to guard your work well with a strong guard so that the medicine does not reach your eyes. And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the lever which is softened by the proper skin, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the foliage of the dead mirte:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, make your constraints; and do not deviate from the right way for him who is the student of this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position; and hold the joints of his head with your hands in such a way that they do not move, nor does he nod his head; afterwards apply cotton soaked in oil or juice of persley on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is thus: and it is applied to the head as if forming the shape of a curved pen, just like the cautery; if you see, if one part is pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but in any case, this which is applied is of no use for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is overturned, and pulling out the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, then operate, and pull out the bowels; afterwards place on the cautery hot in form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail beneath the eye, so that your hands do not make a fool; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Here is the translation:
And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then make a fistula, and cut into the wound; afterwards put in the incision a subtle camel-hair brush because it is the form: and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient's limb at all, so that the melted lead does not run to its oil; and it is necessary to put on the oil a cotton wad soaked in water or in wine: the lead is thus poured into the wound of the fistula, and the healthy part is marvelously sanctified.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertuses to the nave, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body according to what is suitable for its own limb.
of cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur in lips that are called "hairs", and similarly in lips of children.
When you treat these cracks from what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat it with a small cautery iron according to this form:
And apply it quickly to those cracks until it reaches just to the source; after treating the skin of the scab, until it is healthy.
of the abscess on the throat
When an abscess forms in the root of the jaw or in the eye socket, or in the roots of teeth, after it has made putridity and rot and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand so long as the iron rod comes to the fontanelle of the head, and put it behind the head; and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the root and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not avail, then put the head of the patient in your healthy hand; after heating the cautery in such a way that you place a chain over the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastanment, and hold as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold for an hour and rub forcefully.
And in this manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the gums softened restrained, and the moist humors dry up.
from the pain of the teeth
When pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and medical treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: and cautery with a mixture and cautery with fire.
Cautery with a mixture is such that you take a mixture of ashes, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and envelop it at the point of a tent, and boil it in a mixture bubble, and put it on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it cools; and thus do often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the mixture and cotton are cold, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron hot enough that the fever reaches the gum of the tooth.
Here is the translation:
When ulcers are of flux and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery from which afterwards comes the form, and has two openings for the fumes to issue out at the cautery of the other part; and apply the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is, as long as it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply cotton wool soaked in balm so that the discharge is removed; afterwards cure the wounds with ointments and tents as long as they are healthy.
When moistures prevail on the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated first by solutive medicines; afterwards do fire cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little. Afterwards do another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and this is the cautery called "clavile" from which we have the form beforehand; and cure the wounds as we have said before so that they are healthy.
of the thumb When all the diseases of the forearm are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever nor swooning, and it is an ancient disease, then they make two cauteries on the strength in their veins; and another cauterization between two marmots; and so the cauterization which is called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking the whole cauterization which is called "poins" because the form is thus before in the disease of the ears; and so the poins are just up to ..., or elsewhere within. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and so the cauteries are at three veins according to this form:
And because they are the lighter cauteries, because you make three of them in a cup.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, the patient feels it in his back and on his side; afterwards, he raises the heart which is within the tender part with two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves because it is the form:
and cauterize the heart until it penetrates just to the side, and there would be the figure of the cautery with .iiij. cauteries; and because it is done with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, therefore the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tendon, and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
And often it is applied to this nerve because there are eight cauterizations.
After placing the fire cautery on the affected areas with wax; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, that thing happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clave caultery, or many cauterizations in pricking. For the joint is reinforced, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the cautery of pleurisy
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of the disease
When you treat the disease of the backbone which we have said in divisions of treatments, and it does not profit, then they resort to three manners of cauterization that are all good.
One of the manners is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the backbone, according to the figure of the cautery of the fire which we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be aware on his back;
and another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has three knots, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the cord that is on the backbone, or where the pain of the disease comes from the left side, and let the elevation be according to the cord, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Here is the translation:
of dropsy
Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit them, then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in a place near the ribs; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the heart.
After that, let the cautery be opened for a short time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will come together with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what has been described here before.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cauterizing iron without turning. And do not enter too deeply into the foot, lest the yellowish fluid should be stirred up, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After doing so on both legs, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be of a length, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without moving, so that the fluid is dissolved; after curing with other cures that we have said.
of the menstruation
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about before or cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel with every subtle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each rib, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are old and of gross cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all deflected downwards from the almond-shaped point and a little in triangles, and one cautery below the bowel, two fingers.
and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face inflating, then one makes a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clavile cauteries; and let the cautery burn for a long time. After healing, leave the limb so it is healthy.
of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
When you touch the fleshiness named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems to be rash, and then set it all ablaze on the coped "thelul"; and let your hand go as far as the cauteries come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshiness, then cauterize each one as we have said; after healing the profitable joints so they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the skin, it will be of greater aid.
of a badly healed wound
When the patient cannot suffer manipulation or operation, which we will discuss in its place, a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and gives putrid and corrupt matter, so you must prove all the subtlety of the tent, and take care to know how deep it has gone. Then heat the cauterization that seems appropriate, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cauterization until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to the need of the body; and be careful not to harm the nearby nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, beware of these places, and do not make false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not a permanent injury; after curing the flesh so it is healthy, and if the wounds are well-scraped, and the matters are removed at length, then know that the flesh is entirely healthy; and if the matters are not removed, know that the flesh is troubled, and corrupts the bone in its foundation; and thus one of these things we will discuss in its place.
of the kidney disease When pain of the loin comes from cold and great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to the loins on one side and the other to the clavicle, as we have previously mentioned; and if we make a thousand cauterizations in a row, they will be more effective.
of the vessel When the vessel is tender and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a fire cautery on the affected part above the vessel, where the hairs of the finger begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our thumb; and you make a cautery above the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be made according to the form mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, then you feel great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said or like a cautery of the vessel, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be made according to the form mentioned before.
of the handle
When the viscous moistures descend to the handle of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of departure are twisted, so you must cautery the patient on the handle of the hip at the circle, and mark before the joint surrounding the handle as it turns, so that the handle is within the circle; and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present for you, make three cauteries of the large olives, and let the cauteries be as deeply set as all the veins; and treat until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hollow of the thigh, and it's from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we said in the division and the cure is worthless, and the disease is ancient: then it's necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After the fire cautery; and the method of fire cautery is according to eleven methods: it's to know that it assembles burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is such: that you apply cautery on the hollow of the thigh in three triangular shapes, and make a good profundity and greatness, and leave between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; no one makes cautery in the middle on the top of the thigh, because there is eleven according to this shape:
And if you see, if you apply cautery to the cautery of the circle that we mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are burned.
And this is the method that one uses in sciatica, when pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, make three cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle two fingers, a little to the left side; and let the cauteries be cutellaire, and let the skin be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or near the ankle, make three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
And if the mastery is, do it more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do fire cautery on the cuticular or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave a single one so much that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great annoyance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the hollow of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted to the point that the feet were. After a burst of belly which he got death.
And if the pains are in two parties together, do cautery on one and on the other, in this manner. // And the wise men said in the cautery of the thigh, that it is in this way, make a fire so sharp and so thick as a navillon of a date, or a little less, and be between the interstices and be from one interstice to another spacing the quantity of a thumb's breadth; and let the interstices be above two parts, and let them also be like nails, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
And let it be heated so that it becomes completely red and gives off a sweet smell, and then place it on the box of the thigh of the patient, and turn it around the healthy side; and cautery once with a round cautery rod and leave it for three days; and then make an emplaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until he is healthy.
Here is the translation:
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar matters of cold expanded material, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after that the patient is void of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line 5 cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 cauterizations or 4 at the cauterizing claw in the middle, according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a withered arm when they lift it, and fear; and you find in the upper spine of the back and in our appearance which comes onto the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize with a cautery of that kind according to this method.
If the cautery should burn each part of the spine equally. And if you want to cauterize around the spine with a poignant cautery, draw .ij. lines, and let the points be near one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in weakness which is in the region of a nerve.
from the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which the doctor properly calls "podagra", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form.
And if you need to prick on the face of the foot, then have a complete cautery made at each point that is claimed. And if the pains come right up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then have a cautery made on each knee, two or three cauteries for each part, with all the complete cautery olive; and if you have mastery of more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firmer than necessary, as long as the espé of the heart is at rest.
And if the pains descend right up to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains some pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come right up to the sides or right up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge fleum, then he will be healthy with the aid of God.
of the rupture of the spleen
When the rupture comes in anger, and the swelling falls to the hips and it's new, if it happens that when you want to cure, he does not eat during the day; and he uses things that ease the stomach, so the farts come out of his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the swelling is repaired, and you massage with your fingers, and anoint beneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and all signs are similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in this form:
as long as it is white and he casts out sensations. Then massage the swellings to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so they do not turn back; and work well on the hips of the patient, and put beneath him a cushion and a sheet on the hips, and another on the pis who holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so recommence yet another until you come just to the bone; and beware subtly that the swelling does not burst when you do the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this the patient may not die, or other evil.
And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worth nothing. And it happens that the cauteries of children should be subtle according to the measure of their age, and of great people also according to their measure; after three days cure the place of the cautery of butter so that the inflammation is lifted; after cure other ointments so that he is healthy, and cast the patient twenty days on his back so that the wound is well sucked; and it happens that his nourishments should be relaxed for a long time, so that the swelling does not burst when he prepares to go into chambers.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made splint, and for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and too high pride; and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will describe the treatment of surgery in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are conjoined, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make them a .j. cautery of the cautery wound according to its quantity, and let it be burned by the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at .iij. angles according to this form:
But first sign the place of the incision and make a line for the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized area with a gentle touch. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moderate.
from chronic pain in no member When pain comes in no member, either from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, that's good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it should be moved to the member that is next to it, because it must be that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
of messiness
The messes are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care that the illness is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the entire patient, then you do five cauteries on the chief: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and leave it so long as the cauteries come just to the bone, and so that the scabs issue forth if the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
And if the sickness is scattered throughout; it pertains manifestly, so it is necessary that you apply cauterization to these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and one cautery on each nipple, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the chest and another delicate one, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calcifying, so you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and is profitable; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from cauterization as the healthy ones feel it, because the body is already almost corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the iron tools. After curing with flour poultice mixed with honey and other treatments until they are healthy.
of inflammation
Here is the translation:
of the cauteries
When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of veal and lentils with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix all together, and tie with a bandage, and apply to the skin until it is healthy.
the treatment of cancer by cautery
When cancer begins to develop, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that seems like a circle around the tumor. And some wise men say that one should make a cautery at the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and the more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with a cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot heal
When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the excessive flow it makes or because of the old age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too weak) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see hasten to heal: then cauterize extensively with many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten healing.
And if you see that the cautery is penetrating everywhere, heat the cautery to the point where its form is:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" so that the cauteries penetrate the heart, and let them be such that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated. Afterwards, cure until it is perfectly healthy.
the treatment with fire by iron
Another kind of disease which is called "corrodens" and it's nothing other than a gangrene of a limb, because it eats away the members like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery along with fire, then heat the small and large cauteries according to what is needed for the person or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you burn out all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it two days, and apply cauteries suffering burning with oil until the burns from fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the treatment of wounds producing flesh.  And if you see after two days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this gangrene has often been cured by medicine along with fire cautery in place of fire cautery; but always fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
of ulcers that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a large swollen thing that ulcerates the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It's known as fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat one cautery like a pen of velvet, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can penetrate all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after putting everything hot on the ulcer, and turning your hand entirely around the ulcer as much as it comes to the font of the ulcer; and leave it thus for two days until it begins to putrefy; then make a plaster of mild sage boiled with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the ulcers will be cleared and separated from their roots. Then treat the wound with ointment, making it healthy flesh.
And if they are converted by deficient humors of the body, and often occur in many places and on the feet, it is necessary that you apply warm water cautery; and this is how: take a cane of iron or a pointed awl, or a knife of boxwood, and place it on the nail and the joint, which is to say piercing the veins; and place the cane so that it surrounds everything entirely, then put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then find the warm water pathway deep into the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its roots. Thus do one after another until you have pulled out all those that are in the body, then cure the ulcers that cause heat.
the cure for trembling
When some people tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olivaire cautery; if you leave the trembling, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
of small boils
At no time appear by default the corrupt bodies, or small boils, that come from gross corrupted matters. if it is necessary at first when they appear that one do cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of wood of myrtle, of which the point is taken in fire, or of root of aristologe long, or of lenticular cautery. And at no time are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot increase in advance, but are disencumbered of the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great removals of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from corrupt bodies, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And whenever it happens to nobody, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold strongly as long as the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue more; then put fire cautery, olive oil or more small and large as they are all red; then take .i., big or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery strongly until the blood is restored.
And if it happens to flee when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not hurt the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the blood flows out of the artery, it cannot be well restored unless it is by one of the three ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to restore blood; and so it is tied and held in place immediately.
Whoever administers restoration of the constricted blood by applying tight bandages or putting things in, or similar things, does not profit from it at all.
And if it happens to none and he does not have better medicine present, then he must put his finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well so that it is restored above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but let the frost of cold water often be very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and restored; and make an inquiry beforehand about what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter all about the disease where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or medicine burning, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter among the main chief just below, and I will go in this chapter by the same method for it is true that one finds more easily what one wants.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who aggravate their illness so that they die easily from the worsening of their disease, and from the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of this. And of these there are those who give their opinion, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is deceptive. It does not become that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but rather put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain, and what you can have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and may you be willing to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Here is the translation:
a full head of water
It is known that this illness often affects children at birth, and when the midwife holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a misplaced response that one does not know.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and nearly all those whom I have seen hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in the hands of some healers.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not be supported; and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as we need, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spatula-like instrument:
If moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make three incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the swollen areas of each part, and the water flows out when you press with your hand inside, and it does not return: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside. Afterward, hold the incisions with drapauls and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then disengage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be comfortable, and give the patient dry food without much moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine where the abscess opens, and assemble the water flow; for it never goes forward; never backward; never to the right; and never to the left.
Here is the translation:
of rheum
When it happens that a disease called "catarre" occurs in the eyes or in the foot, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not profit at all, then the last resort cure is cautery with which one should cauterize the .ij. arteries.
It is necessary, then, when you cauterize the veins, that the patient make his head back; after scrubbing the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extracting the patient's neck to the entire .i. cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the eyes of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly reposed; then mark the eyes of the notch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument of .ij. inches, so that the vein vein reaches just to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the head.
And if you see, place the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize below, cutting as if .ij. fingers are traversing.
And when the vein is cut, then the blood flows out continuously above.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then mark from the notch and make a cut just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flowing so it is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the siphac, then cut that apostemes burst not in vain, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of hemorrhage
When old hemorrhage comes, and there is catarrh, due to the moisture of the eyes and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medical cures and all this does not profit him, if we cauterize the arteries of the temples and the burning heat, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly restored except in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then the patient removes his neck from certain cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then takes the spatula in the form:
then scrapes the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then raises it high as pincers, and separates well the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turns to the point of the unguin, then covers according to the quantity of the .ij. heads. For if it is not covered, then does not know the without doubt all in all.
And draws out blood from the .vj. veins, just to .iij.; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you bind it in .ij. loops of a strong double thread of silk, which will not be visible before the closing of the wound, and will stop the flowing of blood; then covers the superfluity which is between the .ij. ligatures at that same hour, and then, if you see, then cauterize with a cutaneous cautery just to the bone as much as the heads are covered; and it is the mother work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
For the fire cautery is aid to finish the swellings: for this it is of great aid against the swellings. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the empty space with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when you remove them, then be cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and by tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as you were opening, then hasten to cover with cautery, or fill the empty space with vitriol and hold with your hand so the blood is stanched; and if you do not have this present, then place on the empty space your finger until the blood is congealed, and raise the empty space of cold water until it stops, and be steady as it is necessary; and what is more mild and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cautery the vein with this trenchant .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to wait longer for their healing. For when the instruments are too tight, then they hold less of the blood. And should have between the .ij. knives .i. a large space, and then when you have signed to incise the .ij. veins, and you place the burning iron on them until it reaches just to the bone, and covers the vein in .ij. veins; and should be separated between the .ij. parts because it is not surrounded by this cautery from all sides; and this is the form of the cautery:
of the tears
When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are on the outer surface of the head due to fever, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming inflamed, and feels as if walking in a fog; and since they are thin and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, thus it needs a cure for this.
And the old ones called it "confused cure", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three digits deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others three digits as three ribs above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are as three ribs above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the joint.
Of the incision that is to be made at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two sutures to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
if you put in the first suture the instrument called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and that's its shape: And place the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the bone, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mean suture. And cut all the vessels that come down from the head to the eyes as much as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another part in the mean suture up to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and press on the skin for the taken blood; then put in each suture a piece of old cotton, and put on soft cloths soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that abscesses do not come; and on the third day remove the dressing, and apply a great quantity of hot water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures as one cures wounds, until it is healthy.
of the eyes
When a person has a familiar catarrh, and you see the eyes are dim and small, and the vision is foggy, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and where the head aches in the front with a bitter pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these signs that those matters and that catharsis do not come from many veins, and the cure is more difficult than it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one equally large. And start from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and hold your hand away from the edges of the temples that move to the grindstone; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put in a lot of cotton, and stretch tautly with linen thread; then lay on top a warm drapery soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to form hot; when it is healed, you must rub the bone as long as the flesh begins to grow, then apply treatment of things that excite growth, which make the flesh grow.
In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and three parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to stimulate growth throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of these three things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing like iron; or seeds, if they are yellowish, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if you distill a little violet oil or oil of sisament, then you will make extraction; and when you do this, and the nostrils are stopped up when you do this, and you put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and it is above the ear. Many times it comes out through this cure; and if it does not come out, then you will make extraction with subtle pincers, in which case this is the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then you will make extraction with a subtle little double-edged hook; and if it does not come out through this, then make a cane of iron and put the head of the cane or opening of the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the cane with wax so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out in the form, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue from what takes the ossicles, and put some instrument that is at a point to do this, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and pull it out. And if she does not know how to do all these things that we have said, hurry to open the ear thus that an abscess falls out with spasms; and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape it out with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and continue treatment until they are healthy. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a thorn and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then one should assist in the extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and treat distillations, but the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if no worms appear, take out the pincers subtly, and if they do not appear, take the candle of the form where it is.
And it is constricted below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly all the way to the candle; do this as often as all the worms are seen. And if they do not come out, stop up with a cotton swab as I have said in the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, assist in distillations that the ancients have experienced in the removal of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this entire instrument, it is the form as you see.
And it is of silver or copper constricted below at a small opening, and above they are covered for distilling; and to press inside the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the scraper and envelop it in cotton thread; then throw your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand strongly so that the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and it is the distillations that are a little warmed by fire, as one distills in the ear; and take care not to make it too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born who does not have a small hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or when a piece of flesh grows inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from the front into the ear, if one cannot see them well; and sometimes it happens that the small hole is closed, and one sees it well.
That which comes from the front, if one cannot see it well, is of great importance for the health in many dispositions, and in this case you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opilation, if the work has all this spatiumile of what is its form:
And let it be agitated and cleaned thoroughly in front and behind the entire plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opilation is from flesh grown or a cord of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until all the flesh is entirely removed.
And if the operations are performed in the ear, take a subtle razor and shave lightly with fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the operation where the patient feels great pain in the ear, perceive it lightly, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the healing.
Here is the translation:
And if the flow of blood comes, one should plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
from the flesh of wounds
It is the ulcer that grows in wounds of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cover with a spatula of its roots; then put on the eye a glassy balsam.
And if they do not decay, one should cauterize the subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauteryizer afterwards incises and masters; and many times repairs, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not regrow.
of the scab
Many times things that seem like scabs in their shape and hardness come from papers of the eyes, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of great moisture in the paper above and below; the treatments are such: take a wart and let the grandine move from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make a large opening, then gently scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover. if you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the crack is great, assemble at a costure, and treat until it be healthy; and if it's small, do not make any force, for the ointments restore quickly and enchant.
And if the grandine descends from the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, do not harm; and when the grandine is covered, lift the oily saliva, and cure the affected area of what enchants quickly so that the patient may be healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
Here is the translation:
And the manner of the surgery is that the patient puts his head in a healthy state; and then takes a drapery of linen, and arranges a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the extremity of each part, then places it on him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other, so that the extremity is assembled within the circle; then makes a moderate incision in the spatula-like trench, not making it larger than the wound made at the vein's opening; and makes the skin fold over so you reach the extremity; and in many dispositions the extremity emerges from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Draw out then at once a piece of drapery between your two hands at the deformed place, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread; and be careful not to push in the incision, that you do not reach all the way to the spatula-like trench just up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
And if the extremity does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision so that it appears; then draw out as we have said, then moisten drapery in oil and water, and place it on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break their seal and put on a corrupting moisture that is delayed. Then the treatment should be such that it becomes healthy. And if they come to a hot abscess, then the treatment of poultices soothing until it becomes healthy.
the hairs of the papers
When papers grow hairs unevenly other than naturally, and are wrapped up, then they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so much that it is caused by the destruction of the eyes; and there is a treatment in three ways: either by cautery with assembled fire, or by medicine agreeably according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then push a needle through all the threads; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, and draw all the threads above the paper, and turn them to the rasp; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the uneven hairs, all the spatula copant, from the great tearer just up to the small one; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small layer of cotton and of drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
And if a part is treated where you remove a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper is softened; then apply the whole spatula to the .ij. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great ladder up to a small one; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the .ij. angles of the circle, then scrape everything; then assemble the .ij. leaves to a single thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluous threads on the .ij. curls all sticky things, if you want to do this; and if not, if there is no cure, then leave the thread and the hairs for 3 days or 2 days; then treat the wound without a thread of dry and constricting things, because the paper relives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the thread is useless (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear.
and if another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, to 3 ounces of oil separated according to the form which is here.
then remove that which overflows from the small equal forces according to the form which is here.
And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not even, take a needle or have a thread. And insert it into the figure; and put another thread beneath the large artery, and the second thread beneath the small one, and assemble the threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
and it sometimes happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and on the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it deeper according to what I have said, and then make artificial caines by art, and subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the parchment of the eye, and extract the artificial caines from the formed parties; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin that will be restrained will become morbid and necrotic and putrid, until it falls apart by itself.
If it is slow, if the scalp has weakened forces, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread .i. fine silk thread subtly; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the hunt .i. another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the head of two threads; then put the patient's head in your healthy state; and let it be under the sun so that the works are declared, for it is a subtle and minor work, then put the needle in the entire hunt at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce into the paper hastily as you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put in the hunt that hair, if there are .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come forth at the entire hunt on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom of all the thread that you had arranged, so that the hunt comes forth from the pertus above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hairs are small, then accompany .i. long hair of natural whiskers, and let it be elevated with that which you leave, so that it is elongated and then lift it.
from the purification of the eye
When this disease which is called «aleacrati» or the purification of the eye occurs, it comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you open up the sutures, and separate the eyelids from it, and put in threads of linen, and leave it until it is healthy; and do not think that you should use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreic; and the rose water or alum solution soothes, and an ointment made from the juice of a certain plant, wrapped in a bandage, and cure it thusly.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care to guard against it not swelling according to its original form; and these treatments that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
of the flesh that comes into the eye
This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of operating on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and you stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce through the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread appears at the top of the flesh; then you put the flesh above the entire needle, and cover it with a large spatulum.
And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what it needs, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the papyrus, and make two cuts or sutures within the papyrus; and so are the heads of the two cuts at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make them form an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has no "griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are agitated beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure it with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tinctures, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from cuts or sutures or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to be skilled in every way so that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the same patients, according to what they need from operations and treatments in many dispositions.
due to the inflammation of the paper
When this inflammation has occurred in a manner that the paper above is swollen with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to apply the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, lest the patient suffer from the spatula being too pointed or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, gently scraping off the assembled area, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and it is entirely healthy, and never again becomes oily or salty, and raises a gentle and cool dew, and of a clear color; then place between the paper and oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a soft and abundant ointment; and after three days use a gentle and soothing treatment with similar things until it is healthy.
of the corner of the eye
Know that the corner of the eye is in two manners: it is nervous and similar to a hard, dry crust, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a white, moist congealed moisture, which when touched with iron and pricked with pincers, cannot be moved; and one and the other appearance encroaches towards the great eyebrow, and grows little by little until it covers all sight and all light and movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then bend the finger as pincers of small double curvature, and hold it above; then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or a cow hair, or an ox hair, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pierce with the entire needle, and tie the finger with a thread and hold it above, and strip all the hair on the side of the finger that joins the thumb and the index finger just to the head, then cut the remaining part into the root of the arm and all the subtle and small forces, and leave the natural skin or arm, so that by incision it does not affect the body's accustomed habit; and never hold the finger at only one joint, but at the thread, as we have said; then strip on all the subtle parts according to what is its form:
And be careful that the subtle parts do not touch the raw skin and break it, and that the thumb is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little of warm broth into the oil, and make a plaster from litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured as much as possible so that it may be healthy.
And if the finger is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, many times this type of finger is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have related in the division, and if you see its cover, then open the oil of the patient, and take the subtle part lightly a little gently according to this form:
And raise the finger subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not at all and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium made of litargire and red collyrium and sew broiet, and stop up to the next day; then recommence the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
If nothing opposes you in the eye, then as an abscess breaks, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then recommence the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh is sweet in the eye at night due to great annoyance, then suspend it from the onion, and take a part of it and not all, lest tears come; then distill into the red collyrium made of litargire.
of the flesh that grows on the eyebrow
Here is the translation:
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, if you apply the oil of broiet or distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton on the wound with a bit of egg white, so that it may be assured against hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the blood does not mount, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things that calm hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make many wounds heal in the eye by this similarity.
But always it is necessary that you elevate the treatment of each weak oil according to natural ways; and accidental ways, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
from the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away its work and weaken the eye for three years. It is therefore necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which it is, is false, and there is no other illness beyond the vein; then coil in such a manner: command the patient to put his head in your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and be subtle double veins according to this form.
And let there be a ninth caution by degrees in the body according to this form:
then coil the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those vain efforts from the eye; and beware that you do not blotch the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with more than those veins; and when you have done this, distill in the collier eye green and red to corrupt what is morbidly swollen.
And if you cannot coil all that in this hour, make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is eased and assuredly cured of hot abscess, then recommence according to this manner which is before, so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if there is an engine in it that you make on the abscess, where it must be opened, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made into a chief iron .i. chief returning, and should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicines having excitant properties.
if the joints are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not become worse nor abscessed, and bad accidents do not come, know that it is healthy; if not, then there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the pierced nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines sharp, and when it is uncovered take .i. forest according to this form, and let the iron be angled at .iij. angles, and let the fistula be attenuated just up to the chief as you see here:
Then place it on the patient's arm where the ligament is, and withdraw your hand from the eye, a little, then turn to the entire forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which the veins come into being if they hold their hand on their knee; and then restore the arm with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh becomes numb and endures the limbs, thus the material goes to the knee; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open fully everywhere, and it does not disturb the nose, nor diminishes, thus you must bind the patient; then apply the poultice, then place warm cups or hot irons to suck out the humor, then put on the eye a mixture of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and apply it with bands and drapings; and the manner of the drapings is that you take drapings quite soft, and double each one in three, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need most; then strain it with a hard bandage in the shape of a circle, and recommence the cups to suck out the humor without piercing; then remove the cups and let the eye be strained day and night, and if the bindings become loose, thus you must rebind strongly; then remove the binding after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, then recommence the application and the drapings and the binding and the cups until it is healthy.
of the tearing of a veiled cloth
When disruptions come to the woven fabric, then open, and comes forth from papers as if it's a grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then you see the cover, the works are such that you put a needle in the root of the part below, just up to the one above, then put another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the armier; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to disposition; then cover the whole with double thread and tie around the woven fabric, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put it on the same moist spot in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads dry with the fabric, then cure the eye of comforting things until the wound is healthy; and many times the wound is restrained by the fabric each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes make a great appearance, if they pierce at the subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and corrects the moist albugineous and descends into the eyes, and enters inside immediately; then hold it until it is healthy.
of the hollow of the eye
Here is the translation:
from the eyes of the eye
We have already seen the similarities of the eyes in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; if one works according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye steady and very firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a hair at the whiteness of the eye at the part of the lesser eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and twist your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the opening in this paper by the clarity of the woven fabric, and then place the instrument next to where the eye is, then press it beneath one way after another. If the eye descends now, if you see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest, and if the eye rises again by a second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not mount, then extract almagda lightly while turning your hand little by little; and then put back in the eye a little of that gem, and remove from there the eye within. Then place above the eyes estoupe or lain moillie in oil rosset and abundant water, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on common broiet with abundant water.
And if the patient cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is:
And pierce the conjunctiva gently, and do not go too far in, but make it subtle, then apply the cautery, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient .i. the dormitory approaching, where he sleeps on his back in .j. the darkened room; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be arranged according to his disposition until the third day; then disengage him from that same darkened house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, because the water rises hastily.
If abscesses burst forth, you disengage the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, disengage the vision and put on his face .i. a little ring to cover for some days, and be again in that darkened house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they made alum salt by piercing, where they sucked up the water, but never did I see any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of algmada, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly aligned:
And thus the head of this subtle bone is in three angles aqueous.
of the flesh above the nose
No time is born or nose flesh joined diversely, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; and if it has flesh of fox color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In those cases of these fleshes which is soft and not engrafted, you should place the patient between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and cast the onion to those fleshes, and they will flee; then hold that you can sustain with a subtle spatula on one side, until you know that this flesh is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, open everything, i.e. the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if you do not surpass it, or abscess breaks, if you cut as it is necessary; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then pour out either oil or water.
If the abscess does not open, and moisture comes up to the palace, it means that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pass as it should, it means that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, although the instruments do not come for cutting: then you must take a thick thread of linen, and be careful with our hands, and have an interval of about an inch or less; and put the patient's head on the thread at their nostril, and pull it out through the mouth; and often children are taught this way, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart as we do with a thread. Do this until you know that the threads have corroded all the remaining flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian unguent, and put it back in the nostril as before; do this for two or three days, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a small tube in the nostril for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterward, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill the oils and medicines into the nostrils.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp cover, like a tube, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, do make a close tube, and let the instruments be plain for expurgating the head; and have a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquor.
of the flesh above the nose
Many times a disease appears on the head above the nose which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large soon, so that it is visible to behold; and therefore you should apply a poultice at the beginning, and remove all hair, then put on the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay applying it until it is large, take care if it is hard, of fiery color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, because when you apply it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fiery color, and you see that you can fully apply, then look at the patient and apply sense without fear, and cure the dry and withering things.
when the nose is covered and bandaged
Be aware that when continuous solutions come in one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, for there are some homes. Therefore, it is necessary to consider what happens to none, if you look at the wound whether it is fresh and full of its blood; and then join the .ij. veins to a joint, then cure until it is healthy; and if the veins are separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you clean all parts of their circumference until they heal, then join the .ij. veins to a joint, and bind, and sprinkle with powder made from dragon's blood, and burn incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of the suturing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have had abscesses on their lips for a long time, similar to grains of vegetables, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and divide into each notch, and take them as pincers and cover each part; then apply the liquid after the incision of vitriol broiet, so that the wound may be stained; and then apply the oil of hazel, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
of the decay of the gums
Many times it happens on the gums where it is joined, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary to hold them in place with bandages, and cover at their root, and let the swelling or blood flow; then apply vitriol broiet, or other drying and astringent powders; and if that one returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cover it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return again after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatments for coping.
of ulcers
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are rough and bitter; and sometimes the black and citrus-colored teeth decay, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their head be steady, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus you do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have mastery of various forms of treatments for removal, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that are removed from the teeth have other forms than those that are between the teeth; and these forms and others are prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay doing it as much as you can, because one should not do it hastily; for it is a very delicate substance just up to then, and there is no excuse for doing it roughly. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And you should do well to warn that you not break, and in remaining a part, and return to the patient through the malice of the root for greater pains than the first. And you warn that you not do as the ignorant healer does, who by their haste and hardness often breaks the cartilage, and not amends what we have counted; but they come often by the obstruction of this great illness through the roots that remain, or through the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, if you wash the wound with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, if you apply the vitriol ointment; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
The forms of the instruments, which one must change first, should be long pointed and thick handles, so they do not slip when you extract the tooth; and these are the forms:
And they should be of thick members so they do not bend when extracting, and they should be of well-made iron, and they should have teeth for holding in place.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the socket, it is necessary that you put on the cotton cloth moistened with burr. One day or two, until the gums are softened, then apply the tongs called "algefri", so the head seems to be a beak of a sieve; and thus they are made as if like a file and that is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and apply the instrument called "althali", that is to say a pelican, so that is its shape:
And it should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, it is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, so that the forms come hereafter:
And if one helps with this instrument which has three claws, because it is the form:
and other iron instruments that are before in the arrangement of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles a large clamp, because it is the form:
And so these instruments are strong that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and wise masters subtly find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, because there are some illnesses where the ancient ones did not teach at all about an instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it breaks not a cartilage or other bones, or it decays, if one searches for the instruments that one needs, which I have told you, and helps with the gestures, because it is the form: And so they are large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and ostrude; and then restore the place of convenient medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, if it seems that you know the teeth are not arranged after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make them straight or aligned: then take this instrument which has a similar form, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron with an acute point.
And the blunt point is held little by little in the mornings for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can make them straight, then sharpen a part of the file according to its shape.
and it is also like the file of which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the mornings gently, so that it does not move until it is steady; then smooth out the roughness at the end without any irregularity, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it seems to make them even, so they do not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when the tooth locks
Here is the translation:
And when the tooth falls out, if you reset it in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with it who is not wise and suffers, and never makes the form of a tooth of cattle, and you put it back in its place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and it stays there for a long time.
of covering the lien of the tongue
Never is it the lien that comes from under the tongue or naturally, that you are born with it; or by accident of a wounded plague; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous lien of the large one, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is dryness or numbness, and it is suddenly a plague, if you apply the unguent and cover with a large bandage; and beware that the fissure is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done, lift the place of water rose and of sage, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a piece of linen; and tie the patient's every night, so that they cannot sleep. And if blood comes out, apply vitriol powder on the spot; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see the flesh of a foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it declines into a bluish color, and there is moisture, apply the unguent, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver one part and another; and if the blood does not stop with your work, apply vitriol powder so that it is stained, then return to your work until you treat everything fully; then lift the place of sage and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Sometimes abscesses come in the throat called "godath", and they are properly named .ij. amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, be cautious: if it's an abscess hard of small sense and of fused color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of blood corruption; but let it be until it ripens, and then you will break it open, or it would burst by itself; and if it is of white color reont, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover, but first examine whether the abscess has cooled down and is appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be in a healthy position, and open their mouth and take the scissors between their hands, and press the tongue under all the instruments, so it is in the right form; and let it be of silver or thin copper as one uses a lancet.
Can't you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onguine and fix it in the amandre, and draw it forth more than you can; and draw nothing from the tiles with, then cover with the instrument, so it is in the right form, which seems like a force; and all the way the head is curved, and one end to another, and are very agile, and made of iron indeed or of silver:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover with a bandage, so it is in the right form:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of the hive
When the hive is deep inside, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called a "hive". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme wounds are alleviated, and it is subtle; then you must cut according to its bluntness and length. And if it is sanguine or of a fusse color or black, then you must make an incision on it. For there is great peril for the patient. Then, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, considering its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument we made mention of before; then put the needle in the hive, and draw it out, and cut with the .ij. instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the .ij. wounds. And beware not to cut more than the superfluous part beyond the natural term; for if you cut too much, it will grieve the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .ij. wounds, and cure until it is healthy. And if the patient has a fear of cutting, then beware to use fire cautery with a gentle touch. And the manner of cautery is sharp and subtle. And it is that the patient puts their head in your hands, and then presses their tongue against the instrument we have said or the chapter on cautery, and confirms with a lively movement, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing this instrument, according to its form:
And if you have a head or put the medicine on it, as if you were stirring with a spoon, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the hive; and the patient should lean on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not go down to the throat and the bladder; then hold your hand all over the medicine and press on the hive for a quarter of an hour, until you see it becoming numb and the pungency of the medicine is alleviated; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument all around the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the hive; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait afterwards for .iiij. days or .v.. And if you need to reapply the cautery of the medicine, reapply it, and after the cautery suck out the excess from the hive, with cotton plugged into a hole, and clean what is around the medicine; and be aware of the cold frost, and be cured of gagging as long as it is healthy.
This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put ash in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and let the instrument be cleaned in this manner: And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, you will often recommence, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do it more than at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in its head a piece of egg white, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat; for the piece of egg white does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether safe.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or some thing; therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the language to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing; and what does not appear and is retained in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be rejected through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie the thread to the sponge, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will be recognized, and then you will treat further; and if it does not come from what we have said, take the instrument of plummet in this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high lifted; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all does not go well, nor does it get stuck inside; and it is better that the patient inserts the instrument, because it will be inserted or the thing is easier; if it gets stuck below, where it draws equally throughout the entire instrument, until it is drawn.
of the sensitivity of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the sensitivity, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sensitivity, draw it out with a small hook, or subtle tenaculi that are suitable for this. And if it is not suitable, take a hooked cane, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then insert or remove with the hooked cane, making a hot iron, and do it frequently. And if you grasp the patient's aquosity throughout the day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and insert it so that it swallows, and move it with their hand frequently; and if you feel the sensitivity senses the aquosity, shout.
And if it does not shout as we have said, then fumigate the patient with absinthium, at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will fall without tiring. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are charcoal vis, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that pierced place let the head of the instrument be; then you throw the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but reaches just to the sensitivity; and the sensitivity will fall now, and if it does not shout, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then the doctor will be master that it is driven out by this governance.
And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the wound, if it is, when one can see it, resembles curved tongs entering into the gorge; and it has a resemblance to a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the shape:
the surgeons of abscesses
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size; and it is in two manners, one of which is in its own resemblance, and from what it holds moisture. And the second manner is through the veins where they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess is not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is ripe according to its fulfillment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are raw, and do not ripen according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are in the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are porous within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one pierces it so that it becomes ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a raw abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is in the foundation, which does not become porous within, and becomes fistulous, and cannot be healed in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hole of the perforation of the abscess which is mortified according to completion, and it's when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminishing of pain and of redness, and the debating and adjusting of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be from the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equally or there is no putridity.
In these cases, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worth more that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, then the body will be nourished by the venom from it, and it will be full of much foulness; and perhaps the lips and the deepest parts of it will harden. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the length of the body, according to how the members have need of it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to recognize universally in the treatment of abscesses: where you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
of sores
Where the skin of the head becomes small abscesses, and there are ways to treat them that are in tiles, just like a gellied joint, and many have similar appearances. There are fat ones and those with moisture, just like poulz; and if there are hard and piercing ones at the cutting edge, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary. And the work of the cutting is that you try everything .i. instrument that is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then they do so above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape without leaving the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns immediately if one leaves nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and oil, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and this cures what has been delayed from the night. And then reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay from the night; then treat the wound with ointment in a suitable way, so that it is healthy. And if the abscesses hold .i. much fat, then cut according to this form, above the length; and apply your own judgment, and scrape everywhere, and put all your care into treating the wound where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, then do what I have told you afterwards. And also do the same for the abscess if it is piercing, and at the cutting edge and at treating as I have told you.
And the cutting above the piercing abscess and the moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head or where there is no moisture, and those were .i. abscesses that I treated on an old woman's head; and found the abscess like a pierced stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had not made any effort, one would have done well to make a wound like a pierced stone. In other abscesses coming onto the head, for those that come as heads of children and roots of the ears, the treatment should be done within three days at most, depending on the patient, in order to remove the swelling; and the cure should be done as it is necessary.
of the swellings
Many times an abscess forms on the neck, and sometimes beneath the arms, and in the groin area, but never in other parts of the body. And they are numerous, and entwined with each other. Each swelling is properly located on its side, just like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these swellings are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case where you see good disposition in the touch, and it appears like the color of the body, and changes in each part, and is not airy as the veins on the neck nor in the artery, nor in the conduit; it is not deep; then you must cut above them, and strip away each part, and open the two lips of the heart as once, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and proceed little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not become too confident, lest you touch what you should not.
And if you cut into a vein or an artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put vitriol ointment on the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then inquire by your index finger if there remain small swellings, and cut and dress them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the swelling, do not think that you should cut into that swelling at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away without harming; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal.
And if you cut into the entire swelling, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there remains no superfluousness due to the greatness of the swelling. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and treat it firmly, and sew as we have said. Those swellings that hold superfluousness, pierce it where it appears most dead; and pierce it thus, as previously stated, depending on it, then anoint it with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well dressed, heal it with ointment, softening the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of scalping
The old men said and spoke of the surgical operation on the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the scripture of their words.
For those who have scalping, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleared; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the arm of the patient are at those who have an abscess burning in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws. When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
Here is the translation:
and thus the veins are found to be obstructed at the section of the epiglottis so that there is no flow of blood, and the vessels are long from the inquiry.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then cut through the cartilage as far as it reaches the trachea; and clear the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then touch the syphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the pipe of the trachea which is furrowed by the air that is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with good care, and sew all along without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
One should not delay this just so long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be mortal, and the default is the failure of the wing. Then one should cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and for this reason the wise man commands to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or in four days. And then they command to cauterize the wound and to cure it, until it is cured.
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinew of the forearm.
and I was called to cure her, and I found her as if dead.
I discover the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been covered with a bandage or dressing other than the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cared for it until it was healthy.
and had not harmed the maiden, for she was hoarse of voice, and recovered afterwards to her normal state;
because I saw that in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no fear.
of the large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced person, and they are very common in women;
and it is according to two methods: natural, and accidental; or naturally it has no remedy.
And the accidental is according to two methods, one of which seems like a thick tumor to us, and the other method seems like an abscess that comes from our artery. and he has fear, and it is not suitable to work with fire cautery except on small areas, and he proves and searches everywhere for the introverted: if you find it thus as I do, no fat grows, and it does not penetrate at any vein, if you touch, if you touch as we do, and you pull at all its coating, if there is a point; and search well everywhere, and heal it as it suits, until it is perfectly healthy.
of us
Many ways of healing are ours, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is fitting that I tell all the difference that exists between them and us.
I say that the issue is fever and heat, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then set aside the fever and the heat.
With the patient having no heat nor fever nor pain, and containing .i. syrup, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large;
and they are according to similarities, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to its shape whether it comes from a chapter or a master.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the wounds is that you take or touch the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you feel that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the "entromissoire", and take care that it does not fall out.
Here is the translation:
and after the entrails come moisture, knows that it is fat, if they make a cross then, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the skin where it lies that you may pull it straight with the nail;
and if you cannot pull it straight, then pull it by pieces so that nothing remains there.
For if it remains there, it will return to us many times;
and if it stays there a little while, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and hold the wound steady, and put soothing things on the aposteme, and treat other wounds as long as they are healthy;
and if it is serious, thus he should cut the edges of the wound, and cure those who are injured by the char.
and if the vein is beating against the contrary or otherwise, hasten and employ the virtue of vitriol ointment, and let it be for 2 or 3 days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterizing what has been delayed.
Behold the forms of inward instruments, and they are of 3 kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are 4 quarters that are called "albaret", and 1 that is called "breb", and there are 3 kinds: large, medium, and small, for encircling the abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrin iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in cutting into black stone to encircle the curves of fistula.
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pores.
The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions that have three curves of three manners also.
and if there are onions that have three curves, and they are also of three manners; and if there are onions that have two curves, and onions with a single curve only, and they are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
The heads of these onions that one cuts are trenchant, and of such ones there are those who do not cut more than a part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
and of these introducers are the scabs that form on the skin, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and do not use more force than in the flesh of a lamb, as with legs, and arms, and hands, and fingers, and similar limbs;
and never make another small instrument resembling the scales of a fist, according to this form, where one stains blood;
and put it in a place that is healthy at the junction of the veins, and at the arteries, and never again goes against this great form:
Never inflame the breasts of certain men when they begin to be corrupt, so that they seem like breasts of women;
and they swell and become inflamed, and those who want to cure them, if it is suitable to treat according to this form of this line up to .g.: then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine inwardly in the wound, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound to the seam, and treat until it is healthy;
and if he has a wounded arm, it is ameliorated by its greatness just like they have with women, if they make an .ij. curve above, through .ij. similar fissures; because one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and mix in what we have said about poultices and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, so that it be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it so long as it diminishes the remainder and the fat, then cure it so that it is healthy.
of abscesses of ulcers
These abscesses that come from under the ulcers are types of hard scrofulous lumps where there is moisture, and it is only this that contains moisture.
Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when the entire boil that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until another day, then remove all the cotton, and heal the wound by applying ointment so that it becomes healthy.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do as we have said in treating scrofula, and if the wound becomes a boil, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
from the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses come, and also it happens that the inflamed vein and abscess occur.
and if you know it then as much as it is through the artery, so are the abscesses long in front; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the constriction; and when it is through the vein, it is those things that appear deformed;
and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the ribs and in the corners and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and the one who is at the head must choose also, and in the one who has an inflammation of the artery, they make it above the skin of the loin;
It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and the one who is at the head must choose also, and in the one who has an inflammation of the artery, they make it above the skin of the loin; Then open the wound skillfully, and separate the artery from the tendons, so that it is uncovered.
Then insert a needle beneath it, and make it pierce until the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the place which is between the two ligaments of an intramuscular area, so that the blood flows out of it, and thus release the abscess.
Then adjust the treatment so that the wound heals quickly, until the ligament is strong. then heal the wounds that come from it, so they are healthy;
and if the abscess is because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can take from the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there is a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of the threads from the double thread, which goes from one side to the other side through the flesh;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, so rebury another needle entirely under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four layers;
then cut into the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut away the superfluity of bad blood and let what is linked remain;
then put on a clean dressing of millet in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the kidneys
Here is the translation:
And it often happens that the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and this is the grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of a dead body, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when it is strongly strained, the patient feels pain, and it is not nearly as deep in the body, but beneath the heart;
and it must be examined well from all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither above nor below, and one who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin grow on the sputumile (possibly a term for a type of abscess or tumor). If the abscess is small, you hold it with tongs, and cut at its root;
and if it is large, you suspend it from the anvil, and scrape, then remove the bone and bring the wound together at the seam, and treat until it is healthy.
of large, hanging lumps It never happens in the stomach and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw a man who had a wound on his belly that was more like a fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had a small root, and was already split open, and was corroding from excessive moisture.
I touched them and found in one 18 ounces heavy, and in the other 6 ounces, and the wounds in the incision are such that you see if the patient's moisture is excessive, and the color of the artifact is pale and moist with a subtle root;
if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in your presence the fire cautery. For when the surgeon often causes too great a flow of blood, and if the senses do not fail you, then hasten to give the cautery.
and if you see the patient is fainting and afraid of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the artifact as we have said, and leave it 8 days;
And then restrain, and do not cease from restraining the thread of the splint until it touches the joint, and hold it in place without effort; and if the roots are thick, then you should carefully cover them for the sake of the belly, but you can barely cover half.
then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre later.
when the swelling is full
Here is the translation:
and it is by the softness of the skin and the issuance of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various issuances. And if it is by the issuance of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it resists, and then returns, and perhaps it is dry, and greatly increases at the entry of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the works are that you look at its appearance, whether it is by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. Here is the translation:
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and let it be stretched out straight, then sign from the navel all around the bowel; then he should sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed to the entire spine, then stretch out the half of the abscess downwards towards the whole large ulcer;
then open most of the abscess extended above the thread, and you thrust your finger inside, and you examine the intestine; if you find it taken hold of the thread, if it dislodges, and thrusts the intestine into the depth of the belly;
and if you find the bowel, if it takes hold of the navel, and you cut off the excess flesh;
and you make the artery counterflow, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and you thrust nine forces of thread, and thrust the nine needles inward so that you have done in a cross that you make perceive;
then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as much as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself; where you touch when it is subtle and putrefied, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you touch when it is subtle and putrefied, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be healed, and sew up the limb.
swollen tumor
We have spoken in the division about the symptoms of tumors, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should remove the iron cure; and we say that the tumor is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients said that when a tumor is in the body or where it can be reached if it is like a tumor which is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one should totally remove it when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, it is not necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal from it; no one has ever healed before me.
And the operations, when it is in the body or where it can be reached, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make them healthier if they show repletion, then affect the patient .i. by making an incision in a good place to perform the operation; then cut out all the tumors and all the flesh, and remove all the bone without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and squeeze well with your hand or any other thing, and if the removal of blood makes you feel uneasy about cutting into the artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is stanched; then apply another treatment until they are healthy.
of dropsy Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
then look to see if the hydropisy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the navel .iii. two fingers from the pubic bone; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then let your incision be on the left side of the navel .iii. fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then it should be on the right, and do not make the patient move towards the incision so that the superfluidities do not flow towards the weak place;
Here is the translation:
at the top is the almond, if it happens that the struments come to the water, then they sink now on the instrument; empty the donor of the half or third part, because if you empty more than it doesn't fit in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls asleep, or he approaches death.
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to the dispositions of the virtue that the patient's signs indicate, and his pulses; then pull the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the cord that stops up the passage that is on the syphac, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and pull from the water a small quantity.
do it no day, and keep from fooling as long as it doesn't stay but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let much water, if the cure of the burial or warm bath, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and if you abstain from drinking; and the cure with desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
of the stopping of the rod Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, with their head at the end of the rod and the cope thus like the length of a pen, so that the perforator cuts in the middle, as it should; and beware of the efflux of blood which often occurs, and if it happens, then staunch what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
the blisters on the rod Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it happens that you take them with a subtle onion, and cleanse all with copes, then put on cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment diafinicon until it is healthy. And if the cyst is malignant, of bad color and putrid, then it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have cleansed it, and the cyst is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the cyst which is inside first; and when it is soothed, then cure the outside. For when you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the rod will not be perceived, and there comes blackness and corruption in the rod and in the conjunction; then it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour which has been prepared with scorched grains and veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, then master the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries are helpful in two dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must insert or conduct a tube of plum into the rod, and pour the patient through; and when the skin is burned at the end of the rod which has not been circumcised, either from wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with an instrument that cuts the veins, so that they are freed and released from the head of the rod on all sides.
and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you must scrape it with a spatula at the end of the rod and of the skin; then disengage slowly between two, and I put a subtle drapery of linen on the milled anvil in cold water, so that it does not become hot again.
of circumcision
Here is the translation:
I say that the old ones did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we acquired through experience.
Here is the translation:
When one recovers from a burn, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two fingers' breadth where it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance striking the iron, and corrupting the vein, and many times it grows thus that they have no need of mending and I have seen it.
From the modification that is made to all the thread of the file I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in .i. the whole soul strains; but the thread should be well stretched over the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the infant think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer by tying the thread around the rod so gently, and then you make it slide in all the ways that you can. Then make it straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or make a circle, and pull it up as high as the top of the rod is in; then mundify well the order that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below .i. one thread to another; and hold it as .ij. you do by the second ligature at the pouchet and at the index finger, and join between the .ij. threads, then lift the circle above hastily and pull the top of the rod.
Then make it straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or make a circle, and pull it up as high as the top of the rod is in; then mundify well the order that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below .i. one thread to another; and hold it as .ij. you do by the second ligature at the pouchet and at the index finger, and join between the .ij. threads, then lift the circle above hastily and pull the top of the rod. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedies; and put powder on top and on the powder .i. a drapery glued with a mixture of egg white cooked at the same time as rose water, confited with oil of rose balsam and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure with another cure as long as it is healthy.
The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be tender and cutting, and the heads should be as large as the evenly matched hand.
The error in the mundification is when the heart within fails at the incision; then it is necessary that you stretch to your finger, so that the liquids make an abscess; and the evenly matched joint, and if you cannot hold with your finger, then take the tendons, and then the joint.
And if it lasts three days, and what is beneath the rod is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and scrape lightly; then joint as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, which will not harm it at all.
Heal then the wound with powders, which we have said or treat with powders, and if you joint beyond measure, and it goes to the depths, it will not harm at all; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
the retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of the bowel, or of a new flesh, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and extend their belly upwards from behind their back, and stretch out the patient's hips as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above, which is why the urine is discharged.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", whose form is: and let it be of subtle silver, lightweight and polished, like a bird's feather; and let the tube be one palm long and half, and let it be subtle at the top.
And the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the lancet or scissors, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the thread and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on a chair, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist oil and olive oil and clear water.
Then put the syringe lightly in the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the bowel; then insert the syringe before just reaching the bladder, and feel the patient coming to the thing voided, and that is not done according to this order for fear that the conduits or it will be twisted; then stretch the thread along the entire thread little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then it flows freely, and make the urine flow.
and insert the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient.
of the diseases of the bladder
When the scorching blood comes into the bladder, or porridge is assembled, and you have seen distilled waters and medicines, if you do all the instruments which are called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if you have two holes: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leeches suck because the medicine should be such that it stops well the sperm without addition, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and thrust when the mast is;
and when you have poured your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the irrigator in the moisture, and draw out the drawing instrument that is within; if you draw out the moisture with the irrigator, and then strongly thrust the drawing instrument within; if the moistures enter within, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle cluster with which one clusters the bladder: thus it is;
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below that, there are the sinewy veins; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with moisture as you see fit to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a double-wound thread, and heat that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the clister in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder throughout the entire moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has come into the bladder.
and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes into the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction of assembled medicines; and I have told the difference between the stone in January as rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a tailor's skill; and in the bladder, and in the rod; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Here is the translation:
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient thoroughly by catheter, for clearing all the filth that is in their intestines. For it often hinders the quest of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and let them sit down and move to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and often falls from the high place; then make them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands are below their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then seek and touch it from inside.
If you feel the stone in the bladder, then hasten to cut into the stone. And if it does not yield to the touch of everything, then anoint your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your left hand, if the patient is young and accomplished; and insert it into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then push it towards the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and insert it into the area where you see to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand above the loins, and with their left hand hold the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where the cut is made; then they insert the spatula, which has this shape.
And make between this which is between the hip and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and both are thus or fundament, and let the cutting be so that it is large by default, and within is constricted, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
by chance the press if both are where the fundament is, so that it feels the sensation of labor; and know that there is part of stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is grievous to issue; and if there is a part which is underneath, similar to a glance, and rounded, whose issue is light.
At that place where it has angles and margin, make the cutting larger; and if it does not feel, then you must extract from the tendons which are like a lime at the head, in order to strain the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you put beneath it the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the hole of the perforator, and if the sense is not deceived, then extract with vitriol.
and if there are more than one stone, then put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract it, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, then you must operate, and make a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the bed that the eyes cannot hold; but in any case, you exert yourself to extract, or to break up the tendons, as long as you extract it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on a dressing of soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, stir well the oil and water, then apply the treatment of dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without a sound with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and putrefy.
Then apply the plaster of water and of isa and ofasil, and aid it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, you tie the hips, and assemble the medicines on the wound.
And if the penis is small, and it is led by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot come out; if you cure this as I say, that you cut many times, it is an excuse for cutting per this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Take a rod of iron in this form and it should be at three angles fixed in the thigh:
Then take a thread and wind it around the rod beneath the penis, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the penis, until it reaches the penis; and turn the rod with your hand in the penis little by little, so that you can pierce the penis from another part; if soon the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the penis which is inside the rod. If it is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this because of some obstacle that bothers him, then thread the rod beneath the penis and another above, then make the rod straight in the penis between the three ligaments, then extract it forcibly, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until he is healthy.
of the stones of women
It rarely happens that a stone is generated in women, and if it happens sometimes, the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who discovers herself as mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-informed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stones of women are more hidden than those of men, because they conceal themselves with deeper cuts, and great fear is there.
And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a well-informed midwife, and hold the true faith in her, and if you do not find one, then ask for a subtle and chaste mirror; and she presents a wise and knowledgeable life among women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command of the inquiry into the stone;
and look carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her hand or finger on the stone; and if she finds it, if she feels it beneath her finger, and recommend that she puts her hand or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in this way.
If she finds it, then she must move it gently from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft spot, where it is moved and appears, and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her finger on the stone or beneath, and so it will be smaller at first.
then put the ruler on the wound, if you feel the stone it increases the pain so much that the stone may come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to be known, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges. if you know the similarities to recognize the issue.
And if the stone does not come out, then put on the vitriol ointment, and hold it for an hour so that the stone is stained; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as helpers to aid you in your operation.
and if he has no sense of vanity, and it's from the artery that is cut, then put powder on the wound and strain with tentes and bandages, and do not recommence this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it again, lest the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the limbs are at rest, then return to your work, until the stone be removed.
of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white syphac, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, which contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it's the skin of the thigh between the white syphac that we have said; and this does not have small non.
And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads through that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or swollen as we have said, the abscesses are ripe, like a long boil figuring an egg, and do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own tissue, the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another boil.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white surface, it feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you test at every corner of the joint, because its shape is thus before. According to that which comes after the joint, judge from that which is within.
According to that which comes after the joint, judge from that which is within. And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should be placed on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and much of the drapery is put beneath him.
then he should sit on his left, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the joint.
Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the white spot where it pricks, and make your incision entirely straight while cutting the skin of the joints up to the point where it becomes white, and carefully scrape off the thin layer beneath.
Then pierce the white spot plain with a large perforator, and remove all the fluid, and then put in your onguines, and let the white spot be above; and do not touch the core of the joints, but only the white spot should; cut out all or by pieces very subtly the cartilage of it, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
and let the swelling subside for a certain time, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white spot; then assemble the two leaves of the core of the joints at one suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the swelling corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspended places, and remove the swelling, and treat it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parts, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equalization, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a soft cloth soaked in rose oil.
and put on top another soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put above the two cushions, and put above double wraps, and tie it all together with the bandage that is according to this form.
Then take two wraps, and fill them with cloth scraps according to this resemblance and sew them together at the throat of the arms, and one of the hands takes hold of the foundation just up to the back, and the other part at the thumb; and another takes hold of the two angles, and so the entire restraint is assembled in the loop of the arm.
and often is medicated this branch of cautery with a size of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the joints, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the aigue is uncovered.
If you take fire cautery according to this method, and pierce the skin with an onion-like shape, and scrape it with this subtle fire cautery technique:
And take the scalp in all ways that you can, as much as you stretch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg whites; and know that this work is more salvageable; and beware of the removal of blood, and avoid the operations of size;
and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses burst or removals of blood or other things, then cure what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there,
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it be for a while to correct the remaining water, then cure until the wound is healthy.
and if you put a clean cloth to prevent the water from coming out of the mouth of the wound, so it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one draws out the watery discharge, because its shape is thus beforehand; and enlarges a little the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or even more, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there are many more dispositions to fear, because it seems to me that they are worth more than what I have left.
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad humors; and it is in most cases.
It is to know by the excess of bitter and sour humors, which is spread through bad humors, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance it is an ugly abscess, painful and piercing, with a dark color, and sometimes it comes from a blocked artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
When it is due to a blocked artery, it is recognized by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and do not think that you touch it.
That which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its disposition at the expression of tender touch of the fingers.
and one can well make the incision according to this likeness, and on the other wounds; and it is that you cut the cord of the loins, then place the egg upwards, and pull the white skin backwards, and release the suspender on all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already sewn with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you pull the egg, and cut it.
and if it is attached to the skin, or in that which is within the veins, then it is necessary that you release all of this tension, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, it is necessary that you cut all, and extract the pus, as we have said.
And when your operations are accomplished, apply the plaster of softening oil and rose oil, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the groin
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like formation resembling a pustule, with softening of the groin. and the patient must complain greatly when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is very near to the fear that was before;
and in all ways we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then put the suspensorium of the loins below his two thighs, for all the vessels which are near the edge, and touch the masters, and stretch them out forcibly;
then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the spot where the vessels are, until they are uncovered,
and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then fix a needle or where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein is located, and then tie it again to the other head; Then they cauterize in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then heal the wound as if with others or by anointing with a bolt, so that no vessel bursts which nourishes one of the intestines.
For by this, there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels. So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of the syphac The symptoms of this disease are through the passage that comes from the syphac, or the extension to the belly in the region of the loins, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the flanks;
and this treatment is from the syphac, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of movement come from several causes: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a strain, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the syphac, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and they are equal abscesses right up to the perforation, because the spleen presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of the spleen, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and they are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the corpse in failure of the spleen.
And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained in the gut, and causes great suffering pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments of fear, because they intend to escape from it.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to reach with their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter. then be supported on their neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the joints from the long bone. then put inside the strips of the belt, according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes may issue forth.
then scrape the dead skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the white dead skin may be uncovered on all parts;
then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white dead skin that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second dead skin,
and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second dead skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white dead skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the dead skin near the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and separate what is behind the ligament;
and if you have two fingers if it has a point of the intestine wrapped or white and hard, and if you find nothing, then thrust into the belly below;
Then take a needle where it has a large thread made of ten threads, and put the point in the rear part of the skin, which is after the skin of the thighs; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, so that there are three threads. Then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the skin, which we have said is under the skin of the thighs, with a strong thread of two threads. Then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two threads, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter there, lest an abscess forms and does not heal. and put the thread in order according to the first long thread of two inches from that one, and after these two threads leave the skin which is under the skin of the thighs a large amount of an inch.
and afterwards all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as long as the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before;
then anoint the soft mass with oil, and put in wounds, and I anoint the vein that we have said. And no time is it cauterized, the vein thus, as we have said, after the incision, by fear of deterioration of blood.
For it happens often, and let the vein until it chooses for itself; and if it tarries in the wound, so be aroused by warm water, and put on that which we have said, until it chooses.
then heal the wound with another treatment, so it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it was done in the same way as the hernia that is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the veins, after cutting slightly beneath the skin.
then examine me, and treat the abscess of those who have a swelling, until the veins are clear; and treat it as we have said, until they are healthy.
No rupture occurs in the angles, as we have said, and opens the joints; and do not dissect any of the intestines to the abdomen, and if you do dissect them, it's little, and repair all hours;
and always if it stays too long at this point, the wound or ulceration grows, until the intestines dissect;
and that which has been extended by the ulceration which is in the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes soft and inflates the joints and opens;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this way:
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then cup the affected area of the swollen vein according to the quantity of two or three fingers;
and then extract the superficial skin which is beneath the skin that is swollen, then take the vein and place it on the apparent area of the vein;
and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two visible veins of the vein on the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover a single point of the swollen area that does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you understand in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cover the edges, if it is undermined and heals the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
The swollen area is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin of the groin
Here is the translation:
do cautery
Here is the translation:
of the hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoid is of two kinds as follows: one is that between the buttocks appears as the figure of a woman's nature, where it has hair, and sometimes it constricts the urine.  And the other kind is in women, and it appears on the nipple like a rod with two buttocks.  And the treatment for men and women is that you cauterize all the affected areas, and treat them as other wounds; in the second kind, of those whose urine jumps through the skin of the buttocks, there is no cure.
of the tetany
Tetany is a cauterized area on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the superfluousness of the tetany from your hand or from the joints, and treat it lightly; and do not apply too much pressure, lest the blood vessels burst, then treat with another treatment until it is healthy; and there is another area that grows at the mouth of the thigh, and it swells, and by chance it jumps out, and it is similar to a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you treat it, just as we have said about tetany, and treat it until it is healthy.
of cautery fire command to the patient that they let the hairs grow so long and equal;
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation:
of the abscesses of the marrow
Many types of abscess come into the marrow, such as chancre and pierous abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak of the hot abscess that comes into the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that take hold suddenly; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe whether the abscess has begun with a swelling, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red you can see. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is alleviated; and then seat the patient on .i. siege, and have .ij. small sieges or he inclines, and supports himself on his back and gathers his feet as parts of the leg; and are his hips expanded, and puts his arms beneath his knees, and binds them well with a linen thread; then suck out the fluid from the right side, and I will show you the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the marrow, so that afterwards it forms; and it is necessary that when you have operated this instrument, you fix the rule first in order to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapels, so that the instruments do not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument on top, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand mol, it is necessary to cover at the chief, at spatumile leit; and when the boil is empty, it is necessary that you put ten moistened oil rosset, or green oil sec; and put the tent on top of the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put beneath the marrow and beneath the clear nettle moistened in water or mallow so they are cooked; then cure afterwards .ij. days of ointment coming to that, until it is healthy; and no time lift the marrow and the wound by applying a paste of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and aristologe long so they are cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound has fallen into the marrow, it is necessary that you guard yourself from cauterizing with iron, but cure thus as we have said in the division.
of the swelling
Here is the translation:
If the infant comes onto its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of the child are feeble, then make it sit on a saddle, or the women hold it; and anoint its nature with oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the bath between its two small spamuliles which is its form: and swaddle the second one, and cut its nail as much as the moisture that is in the cord was; and press the woman's belly as much as the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesament; then make her take and hold it firmly, and hold its mouth and nose for an hour: if the infant is now born.
from the birth of a child onto its feet When the infants come onto their feet, if they want to walk upright; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just above the elbows, if you command to grasp, and make them steady with condition; if it jumps further, then God wants.
And if it does not jump further as we have said, then turn it little by little, so that it is according to the natural shape. For then it is easier.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take a poultice of hot water, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and crush everything into a mortar. and put on the natural woman within and remove this joint, then make it sit in water up to the ribs;
and when it is moistened below, make a girdle of myrrh for it, and put it below, and leave it an hour; then make it sit on the chair, then make it stretch and hold its mouth and nose, and take its belly lightly, for now it will breathe easily. from the birth of the child onto its knees When the infant comes in this form, if it puts its hands to its mouth little by little;
from the issue of the child who comes out with a hand during I must skillfully bring back the hand: If one cannot reset it, make the woman lift up and walk.
If she cannot walk, make her sit on a bed, and bend her legs in the shape of a fork.
Then massage the muscle I have mentioned.
And if she cannot bear it, make her sit on a chair, then study how to reset the hand. and examine the child according to its natural shape, and make it straight, and instruct it to take hold as much as the infants issue forth.
of the issue of the child upon its neck, and has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. I think that you should touch the child's hand, then turn it little by little, and rock it gently;
and when it is aligned, place on the natural muscular movement of the hip and thigh, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you have done this, let it sit on the chair, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady. in this same manner for all the second ones
in this same manner for all the second ones When it comes to this manner for all the second ones, if you cut the second one at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated;
and let the veins sit on its face and on its neck, if you cut from the bud, so that it is not retained, and kill the veins;
Then put the child back inside, as long as you have placed it well, and instruct the woman to take care not to expel it at any time.
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes only one is born; it is not a strange thing, and it happens often. They are strange things, and do not live, if they have a little name;
I know that, they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syllable which divides them, which is tied to the bundle;
and never do they issue naturally as a whole, just as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle bath be made, and make it thick and light as it does. and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6, or many up to 15, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage.
and it is clear that the wise old man knows all this, for it seems that he has experienced similar things; if you do according to what is suitable.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to operate with your hands; if it is suitable that you know the woman's true condition, and there has been no accident or she has fear of death;
It is necessary that the woman be bent over her back, and her knees be inclined downwards, and her legs lifted.
and the midwife holds the thigh in two places, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart by the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the womb with moist ointments made from altaea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the belly with these ointments and these muskings; then put them in the womb lightly, then seek .i. the place where she puts the fingers that are suitable for this;
and take heed when the veins are apparent, so they descend to their head; if you touch the veins in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the gullet or near the ribs,
and if the descents are on his feet, touch them or prick them and these moist places;
and it is necessary to hold the vein with his right hand, and put the curve between the two fingers of his left hand, and let all his hand be light, and touch the vein in none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then fix an encounter with another onion, where the third is in a similar mastery, so that the extractions are even;
and then they are set in motion equally on one side and the other, to make them issue, and let the onions be held by threads, as it is their shape:
And if one part remains, then anoint the boil with some of its own oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
and if it remains a point, set this onion or higher up on him, and make them do so that they issue completely forth.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be led back by straightening. so you must wrap it in a bandage, so that it becomes whole.
then put the cup on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and in this way.
And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at the issue, or it has an assembled sharp head, then you must put the spinous spatula between the two, and make the head straight and extract the sharp part; where you round it at the instrument called "almidach", whose form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one;
and thus in this way, I make the children have a great natural head; and then treat the bones for their tendons,
and if the head jumps out and it is held by the forceps, so it be broken, until the moisture that is or worse comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces in the muscles where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as much as the moisture flows.
And if the patient is standing on their feet, it is a light attraction, and the adjustment at the mouth of the marrow is lighter.
And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you straighten it with a draped enveloping sheet on the hand. and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrodes.
and if the other members are numb, and the head remains. If he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts an onion or two, and draws it forcibly;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be operated on; then you must apply moist and greasy things; and he applies plasters, and it is in watery softening and moisturizing.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then apply what we have said about the living infant.
and so that one cannot have power, if one treats the fever by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary treatment.
And when you have done this, then apply what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow.
and if the flow of blood comes, it should be placed in a warm bath, and the other treatments should be applied.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a dead fetus had been, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead ones. After long tension, abscesses came to the skin, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a poultice of strong attraction, and I drew out a bone, and after some days another. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and drew out many bones, until the woman was in better condition. and he examines the woman's long tense muscles, and then immediately adds a little warmth from the cow.
and I have not found this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
to return the thigh to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one has the books; and at .ij. turning as .ij. heads of the .ij. ligaments. Here is the translation:
and let the mouth of the box be four fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one and a half palms long; and inside the limbs should be two adjustments of this same box, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tenacules. and it has two joints, if you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
and when you open the marrow to the entire instrument, if it happens to sit the woman on .i. bed, her feet hanging and her legs stretched out; then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then open your hand to the entire instrument, if you have done the adjustments equally, according to the quantity that you saw open the mouth of the marrow, so that the vein makes what it wants.
These instruments are all superior, and they are multiplied in their similarities; and when the masters have them prepared, so much is the work hastened, and higher is the esteem of men for their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to hold their arm, and then make them extend it with ease, and hold their hands by the mouth and nose. and let it jump through that, well it is.
If you do not take it, he takes the pot and makes perforations or a cup, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the disease, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centauri.
All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cane or perforations on the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the disease.
and the steam as long as the vapors come out of the disease; then make it sterile, as we have said. If the secondary treatment is urgent. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal, then instruct the patient to dirty their left hand in the oil of sesame or in massage of altaea, and then apply it to the affected area.
and seek the second one; and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the marrow does not burst at the extraction. but it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then drawn out; if it comes and dislodges itself.
And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted there, we have described the treatment of sternutation, and of fumigation with herbs.
and it is not part of all that we have said, if you beware so that you do not fall into the trap;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the veins, you bind it to the thigh of the woman, then anoint it with ointment of four ingredients;
if you will open and reset it, and come to an agreement; but nevertheless, when it will open thus, a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and injures the patient.
Then it is necessary to use fumigations of cubeba roots for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of fresh cress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, is this.
And it is to be seen similar to a cane, and put the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tinge as long as it is roasted, and recommend another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus it is understood that they are subtly affected. it is necessary then to apply a poultice that it perceives the subtle effect at its finger, and does not perceive it as a stimulus of agitation, and adjusts the bandage so it does not touch it.
then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not restore, then put or insert a tube of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes this suddenly happens with a blow of a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cover that sudden blow: if it is cured, as we have said about the treatment of a pointed wound.
of the fistula at the bottom foundation Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are a swelling, and those that come from beneath the foundation of the fundament, or in the space of the aforementioned parts,
if there is a fistula or more; and when that swelling is old, it works, and likewise moistures the white or subtle ulcer,
and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by the fact that they come from a bad digestion or flatulence when the patient has indigestion, and by chance they burst forth suddenly.
And if the fistulas reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis, and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the bottom, and it does not pass through. and it is that you apply your indexed finger at the bottom, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has tortuosity, if you apply a subtle tent of plank, or a horsehair, so long as you feel the tent or hair on your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from a perturbed egestion nor windiness nor truth, as we have said: know that she does not perceive anything; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and cannot be restrained by medicines.
If it is perceived just up to the joint of the thigh, then it is the tendon coming just to the place; if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, then it is that he has inwardly bowed, and there is no medicine nor sudden relief by anointing;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through work, and the foolish doctors who interfere with it.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs towards his stomach; then place a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as much as you know where the tent goes.
If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger,
if then the tent has perceived it; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One can almost always heal some wounds, but this happens rarely.
and the help that one makes, if it is that one removes the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. and thrust all hot into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized wounds are like a bird's feather.
and then the treatment of many wounds in a burr, as long as that chart is firm, then the treatment of jointing by softening and reinforcing.
If it is thus healed, it is good. See that, otherwise it cannot be healed;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the hold a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the finger; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and cut again before the hold, and then apply the cautery, as long as it reaches the head of the hold;
and it will be delivered the tent, and fall; then I will find those worn-out flesh that seem a bird's feather, and none of them remain.
And if the wound does not heal, and becomes thick between you and the skin, then cauterize with fire or medicine against the fever.
For fire cauterizes assemble these things: it is to know, the art of these joined flesh, and the stoppage of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken pieces, until the eyes gaze downward, and issue forth the flesh burnt in the mud.
Then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed from hot charcoal, and these are dry remedies.
For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes from the deep foundation, and it is separated from the body, you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the fabric or the syphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are not more than one way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the fundament, or if you can place and treat it as at first;
and do not go too deep in the fontanel, so you do not cut the holding that holds the fundament, and come to the evacuations by the sensitive direction willingly; then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the bandage afterwards since it is cut from the fundament, or by tension or another appointed instrument; then define this faulty charter which is in the wound, as much as you can;
then study how to restore the wound, and to hold back the fistula in the part that undermines the foundation: if it is something lighter for the patient.
And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the skin above is eaten away by the ulcer. if you take a perforated tent at the head in this form: And you push the thread through, and insert the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the bottom foundation within, then extract the thread from that which is pierced, so that you push your finger or foundation.
and draw the head of the thread, and join the edges of the fistula together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay there a day or two.
and hold it back no more than necessary, so that the thread grips these flesh parts that are between the two, and sticks together.
Then heal the wound so that it is sewn and healthy.
If the fistula does not pass through, then make it pass through in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the ulcerous place if it is deeply embedded, and then heal it, as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
The shape of the spinal vertebrae from which one makes the fistula is very much affected by one, partly and cutting. and on the other hand, because one does not understand what one should not touch, if you see here:
Bruises are in two ways: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they burst out blood suddenly, and there is one or more, and they are far from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are far have little moisture,
and immediately afterwards, a drop of citrus water or a drop of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves by going into chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and they seem to produce threads; if you hasten, and it grips like tendrils, or you hold it on your finger, then it crops into its roots;
and the uncle cannot hold them due to their moisture, if they take them in a wrapping of cloth, or a piece of camlet, or a fragment of chamelot; and hold them with your fingers, then cover them, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said or according to the chapter on cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot be opened, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and bitter cluster to remove what is in the foundation, so that it can open easily;
when the patient takes a breath, and if the thread is pulled from the foundation, then it is an easy treatment; and it is that you take them in your finger or with tongs, and grasp them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you apply the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too large; and hold the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the excessive flow of blood.
then put on the foundation a piece of cloth soaked in oil or rose water or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let it be until it heals, and when they are healed, if they receive treatment of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
you should search for the veins or foundation Many times there is a searching of veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you make a point of a spatula or on an angle the scorching above, which does not let it get moist. then the treatment as long as it is swollen as it happens;
and if it cannot swell, then restart the rubbing more forcefully than before, as long as it hurts a lot and becomes scarred; then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
for trembling Here is the translation:
and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it like a dead finger, and it comes into the whole body, and more in the hands than another part.
And the treatment is that you take a thread of an owl's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place that thread on the finger, so that the circles totally encircle the finger. then turn your hand all around the thread so that you enclose the entire finger, and put it in the front, and stretch the finger out of its roots.
And if you see, make a ring of copper or iron in this form, and be subtle below and draw above.
Do not pierce, for you must hold to the finger, and press; And if you see, if you cauterize the frenum, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
of the form of theclyster Never make aclyster of silver or copper, or of tin alloy or maille; and never make these small and large instruments, according to those who are accustomed to them.
Those that one uses in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
The shape of the small and large cluster is above wide, where the abdomen is tied in this manner:
and it has a separation or the abdomen is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has a perforation on one side .ij., and on the other side .i.;
and let the abdomen be where one puts medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and let it be perceived entirely around small perforations,
and let there be between each perforation .i. a space of an inch, then put in these perforations .i. strong thread of twisted cord strongly knotted in .x. or around, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a sack; and when the medicine is within, if he administers it with an instrument in front of a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle.
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then apply it lightly.
then the minister holds it with his two hands together, so that it be fully visible, then extracts the cautery, and lifts the patient's legs to the partition.
and if the medicine wants to issue, let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps a night in total, it is a greater aid.
And if you treat him for a disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to exit, so recommend it as long as he is healthy.
And if the morbid matters are at the bottom, or an abscess, so let the cluster be as subtle as for a child.
and it is the shape of the subtle cluster on which the skin should be held firm:
of wounds
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting with a sword and a knife, or with a lance or a stick or a bramble, or similar things;
or which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if take care it's a matter of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great. and you suspect a slight abscess: if it makes the headache worse from the cephalic membrane meanwhile it comes little blood from the wound, and the pain is on the contrary of the injured part;
and the patient is exhausted by an excess of wine and coarse meat.
And if he does not want to get better, let his meat be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty flesh.
and put on the wound, if abscesses or ulcers come, clean them with oil rose water softly, or in wine steeped.
and if there is no abscess or ulcer, put on the wound, so it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will tell a little later.
and if the wound has been moved, put on some ointments, so it may be healthy.
And if the wound is large, like a cut from a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by themselves, then assemble them by suturing, as I will tell about wounds of the belly, and the suturing.
If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it breaks, and no longer holds except for a little, thus it cures; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat large pieces of meat, as if they are eating and roasting cooked food, like they are eating poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotten skin or putrid flesh, and it does not adhere to the bone, thus cut out all the rotten part, and throw it away, then heal it.
and if it has become infected in the wound or vein, without crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, thus cauterize the infection, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread. and if this does not benefit him, then he must be cauterized.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in such a way that the wound heals quickly.
And the method of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; living chalk three parts, and powder subtly. and apply the poultice to the wound, and hold it firmly in place, so that it adheres well and joins with all its sap.
and then leave it alone, and let it not become inflamed; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
And sometimes one makes a poultice of hot chalk, when one does not have the incense nor the blood of dragon, but that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved the wound, similarly in this case, then do not put this powder on it.
but apply some digested oils, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it has a good flow. then the treatment of other treatments until he is healthy.
And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold it steady with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between the two heads of the wound, but if the veins or the artery are cut.
If it is the veins, if there is no other remedy than to let them bleed, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the veins and makes them retract. and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the veins is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soothing, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it in warm water. and other fingers of mine according to this manner, and wet bandages.
And if the wound is large, then sew and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce or cut below the swelling.
and if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is the practice.
and if the spine of the throat is wounded, or the neck, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the food goes, if you cut the neck on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and let it be for some days, then cure the wounds of the flesh thoroughly until it is healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it out; and if there are fragments of bone, if you pull them out quickly, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound purifies, and let it be uncovered and aligned the joint;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from a lance or a knife
If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has become putrid, for the patient will soon languish: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not putrid, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put on the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply. and return to the body, and open the patient's eyes. but I put on an attractive bandage, and bind it three times a day.
and if you have no ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or two days, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of heart in the translations of the vein; and when you see the good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved. Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy.
and if it cannot heal, and make an effort, especially if there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or on the foot or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed on the bone, and has caught pieces, then clean the wound, and remove the false fibers if they are detached. and if they are not dislocated, let the wound putrefy, then align the extractions;
and other wounds on other limbs are the judgments as we have said.
because of the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small;
From the great wound often bursts out a piece of intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, because of their internal insertion.
and the stitching is more painful, and often it is worse than the small wound that is the large one,
because when one puts back together the intestines in, one does not put them back together from hot to hot; because the intestine swells so much that it feels cold, if they return to their place,
and because of this it is necessary to treat the wounded place, because one must reset the intestine to its place like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
the common stitches have a place in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitching of other wounds of the body and four other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and they are more prone to having a rupture of the belly, and I will describe one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has fallen out, and a grievous thing is to put it back, this is by one of the three methods: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, for it is because the intestine is inflamed by the cold.
And when it is chilled, warm it in such a manner: soften a sponge or a cloth with water and apply it gently, where you cook in water simmering and steeping and infusion, and raise the intestine until the swelling goes down;
and sometimes this wine restrains, and it is murderous that one should not drink to reduce the swelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, if you moisten the intestine with water or warm wine and bad humors are cooked, for it is aligned, the entrance to a little of something;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument of the thing which one takes hold of to stop the hemorrhages;
and the first treatment is to deaden that which is cut, that we must not cut without great necessity for it;
and these are the instruments to make a division:
if you cut deeply into the curve and do not digress, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if you reset it according to its natural form in its own place, see if you can put it back, for that is worth a lot.
When the wound is large, and it is located beneath the belly. it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and it is located beneath the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is on one of the parts. if you make an incision in that case where the injured part should be higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say for large wounds and injuries.
For small wounds, use what you have prepared.
Then you have between your hands, I minister pitifully who pulls all the treatment to his hand, and bring together the lips; and it is the common manner of stitches,
and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, Then let the skin of the wound heal, I give you a space of an inch, and I fix a needle where it has a good strong thread; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac,
then he tightens with a double thread within the needle of the .ij. parts, then assemble the .ij. heads of the wound together afterwards,
and then leave .i. fingers' width of space, and he fixes another needle; then thread it like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you have mastery of the needles, until all the wound is restrained;
and be the moderate needles, between subtle and large, for the subtle needles take hold of all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well: Because it is necessary for them to be moistened;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
so that they do not puncture and open the wound before the suture;
and then prick the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and you hold tight or wrap the heads of the needles so they can stay steady and let them be until the wound is sewn up;
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it takes only one needle or two.
The second cautery is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of leather and the two heads of skin together on a needle or where it has a strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced these heads all together,
and when you have pierced these heads all together, then reset the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and put a space between each vertebra, the thickness of a smaller finger;
this vertebra belongs to the man,
and I treated a wound that a man had in his belly,
which was caused by a blow from a knife, and it was a wound more than a palm large, and it was a gut well inches two palms large,
and it was a wound within the belly. I replaced the intestine then, so that it had been without food for twenty-four hours,
and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not heal from the ointment, for I stayed in a place where one could not find any, nor any medicines; and I put cotton on the wound many times a day, and washed it with warm honey water until it was healthy.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of cauterization:
Take the needle, and insert it into the defective part just up to the area within;
when it has pierced the right heart in the right way, if you have drawn out the blood or cauterized or wherever you inserted the needle,
and make a piercing of another part of the defective area within;
and the understanding of this treatment is that you burn them thus as the pelleteer makes the pelz, and that you leave once the syfac of one part, and take again from another, until the treatment is fully accomplished.
The second way of treatment, which Galen says is proper,
it is thus that some make, who naturally assemble the injured parts together, and apply one of the heads so that it faces another head, in such manner:
fix a needle or head where the mirror-like surface, and make pierce that limb only slightly, and let the heads thus face; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the part of the flesh just up to that spot within, as the head of the swollen vein;
then make a piercing on one and the other side of the weak part just up to there within, in the other head of the swollen vein that are on the other side;
and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen says this in his book, and no one testifies to it,
one must cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or it has thread in each one;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is the stitching more grievous than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the arsenic has not moved, if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the irritating powder, making a scar.
if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the irritating powder, making a scar. and if the arsenic has not moved, then apply no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and they cut the vein, and sew up the skin, and the mirror; then heal the wound like the others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, a lot of cotton; and change it every day until it is healthy.
For you do not have mastery of another medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members, then it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and place it between the tendons, and beneath the bones;
and if he feels pain or numbness in the belly, and it often happens, if they treat with black wine clusters, and meanwhile the numbness reaches up to the intestine;
and it pierces inward, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it's because of the plaintiveness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approaching of its natural disposition towards the nerves.
And if the serum flows from the wound, set it back as soon as possible, just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned towards black or green, then you must leave the black place, which removes blood that does not come from a vein. for there are veins and arteries;
then apply this to what is between the groin and put the joints in place during the procedure below the wound until it is far enough to alleviate the extraction when the nerves shout, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of a broken bone
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if one cannot restore it in some homes,
because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by the point of a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus obstructed the excretion and ventilation;
I examine a patient according to what I can see, and do not cease from subtly probing until he is healthy, and his eyes settle.
And when I saw him settled, I doubted that the patient had a bad pain in his stomach; and he had no point of pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a manner: apply gentle heat to large wounds, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the gentle heat has opened the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
Then set another fringe afterwards in that manner as before, so that the wound is completely covered;
and sew up the wound. If the head becomes stuck in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a manner: take the head of this intestine thread that is very loose, and then bind it to the head of this subtle twisted linen thread, then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in its natural position;
and this manner of treatment of wounds is not better than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal tubes, if there is no ingenious remedy, better that subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula". and likewise when she is combed and made to bend.
And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of a hard and white abscess, where one does not feel pain. and it is thus combed like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in clear and open wounds, and other times in dense ones; sometimes a little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh; it is not except by one of the eight causes:
it is to know, through the small passage of blood or course; for his evil. for that which has hard flesh within, and on the lips, that does not let anything grow there. where there is too much swelling. where the flesh is porous, and the matter is of bad quality. where the medicine is not good in the treatment; because for that reason the corruption is a kind of plague; where by its property in the region it slows down digestion, and delays health, and is harmful by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
or it is suitable that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is a fistula that does not obstruct just up to the place that I have said, and you are confident of the cure, and you examine it carefully, if you take a straight rod of iron or wood, the fistula is straight, if it wants;
and if the fistula is twisted, it seeks a subtle probe of lead, for the probes bend within towards the twistedness;
and you should make a fistula at the perforated hand and you cannot search very well by feeling. if you cleanse through one of the perforations,
for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it purifies;
then you should examine carefully at your power, whether you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is separated in the font;
and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if the coping is according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if the coping is according to what I have told you, and remove the rotten flesh and corrupt humors that are within; and then the treatment until it is healthy,
and if the fistula is properly deep in the right place, it is necessary that you cut open deeply, as much as you can, then I often put warm compresses in medicinal treatment, and the stitches just at the head of the fistula,
then I often put warm compresses in medicinal treatment, and the stitches just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the surplus which is accumulated at the bottom;
and then you put ointments on the wounds so they heal quickly;
and if it does not heal by this, then cauterize as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut around it. If a vein or nerve does not grieve you in principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, then let it be so long that the decay is completely removed, then heal the things in the joints as much as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and render void what was before, know that you are not misled just as they found:
if you discover and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot overcome it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if it has a small corrupt bone, and you can treat it with bandages, if the extraction is made with a suitable instrument for that,
and if it has many bones, so extract them all, do not leave a single one;
and if you make the moisture contrary, there is no error or fear, if you correct the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them for an hour, then put on the wound a poultice which induces ripening, and let it be until the abscess is ripe among the bones,
and then if they have more lightly the bones;
and if it's a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, if you remove so much of the corrupted flesh that the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corpse corrupt, it reaches just below the bone; if they want to sew and cover up to the corrupted area, and then heal as much as it is sewn;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, if you take an example and help with your work.
It was a young man of around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came inside the body,
until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and did not have any cause of fever by opening;
but the doctor, in their foolishness, operated so much that the abscesses opened, and corroded many materials, and became fistula, and there came many passages that all went bad and moist in the body;
and many a mirror mirrored cure within 10 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him, and that which corrodes through the openings to a great body; and the body of the young boy became red, and had a citrine color.
I pierced a tent in one of these pores, and then searched for all the pores,
and found that some veins came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the pores as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
Here is the translation:
and begin to restore the wound with medicines soothing by long tension, and cannot suppurate;
and then began again, and discovered the bone as it was before,
and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then stopped it, and thought to suppurate the wound;
but I could not do so much that I scooped out a piece of the bone, and extracted it from all its marrow; then the restoration of medicines; and he was quickly healed and relieved hastily.
and it does not fail to restart the work because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot suffer. and for fear of death that I had of him. For often the evacuation of blood was successful, but he was entirely healed.
For often the evacuation of blood was successful, but he was entirely healed. and was born on the shoulder blade a hard callus, and was of good disposition and had no hindrance nor contradiction in everything, neither to the wing nor to come.
and stop the bleeding, if you extract the corrupt flesh from beneath, and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not spread to the flesh; and put a probe or a table beneath the bone to scrape out the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to cauterize as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and cauterize again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it reveals the flesh entirely; then put the cauterizing iron underneath,
and then cauterize from one part to another the corruption, and be the healer who draws out the root of the corruption thus, as we have said;
and if there is corruption in the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone or whatever contains the other part;
and if there is corruption in the continuation of the joints, then there is no other anguish except to cut through;
and if there is corruption in the prickling of the hand, or prickling of the foot, then it is very strong that thing, but however it is necessary that you inquire into that corruption, how it appears to you; and you must treat it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not work against you;
and know that the incisors and the sockets to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with its instrument;
and know that you will show the instrument with which you will operate, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; if you prepare the instrument with which you will operate, according to what is fitting.
of fire The heads perish either because of denseness or because of fever;
and when you have medicated that corroding wound by the treatment of medicines, and it does not improve; then you should cauterize that member up to the place where the corrosion comes from; if the patient escapes by means of death, or through malice, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the member;
if the patient escapes by means of death, or through malice, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the member; and the signs are such that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire. and afterwards the blackness spreads, then it goes on to corrode the limbs one after another, and takes hold of the entire body; if you hasten to copper,
and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and viper and similar things,
If the corrosion is at the head of the finger, thus the cupping, and do not give it too much space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, thus cupping at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, thus cupping at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and it does not matter about the remedies that are applied, except for the quantity of its virtue;
and so we do it when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it seizes after another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, it seizes the entire foot; and if it rises in the leg, then it seizes at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the manner of coping with or supporting the limb is such that you bind it above and below, and stretch out one ministering to one of the ligaments below, and another ministering to the other ligament above, and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
then cover or support, and place a layer of linen on each part, so that the supporting does not touch the healthy flesh, and bring to the patient another wound and abscess caused.
And if blood flows out when you operate, immediately cauterize the wound hastily. where you apply some retaining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
then tie the limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy.
and I would counter that he had a wound on his foot:
he had a black spot which seemed to be burned by fire,
and that corrosion came first in his toe on the foot, so much that it consumed the entire foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
and long afterward he returns to the corrosion or ulcers of the hand, and it comes to me
and I put him on receptive things after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroding;
and he saw that I treated the hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to counteract the material; and I doubted also that if I cut off his hand, it would not die; because the strength of the man was feeble; and he despairs all, and returns to his earth, and he stops using his hand, and was healthy;
and I have not seen it happen except when one does another task, as one has need.
Never comes an abscess to the clear skin, and delays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then they go and pierce, and in jumping the belly, and remaining with the vain views, just as one examines. and the skin which is above is as subtle as the delicate sheets of a drape. and they do not run just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such illness is called "healthy".
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches almost to the bone in the forehead, then it is called "fistula".
and the skin is so that you should cut around the entire circumference, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a thin sheet. and do not be afraid of its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the cyst thus:
look at the breasts are large, and the tumor which is in them is of foul odor, then the medicated suppository of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take sage, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in it, and boil it in a vessel over fire, as long as the medicine is red, and thickens also as much as honey;
and then take of this according to your necessity, and make it into water and into honey, and cleanse the womb, and hold back the passages; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then stir it in a sprinkling way;
do this many times, until the chest is exhausted, and the pus is evacuated.
and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of wood from the vine, and throw water on top.
then cool it, and cleanse it, until you know that the chest is well purified.
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither does Egyptian medicine help with ashes, if they treat him with a mixture of water and honey or he has a little bit of litharge broth; where you treat him with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the senses are well purified, if the cleansing of what makes the flesh grow in them,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine; where you cleanse with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the cane of the lancet cannot enter, if you enlarge it with a file a little, and put in a thin tent of Egyptian ointment, or ointment of balsam, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and let it heal so much that the lancet can enter,
and if they pierce where the swelling is above, whether it collects or settles below where it is. For when the swelling is in depth, do not let it suppurate there; and if you cannot cut beneath the seat thus as you see, if it appears in such a manner that the swelling runs to the lowest place where it is,
and if you cannot cover the seat of the sinew below as you have seen, if it appears in such a manner: that the belly runs lightly downwards, and does not leave anything of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to put on the seat,
and stand on the same drapery of linen that covers the entire breast; then sew the edges in the proper place of the hole in the breast, which is a little larger than at first, then there is a gentle sewing under the other drapery according to the quantity of the hole, and put it on the hole in the breast to align the suture, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
and he who is above the pierced breast, often removes the swelling. and knows that which runs from the swelling, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed of the patients who feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the pierced breast, if you know that the senses are affected already, and approach the saints;
and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open up the wound, if you change to another dressing, and renew the bandage.
And if the senses throw out undigested food after many days, know that the senses are not affected yet. And if you come subtle cors after long tension, do not despair of health.
For the saints are approaching. For there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if the bowel is indigestible, it knows how to relieve itself after many days, it seems that the senses are not troubled;
and if the senses take long to clear, and are polluted, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue; Here is the translation:
Take a remedy made of ivory, and make it with rose oil, and the essence of old wine in equal proportion.
then boil it down and use it; and this same mixture makes cooked honey thickened, when ivory remedies are not available,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is over the fire; and then he applies a poultice, and spreads it over the breast, and sometimes he administers a long aristology. and roots of celestial lily, which is also as efficacious as powder of virtues and hundred herbs;
and roots of celestial lily, which is also as efficacious as powder of virtues and hundred herbs; and in using simples or composites: crush them, and make powder, and mix with the honey that I mentioned, and use; and if the wound is enlarged, and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is enlarged, and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption is deep-seated, and it makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the sinews; if you treat a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail, near the joint of the hand. where they put their foot, or by chance not born with other toes;
and when it is weakened, and one does not take care of it, if an abscess comes to the foot; and they run and throw so much that they run against the root of the nail, and by chance they run entirely;
and there come ulcers up to the bone, so that they bring putrid pain, and the skin is loose and wide, and the color is dark.
When you treat as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not profit at all, so it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous tissue that remains around the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great aids if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy;
and he places his finger on the flesh, and begins to prick, and the blister. it is necessary that you put the straight edge beneath the finger that pricks the flesh, and the swelling above, and cut into the subtle and light flesh, and apply to the remaining flesh of the medicine, burning and corrosive remedies to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut around it, and remove the decayed part, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
and if you see the decayed bone, cut around it in the same way as it was said before, then treat until it is healthy;
and if he is injured, and bruised, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal him first; then cut the corner of the spatula-shaped instrument, cutting across above,
and beware that the incision does not reach just to the flesh which is beneath the corner, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it to soothe.
The two fingers that are born on the hands of certain men by chance are completely withered, and by chance there is a piece where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail,
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no one of the two fingers. He who is born with an evil eye does not move himself, and he who is born at the joint of the evil eye, perhaps moves by chance;
the size of him who is bruised is light, in such a manner: size it by its root of a wide spatula.
Here is the translation:
In one who is born or ought to have a new derrière, it is necessary that you first cope with the round flesh up to the bone. then cope with the bone at a convenient joint for that, then heal it until it is sound.
The sudden movements that come together suddenly arise from birth, or from sudden injury, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you cope with this dislocation, so that the bone returns to its natural form. then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so they do not stick; or you place between two subtle pieces of lead, so that the joints are joined, as it is suitable.
They stick together with one of these two with the palm, if you bind that joint as it is suitable.
Of veins
You are full of thick, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities that come into several members of the body;
and they also occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, more than others.
It is necessary therefore that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil.
The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is that they take it, and then they draw out the black blood; and another manner is that you raise the vein, and pull it entirely out.
The incision should be made in this manner: raise the first leg of warm water very strongly, so that the thick vein is made subtle. then stretch the leg of the patient down from the hip to the part below the knee; then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision.
then remove and draw the black blood from your hand, from one vein to the other, until as much blood as the virtuous blood of the patient can suffer;
and then lay it down, and command that he should abstain from eating black bitter foods;
and recommend the evacuation and the healing when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
The elevations of the limb are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, Then put him in a bath, and let the swollen leg relax warmly until it turns red, and inflates the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then cover the vein from the loin to the knee joint, or in the part below the thigh;
then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of this part, until it appears when one feels it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin, it seems like a white cord;
then apply the razor below, so it is lifted from the skin, and then it is held at the nape of the neck more lightly,
then cut in another way thus two inches deep; then strip the skin from the vein so it appears, then shave with the razor, as you have done, and hold it at another uncle, as you have done previously;
then cut to another size, or more if you are a master of it, then shave, and cut at the toe of the foot,
Then burn with fire to the second notch; then strip the belt from the belt, until it is entirely free, then the covering.
and if you cannot burn and lift, if you thrust a strong double thread needle everywhere. and burn and pull, and thrust underneath, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is freed; and take care that it does not cover, for if it covers, you cannot burn or lift, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have fully treated it, put a warm compress on the wounded area with wine and oil of roses; and care for it until it is healthy.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before.
so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so as not to cut the vein.
and it is of thick curvature, for if it was subtle, it would seize the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is engendered in legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance grows another part than in legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin,
as it goes beneath the body of snakes and worms, interjecting between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are if it comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes the places, and the veins begin to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop with a piece of cloth around one and a half inches up to the node.
and let the splint stay on the leg, and all the times it is not in default, if the envolope wraps around the splint, and the swelling; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely issued; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction or wound, and a bad disease;
because that is why it is necessary to treat it little by little just up to the head, and leave nothing or corpses;
and it is often this vein when it is treated with 5 punctures of a long needle, or of 10. and one vein comes to me, from which it issues 10 punctures of a long needle, and when you cut, if you find a broken or perforated place, and pierce just to the bottom,
if all of it issues; and let the material that is within be evacuated, and apply to the wound medicines that are penetrating without any purification for a day, then cure as with abscesses.
And often at this vein many roots, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and many come from wounds, and where it jumps into the rain; cure the wound thus as we have said before.
Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often has oxen,
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body ascending and descending, and they feel well along the alignment of limb to limb, as long as they straighten the skin or it heals, and then it bursts forth;
and it is engendered by putridity of certain humors, if they come forth like worms and snakes and lice and roundworms or belly;
and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot force more than when it goes:
it is necessary then that you bind the limb above and below with a strong, well-tightened bandage,
then cut above and the trailing flesh, and if the vein is deeply implanted in the flesh, you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cut above, and pull forward;
and it is necessary to use the patient's modification of bodily mixture with dissolving medicines for the bad humidors,
and beware of rotten flesh causing putrefaction.
From the pain which comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then it moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and soon after, his eyes climb up as if to a shoulder, more stiff than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder,
and then soon after it spreads throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
then I count that she twisted again within the body, as if I saw it.
I was greatly amazed how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and for this reason, it seemed that the constrained winds appeared;
and I did not appear to be according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
And when you wanted to cure this disease, and the patients felt that pain, it appeared as we have said, Here is the translation: and apply cautery to the joint; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat those who are troubled by winds, like foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's venom, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the joints of the body where they settle.
The diversity of them is that they have large points, and small ones, and curly, and swollen; and those that have jagged edges, and those that have lengths, and those where there are fragments; and that which falls into no member if it falls according to various ways: either in a principal member it curves,
like brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then into no place of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear. it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and swells the swelling that is on the brain, Here is the translation: and perhaps it happens without strength of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the white moist wound appearing as pus, and jumps out also like broken flesh;
and this is a sign that appears, if you keep to the cure, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or pierces the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not at all void; and by chance the sweat changes also like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and sweating cold, and fainting: he then feels without doubt that death is approaching.
And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves a healthy arm are that without flatulence, it jumps out of the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and shudders with cold.
And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and casts great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the loins.
And if the sausage or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the food.
And if the sausage or belly, and there is no point of wind in the intestine, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the sausage.
And if the sausage or belly is in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the arm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar members, are safe according to several more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not venomous, thus I will tell you that it happened to me, because I did something similar.
It happened to a certain man who had an arrow or a lance in the root of his nose: I probed it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and it was done without any harm.
And I drew out an arrow that had pierced into the fat of the eye beneath the eyelid, and the arrowhead was removed, and he could not touch it except for the tip towards the thigh. and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with a very light iron shaft without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And it pierced a throat of a Christian with an arrow, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I softened the barbarians, and I subtly worked on them until I pierced them, and the Christian was healthy.
And they pierced a vein at a man's hip, where it was swollen or bruised, and thought he would die;
and then after he had passed xxx days, his condition did not change; I cut into the vein, and I made an incision, and pierced it deeply, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose vein has fallen or dropped, and the wound was sewn up above;
and he keeps the arrowheads within, and does not at all change their natural arrangements, he finds no harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was swollen;
and he endured there a great pain; and many other similar things.
And it happened to a arrow to a certain prince, king, who had it implanted in his nose, and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded
I was called to the cure after it had been implanted for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and he felt aching and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I applied to the affected place a plaster made with attractant and digestive ingredients, because the abscess did not swell. and the abscess of the arrow appeared to me.
and the abscess of the arrow appeared to me. I put in the hot iron more often, and reset the wound immediately, and thus I kept the patient long tense.
until he felt the arrowhead. Immediately then his nose; and it was pointed at me. I put on the wound a medicinal corrosive ointment more often, until it was uncovered,
and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had lodged in the flesh; then I adjusted at the opening of the wound by that medicine aloe, so that the head of the arrow appears visibly;
and it crossed well the terms within three months,
and then I slackened if the wound where I applied the tourniquets, and one side and the other, and could not issue;
then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously use remedies of various kinds, until I took it in hand with well-made tourniquets; according to this sign that its form will come at the end of this chapter, as much as I understand it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restore it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows, if you put your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the books cannot take everything in.
but wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those who are present and failing, find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed unless according to two methods: where they enter through the skin, or through another part;
and that which jumps forth there where it enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and jumps forth many times now.
And if it does not jump out now, let it be until the flesh is purified around it, and the discharge is eased;
and if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot be discharged, let it be thus for some days, and the swelling will decrease each day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, so perforate everywhere with a subtle forearm, as much as the eyes within are enlarged, and then the treatment.
And if the arrow is replaced in the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, then one should make a complete tent. and if you feel it, if you pull with an unsuitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or vein, if you think that the wound is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow head or point to which it holds,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow head or point to which it holds, if you remove the skin which is stuck with ulcers so that you can cure, and then break or fold back the ears of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
and then break or fold back the ears of the arrow, so that you can extract it; and subtly take care not to break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
And if you cannot do it at one time, leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if you remove blood that does the opposite, so amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and guard against incision of the nerve and the vein, and put in a device so you can safely draw out the arrow without danger;
whether it is straight or crooked, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form they were in when the arrow fell on them; for it is the greatest aid that it should be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you;
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears as nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in this place if one sees or feels it apparently.
Cut then thus, so that the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it comes out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out.
and if it is the fault of the arrow, it is, one cuts all the way around it;
and if the fault is in the chest, and you see how to administer a remedy, if it administers an instrument that cuts; if the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then one cuts strongly;
and if the arrow is cut, it is cut with an instrument pointed inward, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the vein is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can. then heal the wound as it converges.
And if the vein is in the hand or foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the side, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, so you cut.
and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract, and then sew up the wound, so that it heals. and the treatment until she is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and you see the shape:
And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because it has or chief 16.
it is to know: certain glands that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech". and the certain arteries that are in the certain temples appearing; and the certain veins that are in the certain eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the small gutters which are on the neck; and the small veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augherich"; and the small veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is called the left side of the head, and people commonly call it the "vein of the head"; and the vein is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic; and people commonly call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side; and people commonly call it the "vein of the belly", and it is located on the pubic area; and it is the one that we bleed, which appears clearly on the skin.
And the saving vein is the vein that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the skin on the left side, and the second sophenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nessa" which is at the ankle of the other side;
and on the other leg are 3 veins beneath those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catharrhes, and with migraines; and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are rough like a dry cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a vis. as long as the veins appearing behind the ears in the veins dependent on the head: where the humps give you pain, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an infection;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then raise your hand above the entire vein above, and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you must traverse two ducts, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish;
then hold him steady, until he is healed;
and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an old one, and the vein, and accustomed optalmia, and at the course of the watery eyes;
and the quality of the healer is such as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then make a sign of incision;
then raise the heart above the vein at the tip of your index finger, and insert the lancet beneath; and raise the vein high, and the scalpel, just as you have done in other veins, and make a correction of blood according to your necessity;
then disengage the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their coping and their extraction, where the book begins.
The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic [head] as maladies of the ancient face, and migraine, and redness;
and it is of such a quality that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again moves out of place with a large flame.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
then the vein, and let the healthy part of the traversal be a little thick, a little long, a little wide flame, for there is no point of flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
The health of the vein of the hand is worth avoiding ague, and excessive sweating, and facial diseases. as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the wound is such that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches his nose to his left hand; and take the subtle flame long, and fix it in the lever in the space that is between the two nostrils; for the vein does not open well here, and the blood will start to flow now;
and do not go too much in depth, and make a correction of blood according to your necessity, then leave it a night, for it is almost completely restored;
The sanitation of the .ij. joints helps in the stretching of the wing, and at the beginning of messeliness, and in many diseases, and in epilepsy, and in corroding, and in herpes, and in swelling;
and the quality of the sanitation is that the patients stretch their neck one way and another, as we have said; and let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat.
then feel the vein of the loin a little broadly, then draw blood from it moderately, or as much as is needed.
then do another part in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the veins moderately together. so that the patient does not strangle; and let him sit until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the livers The health of the veins of the livers above, if they aid in gathering in the mouth, and in corruption of gums, and cracks of the liver, and pain of the nose and interior.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said; then turn the liver, and examine its veins, of which one is on the right liver and the other on the left; and they recognize them by their blackness, and by their having small black veins around them. examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if you examine the largest of each part, and thus make the veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
From the vein below the tongue The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the veins is such that if the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a dark vein:
examine one and then the other, and do not press too hard, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly examined are healthy in two ways:
where you prick everywhere it makes a wide flame, or subtle olive oil if you cut trenches, and is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the wide flame is very renowned, and is wide if you see:
And it has mastery over opening the veins that are full of thick apparent blood, and that contain thick blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame olive-burning:
and it's more subtly pointed, and is for cleansing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the healer to cleanse wisely, and that he should beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he touches the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not pinch the flame, but cut it off as if anesil.
And if the abscess does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, or you bleed into the vein in his arm: it opens manifestly; and take a flame-shaped iron, as we have said.
And if you want to recognize the joint of the injury, it is necessary that you stretch the arm, so that you touch the joint as much as you recognize the pulse; then mark the joint of the wound, and then stretch the arm, and take a flame-shaped iron;
and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the joint inflamed, for it is of the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it swelling above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is without an artery: Make haste then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then lift your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
Let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be without fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then open the artery so that the head of the veins returns; and let the blood flow.
And take a fist-sized bandage, and bind it, and take one of the moieties and place it well just next to the other joint;
if the wound is stable, that's good; if not, then cauterize, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
and the staunching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the ease of the arm.
The healthiness of the vein in a thousand ways helps that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too much in the front, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the sinews become inflamed, and by chance he cannot heal;
and this nerve is exposed many times, and if it does not expose itself in any way due to its subtlety, then you must wound the instrument aneasil; and avoid the nerve at your power.
And if he has a vein between the muscles, then it makes two long tubes.
The sanity of the cephalic helps, because it attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bloodlet on the olivary vein or on the martyr vein, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and not to hurt anything if one fails the first time, and then recommences. and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when it fails at first, but it does not irritate. The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not diminished unless it is guarded by sanity.
and to avoid future diseases; and let the vein operation be done on one of the three veins that are at the elbow: namely, the cephalic, fat, and basile vein; and one should operate at the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
and one should operate on the first day or the third, after 9 hours or 10 days.
The vein operation that is administered for illnesses has no fixed time determined, but only according to the need of day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until the seventh. Nor do they advise cautery for the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary to purge the intestines with a light clusters. if he has much retained filth, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and noxious humors from the intestines to the principal members.
One does not heal quickly who is too full of meats, nor one who is drunk, as long as they are furious, nor dropsical.
and it worsens on the sick one after passionate colic, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiplying of the habit in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and this is all the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of sweet body;
then subtle are the humors, if the blood is thick, through meats and through beverages and through medicines, if you have the pure power;
then enter into a bath, since nothing can deflect it, to make the blood more subtle;
and you prick of the vein beneath the third finger, as we have said;
and you beware that day of work, and of puncture, and of dislocation, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the veins be higher than those that are pricked, and rub the arm three or four times;
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
and then he rubs the shoulder with his hands until the veins swell, and he feels it;
then anoint the sinewy part with a little old oil, then place his finger of his left hand on that vein below the shoulder where it hurts, to anoint; so that the vein does not fade and fails to strike. For there are veins that fade like cords in the sinewy part, and if they have such ones that are full of windiness, if one inserts onto the flame, one withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or near the fastening, so the vein is not inflamed.
And if the vein is inflamed, and the patient expects it, let him wait a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps it will come to abscesses wounds; do not enter or bathe, then resume the health as it pleases them;
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then insert the needle into the entire flame directly;
and open it a little hastily, so that the eyes may be inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not resume the health, and put a little of the oil of lily on it, for it alleviates the body of blood's pain, and is mixed in this oil which the lily produces;
and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same makes a triangular and bulging wound, when one puts it on the limb; if the sinew is subtle and separates when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, similarly when it is not healthy unless at the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and put on the limb a sponge moistened with water and a little warm, and hold it in place for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place for a few days without any black or green discharge, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft flesh yielding to the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it may happen in short time without any artery; but the master surgeon does it by applying a dry plaster to strengthen the flesh, then treating with another treatment, until it is healthy.
And draw from each one blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it be subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large.
and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little, and he should be bled across, not in a puncture.
and this manner of health is saved from deterioration of blood and of decay of nerve, and is worth more than the health which has a long duration but not a broad one.
And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a mild purge with juice of green apples; if it is heated, then draw out three or four times.
And if it is of a cold complexion, then diminish beforehand the mild purge with syrup of muscat, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cherries, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if it fails in health, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use of other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to evacuate his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is afflicted by great pain, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
And he who wants to evacuate his arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, then bleed on the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to be bled from another place, then he should be bled on the second day or the third.
Because there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; if it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and to widen the opening as far as it reaches the pam. Then you observe all the signs of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it beats, so that death does not come into the body. and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and you do not know how to release the arm, and make blood flow out a second time, and the opening is closed, so that you press firmly on; If he is curved, let him stretch his arm hastily, for this would be bad.
but let him go as long as he feels it the second time; or you touch at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth. and put it on the small piece of silk, and press on it lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let him leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to bleed twice, then the blood flows from that same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the vicinity of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the healthy one is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so long as the fissure becomes red;
then it should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthy one now from across, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the wound be large, and let it be well pressed near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not reset the hand in warm water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger on the right hand is good against all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Here is the translation: and if you cross the vein, and if you cut through everything entirely, do not cause any grief;
and do not go too deeply in front, because the nerves are then stripped of skin;
and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot be opened.
And when you have drawn out enough blood as it seems necessary to you, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus make a scar of each wound.
Here is the translation:
The wisdom of the wise man is good for all the diseases that are below the body, as with diseases of the chest, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his wisdom is that the patient's pain is relieved by a warm bath, and rubbed on the vein until it perspires. and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go towards the kidneys;
Here is the translation:
And if you heal the wound on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and heal the traversing wound as in a copulant; and let the flames be anesthetized.
And if the saneness cannot issue forth, put the foot in water, and let it be well purged of the vein.
And if the healing fails the first time, restart the second above a little, because the limb is salty; Do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus make the wisdom of one foot equal to the other.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the level of the thigh, and its health is related to the pain in the leg, when it's because of hot blood.
And the quality of its health is that patients are between bad and good, and stretch above the thigh, three fingers in twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not appear; and if it appears, then the health is in all ways that you can, and by crossing. and it is good that you take it, for the vein is healthy, and it is very well received in many houses.
and it is good that you take it, for the vein is healthy, and it is very well received in many houses. And if you do not find it, look for any vein that opens or closes between the two feet, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
and make the blood flow as you wish, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healthy.
The healthiness of cupping
Cupping is done with horns, or with iron, or with glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
And this ventilation which is without touching is according to two methods: either it is with all fire, or without fire;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the ventous below the chin; and the cupping on the shoulders; and the cupping on the back; and the cuppings in the arms; and the cuppings of the legs; and the cuppings of the ribs; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this, one should not be afraid to take blood, as one does when bleeding a vein; and it is not fitting that it be administered, nor at all by fire nor sense of fire, in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is voided.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to administer, or by habit, if we begin each hour at the start of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each season;
for there are those who, when they have had the task of administering, have heavy heads;
and if there are those who find excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who spit a mouthful of blood, and have swollen the tongue, and redden their lips; and if there are those who bleed, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and similarly when it is in the midst of the month, we command to take a remedy after three hours of the day.
The saliva of the muzzle helps with the grip of the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this ventilation is in the place of the sainy of the cephalic,
and it does not suit anyone who is of a cold complexion in usage, or who has a catarrh, because this causes them great harm;
and for this reason it does not suit the elderly in usage, nor those who have cold heads or illnesses.
And those who are often sick, if they become obstructed, and for this reason it is suitable to put the ventose a little lower down due to the doubt of obstruction.
Here is the translation: and to a fracture of the collar bone above the arm, and to an injury, and to fullness;
and it is necessary to puncture, because it holds too firmly, if there is inflammation of the spleen or stomach or heart.
The ventosations are like this: the ribs of the neck if they cause pains of the head, and obstructions, and migraines, and to the strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the vein of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to place his hand so he does not cut the artery, and does not see the remaining blood.
The cauterizations of the mouth if they are worth a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the healthy state of the .ij. lips.
The cauterizations of the spinal column are worth a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The cauterizations of the sides are worth as much as those of the .iij. veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and command the surgeon to not make too many incisions, for the veins are naked and exposed, and he knows about the underlying nerves and arteries.
The cupping that is on the back is as if it were a remedy from the foundation, and for the underlying diseases, and it is necessary that the cup be large, and be of copper, so it has the power to draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The cuppings on the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from the entire body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers; and are in the place of .ij. sophisms, and of .ij. swellings, and always they clear the body after long use, and bring about a better disposition in many ways.
The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck immediately, and put it hastily, and remove it equally, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the red and swollen place, and draw out the blood's flow; then strike, and reapply the cuppings, and take care of the body's disposition, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once strongly, and make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize two or three times: the first time to subtly clear the path of the large wound.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood bit by bit, we suffice with only one application.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we recommend doing it frequently; and if the wound is deep, we cauterize deeply, and the goal is that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are obstructed, that you open the veins of oily apertives and dissolvents: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
And if it is one who has tender skin and large pores, it is not suitable to put oil.
but it is necessary to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And he who has much moisture, if he raises with the help of angelica, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have gross superfluities are raised by old wine, or water of elder, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not necessary to be more healthy with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventilation.
and it is necessary to warn when one must be ventilated and when it is ventilated. And beware of the person who is healthy being choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that they take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and peppery dishes, and roasted meat of a pig, and damp meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little peas and small birds and pigeons;
and the day when they will be purged, they should drink more than eat;
and it is suitable to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before the purging, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
The blisters that are placed without striking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, because these members cannot suffer blows on their surfaces.
and do not make them on the strength that they attract blood from member to member, as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place blisters on the belly and on the bowels to diminish the member;
and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue through adventure the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
and thus it happens when one places it upon the fire and upon the soft part when there is retained ventilation,
and these ventoses are administered emptied by suction so gently; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of warm water,
as in bad diseases of the lungs, and in such a manner that one fills the ventose with warm water or hot water in which one has cooked herbs of convenable virtue to them.
The form of the ventose administered by fire is thus:
And it should have two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth of forefront, and it should be placed beside the millet, a small opening, just as if to push an awl.
and let it be of iron, soft in front so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
and let there be in the millet a transverse rod of iron or steel, to put a grasping clamp,
and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
because the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean than the fat.
And one must then apply this cup to the limb:
take the candle of wax or oil, and put it in the cupping glass across the vein that is in the cupping glass, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and let the two be on the part that we have spoken of, so that when one wants to, if the vapors go, and remove the bandage;
and take hold of the dressing as before, and rewrap it often, if you have mastery.
In the bandage then, which is administered in malady of pleurisy, to all aching, it has no strength nor part, and is not administered unless when it is full of ache, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible;
and that is the method:
Here is the translation: and in the wounds of flesh, as we do with ulcers or abscesses, and similar things;
and the quality of the ulcer is such that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without putrefaction, if you take them;
and put a bandage on a tender sweet spot, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their belly; and then be free from vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the wounds;
and when they are swollen, and red, it is the time to apply a poultice, if it is the case or one can put a ventouse, one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
If not, then lift the limb of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the limbs are too numb afterwards along the course of the veins, so anoint with a cloth of linen in cold water, and put on, as long as the vein is constricted;
and if the veins are multiple, then put on a Vitriol ointment, or gall, and similar things, as long as it is constricted;
where you apply on the body many peeled and softened beans, and let them stay until they adhere to the skin, it will staunch now;
and if you have more of this mastery, take other similar ones.
And if the blood vessels do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle until the blood issues from it. and then apply them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere.
and when you see that they are falling, sprinkle some powder of aloe and of dried brookweed, or of ash, if they will now cling.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this chapter, that they did not find anything of the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I never found any good.
and I knew nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I studied so much that I treated the science, and through experiment, and through the experience of my life;
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of instruments that are needed, as I did in these preceding chapters.
It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so nothing will be lacking in total, just as weakness of body, or old age, or feebleness.
or if the tendons are not very strong, or too cold; and moderate cold joints, it is to know frozen joints, and flesh of oisel and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat rough fish, and do not fill oneself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, so you do not have doubt of a hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if you govern the patient according to their primary condition as they are accustomed.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as a fermenting fruit in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and more quickly repairs the fracture.
And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the weakness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children.
but it is not a cure, to reset the broken bone, that is, thick tendons which are hurt and join the limb together, so it enforces as it was before; and does not hinder any part of its function, and therefore it needs to be nourished with heavy foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: And if you break with a wound, and break at all a small crack.
And in each manner he has his engine, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes back to its place;
and it is known the break of the bone because the joint is twisted, and appears well by feeling, and sounds when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break;
but it can well have tortuousness, or fissure, or small breakage. It does not seem that you move to the hand, but put on medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold it subtly now.
And know that the breakage which goes into the joint, and are the disjointed parts, it is necessary now to put them in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not grow there.
and if abscesses grow there, let it be for a day, until the abscess is appeased; Then set it equal in the muscles where you can lift lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces; then hold steady, as it should be afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is in two parts, or hand, or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to two cords, or to a cord and to your hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are dislocated, you reset them by all means using additions in their places in the muscles where you can, and take care that through your work no harm or injury comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
And you feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to their work of abscessed and contracted member, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is at rest, scold the patient well that he should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so positioned that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and you must ensure it is set straight, so that twisting does not occur when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members, like arms and fingers and similar ones: so it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle wrapping;
and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for wide bandages encircle the entire large limb, and hold everything equally on all sides, so that there is no unevenness;
then put light entwining bandages, 3 or 4 tours, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little at all of the bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is slightly adjusted;
and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn it around again above the broken limb;
then return to the part below the break, and hold moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above;
Then place between the swollen ligaments of the loins or hips, so they are all equal, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on top something that appeases the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
Then stretch on your stitches, and be of a moderate size cane rod, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm branches, and be according to this figure:
But it is necessary that the stitch that one puts on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it suits the limb of smallness or greatness;
then hold steady on the stiles as you did at the first ligature, then tie above a vein similarly, just as in the first ligature on the fracture;
the tighter it is, the less; and it is necessary that the vein be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a gentle touch;
for if the veins are large, just as I have seen foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted cords of uneven thickness, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not suit that there should be less than two fingers' breadth between each stile.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the staples after the tightening in their healthy places, put beneath them a dressing of linen or a piece of leather, so that it does not become black.
When the wound is with the bruising, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not suitable to tighten these staples on the bruised members on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not suitable to put these staples on before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs suddenly.
and thus the manner of ancient remedies to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of remedy restoring fracture in many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way of remedy restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and myrrh, in proportion .x. 3; mirre and aloe, in proportion .v. 3; and alechil .viiij. 3; and make into powder, and mix with abundant egg white; if the complexion of the man is warm, use this remedy, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is suitable for many men.
Another way of remedy that is suitable for torsion: take myrrh and vismalve, in proportion .x. 3; mirre and aloe, in proportion .viiij. 3.; acacia .vi. 3.; Armenian bol .x. 3., and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and administer it.
Another way to plaster joints and bones dislocated from their place, and ease the sudden pain, and the size of the bone, and the fracture: take a new linen cloth, and apply it gently with oil and in warm water, and put it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore completely, but it is good for soothing an abscessed wound, and properly relieving pains.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthworm soil leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take roots of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, and a part of each; crush them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Another way to plaster stronger than the first, when an abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, a part of each; crush them, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Here is the translation:
And it seems that one should apply Galen's remedy to the broken limb, to restore it, by using warm dry things, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat a wound and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of men who have been beheaded, or wings of birds, and visnaga, and equalize them, and crush them, and make an ointment and apply it to the wound.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is his bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it, it will take many days.
And if pain comes to the wound, or becomes inflamed, without rest or swelling, if you hasten, and loosen it, and remove the ointment now; and take a lighter dressing, and a moist sea-sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the wound, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or moist compress with rose oil or water, and place it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplastering, and do not restrain it so strongly as before; and subtly treat until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess has cooled and reduced and pain and swelling have gone away from everything, and you have mastery of emplastering and bandaging, then resume it, just as you did initially.
And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not leave it loose for fewer than 8 or 10 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the breakage is corrected, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of various ways of fracture Many ways of fractures are, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures made by percussion of a sword, and the whole bone breaks just above the socket which is beneath the bone, as if it were crushed or shattered; and because of this, this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Where the sword cuts the bone from above, senselessly piercing, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is an embedded percussive blow, or a split or a break in the stone, or a fall onto the stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is implanted in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small split, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
And if the wound is made by falling onto a stone, or by a blow, or by similar things, and it makes the piece of bone enter downwards, and it is like the joints are set when they fall onto the hot coals; as it happens within the bones.
And it happens more to those who have a moist head of bone, like the head of a child;
and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged, like those; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of breaking through the pulling away from them, and the inquiry into their tension, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
The capillary similarity is known through this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs upon it, then it shows the black breaking.
In the treatment of the fracture, beware of the accidents of the patient, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of the column, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paralysis, and fever with ague, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the naval fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue beneath the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
And if the break of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the injured bone, and uncover it on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more subtle than you can.
And if the flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, it is helped by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscess bursts are appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut into the bone with an osteotome, and it is done according to .ij. ways of working: one way is that you cut at the narrow taillement beforehand, and this is the form.
And then I cut .i. another larger taillement than the first one.
And the second method is that you have many diverse instruments, some straight and others broad, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so you do not harm the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you adjust instruments with supports, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the outer layer, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each one comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have supports for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of supports:
The quality of piercing around the bone is that you put an instrument on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then replace the instrument a little further away, and do this all around, and cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you hold, such as pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have pierced the bone, and extracted it, it is necessary that you use an aperteur which is delayed from the bone to another instrument similar to a incisor, but it needs to be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no useless shells, if they lightly touch the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is what Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this incisory instrument, of which this is the form:
And do not cut on one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the web that is beneath;
If it is airy at the opening, then the bone is lightly set, for one sets the bone well without harming, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not pierce just to the membrane, and the bone is so slightly covered above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape off the scales with a subtle rasp, which you should have in various quantities, to adjust each location most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
If you rasp before with large rasps, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other delicate hair-like breaks and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you adjust the cause according to its direction; and this is a thing that is not easily understood by one who has not devoted his study to this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a bandage of linen, according to the size of the wound, and apply oil rose, and place it on the wound; Then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and apply wine and oil rose, and place it on the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another thread, and do not constrict it further until it holds the wound sufficiently;
and leave it thus for a day or two, until the heat of the abscess is appeased, then disperse it, and administer medicines such as radix of lily, and powder of violets, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and administer thus medicines without sharpness or biting;
and beware that the wound is thus clean, that you do not leave the infection, nor leave it to assemble pus, for when pus assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and decays, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one places on the wound something biting, it becomes inflamed from above.
Here is the translation:
And if you do not have fire that comes from the medicine that one has placed there, which has such a virtue, then it is necessary to take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil, and glue a drapnel, and put it on the wound. then you heal in many ways of cures that are necessary, until he is healthy.
Know that no times are the two parts of the nail broken above, or one part by the sole, because they are two bones; and this beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a wound or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your small finger or fingerless nail into the broken part, and set the break equally according to the natural shape of your finger, and in the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural figure. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come out at the joint, then it is necessary that you set it evenly on top of a slightly large radius.
And if the break is of two parts, then refashion another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed wound is pacified, then it will close at the top of the nail, tending to form a crust of linen threads, if the break is in one part.
Where you apply cautery to another part, the break is there; and let the tents be as large as they fill the pores of the nose.
And direct any restorer that one should soften the tents in broth, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites, and powdered millet; then leave the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes apply on where you have eyes of eagle in place of tents, and if it has a soft drapery within, and holds the breakage, and soothes the patient from within; or do as you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are observing, if you put cerotate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of dragon's blood.
And if apostemes (abscesses) occur, apply an emplaster made of flour of six herbs and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light bandages on top, and do not bind them too tightly;
and if the break in the nail is small, and it breaks into minute pieces, remove the extraneous parts with suitable instruments, then sew up the crack, and treat the injuries with charms, and suddenly, as with suitable emplasters and ointments;
and if there is no deep wound in the nail, treat it with tents, and apply a poultice of pounded plants, so that it may be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of injury above, and the break is dislocated thus slightly, and it is not broken in two, because it is held together by the corbel inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and put the break inside lightly, and hold it with the other hand above, and set it evenly.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated upwards, it is necessary that you administer extension of the jaw thus, so that it is even.
And if the movements of the teeth are disturbed, or broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jaw a cerote, and put on it a double drapery; and put on the drapery a well-made staple, or a piece of even leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then set it back in place because it is changing; and apply a poultice made of powder from the mill with abundant water or flour of six grains, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are bitter, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
And if abscesses come, treat them according to what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, remove the useless piece of bone that is in the way; if you subtly remove the obstacle with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to the need.
And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of the strength The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is fracture with wound.
And the operations are when the fracture is without wound, that you have two ministers, if one holds the shoulder that feels the strength broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put equal the fracture to your fingers, so that the form be as it should, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have mastery of extending, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or of wool, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you make equal the fracture, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot bring the head of the forceps to the surface, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient gaze upwards at his shoulder, and put under the shoulder a soft oreiller, and push the ministers down below, so that the bone of the forceps be raised.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel that it is broken in pieces, then it is necessary that you sew up; and pull out the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess flesh, then take one of the incision tools that you have; but put under the forceps this instrument, to guard against excessive flesh.
and it seems a spoon, and it is not a gauge, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have .ij. fingers, as you see, and let one be large, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, then fill the wound with drapels and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if you soften with a drapnel in rose oil and in axle grease and in wine, and apply it on top.
The strangulation of the bone, when it is without wounds and without bruising, is that you apply on the bone a plaster made of powdered millet and egg white, and apply light staples above, and place a splint beneath, if you are skilled in this; then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then apply a double layer of drapnel above the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended; and set the steel on the bruise, and turn the bandage on the neck, and below the healthy spine, and below the affected spine; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, if it is rewarded every day, and when the ligaments relax, if it is restrained;
and make the patient sit on his back, and place it when he sleeps; a small pillow below the spine to lift the shoulder high; if you align the bruise with the force of the joint, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so that bad accidents do not happen, for twenty days;
then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and restrain it and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored to its full extent in twenty-eight days, and with less trouble to anyone.
of the bruise of the shoulder
Here is the translation:
And if a part of the bone projects forward, and not below the heart, if it is placed thus, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscessed heat.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is not often broken in the middle, but it happens little; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of health, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and that is not good.
And the restoration is that the patient lies thus on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplaustres and stoups above the subtle layer of salt, or another lighter dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it on the broken bone, so it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes loose, then hold it fast; and if it seems to dislocate, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the flesh, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and remove the dressing, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the dressing, and hold it firm until it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
You know that the breaking of the ribs only happens because of great blows to the back, and at the inner chest, and they do not break unless they are brittle; and one feels it well by inquiring into the two [ribs].
And the restoration is that you make equal the break, as it is suitable. And then put on the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just as if it were a pleurisy, because the bone points to the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits great abundance of blood, and it is of grievous health, and the old men have put great effort.
And if there are those who say that they should administer foods that inflate the stomach, to soften the fracture by bloating.
We do not do this, for abscesses would not come, if it had not arrived. And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
And they said that one should not put ventouses on the limb, to suck out the ferment, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the superfluities from the limb by the disposition of weakness.
And they direct that one should cover the limb of a wounded hand with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to set the straightness within, then let it be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain which they cannot bear through the opening that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break into the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to protect the syphac; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then stitch up the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with emplausters, until they are healthy. And if aposteme wounds come, then put on dressed fabric soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb; and cure meanwhile the limb of those that need to be apostemed, and be gentle on the ribcage where it should be, until they are healthy.
of the break of the neck
Sometimes a break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will be broken; and also in the spine of the back. And when it happens to no one, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see if their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, you do not feel anything. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they change and feel well when one holds them firmly and precisely, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so that one can put a cure on it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take care to see if the feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is involuntary evacuation and senseless ejection; and when one evacuates it from their belly, it ejects without their will. And when it is evacuated from their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain for their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly regarded.
And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of May dew, so that it be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone dislocates, then it is necessary to cover the wound with a bandage; and remove the bone, then assemble the edges of the wound, so that it is large, in one piece, then apply the treatment of anointing with charcoal, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "head of the knee", you put your pouch on your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on the poultice, then put the plaster and the stave in place, so that you have mastery over it; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make a fomentation, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it is, then there will not be a little bit of easement at the head; and make a long splint, and decline to the sides, and comes to the patient's pain in the limb, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upon it, so that you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and the shape of it are; and if the fracture is at the head only, then put equally on that fracture, so that it may be in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient sit on his belly, so that the restoration of this fracture can be well-perceived. And when you have set it straight, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and place the limb under the ribs, so that the binding is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if the abscesses come, do not touch them, so that the abscesses are appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The joints are those which are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, one must restore it according to one of the methods: one of which is that you take a full fist of moderate size, in this form:
And place the joints in this way, and hold them high, and sit the patient on a seat; then put his arm dislocated on the stick, until it reaches the joint, and has in the middle of the stick, then holds onto something heavy or the attendants hold it from below; then put the fingers on the break even with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other method is that one places the patient on his shoulder, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the attendants that one holds what is on the break with their hands, and the others hold below all the joints, and each extends to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold it back below the breakage, and above the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then it must be placed below the joint, and another towards the side, below the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, then it must be placed lightly, without labor, until the breakage is even above the joint, and above the side; then set the breakage even, as it must be, and hold steady, so that apostemes do not come.
And if apostemes come, then do not hold back until seven days, and put on a soft linen bandage with oil of roses, until the apostemes are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place the plaster on the breakage, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the dressing, and hold steady on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so that nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the breakage a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be as large as it passes the breakage by two fingers on each part; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, stronger and less aloof.
And if you see the seat of the stars, and the straining, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of the 14 days, lest the vein should not swell with life coming to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you address, as we have said.
And if such accidents come to pass, do not unbind before 14 days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and place their hands on their stomach; and put the joint under a plain cushion of equal thickness, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; if you address by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is first subtle; and when it begins to recover, may it be gross. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be recovered in 40 days or so; and then one must unbind and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb. And if the stricture is lazy and numb, let it stay bound for 50 days or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
Here is the translation:
When the small veins are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings; and when the large ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they were broken and healed together. If it's the small vein that's broken simply, then you must extend lightly, and set evenly.
And if it's the great fleshy part, it needs to be stretched more strongly; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient cross himself in the same way, and place the cushion before him higher, so the patient doesn't suffer any hardship; then stretch out the minister's arm at the part below his hand, or at the linen, and another minister above. And then he puts the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we said before.
And if with the breaking into a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, apostemes appear, apply the dressing made of cerote oil and white wax, so it is not too hard nor too soft; and lay the dressing on subtly, until the inflamed apostemes are calmed. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of powdered mill dust with abundant egg white, then place the staples, and let the staple of the break be stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have twenty staples or arms in different positions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or in the other; and hold more strongly on the break than elsewhere, and touch less often, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is stretched from linen, be not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And rewound the limb and the linen afterwards for some days. And if some bad accident happens to the limb, as a bruise that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you warm the limb with lukewarm water, so that the bruise may be appeased; and let the limb not be tightly restrained. And then recommence the strapping, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones disjointed, and similar things, it will be addressed.
And if you take a ward that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold it steady.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not release him until 20 days or when it is better, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and jerkiness, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers, there are few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent swelling.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient's arm be crossed, and it stands directly in front of him evenly; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministres the broken bones, and sets them even with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and he applies a plaster and poultices, so apostemes do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the injury; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the partition within the belly of the plant, he makes a sphere of bandages, and instructs the patient to bind it to his broken plant; and then he tightens with a long bandage, and it is the splint of soft leather, as big as the plant of the hand, and he binds, if it is necessary.
And if the break is in the fracture, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is covered and straight, then he ties everything around the hand, and tightens the ligament between the two.
And if the break comes to one of our two bones, it is the pouches, he sets it even, as it is necessary; and he binds with the plant, and if you see that he puts a small straight splint to lift the break, and does not move; and if the break is in the other two, as in the index or one of the others, he sets it even, and binds with the healthy finger that follows; or he binds them all together, holding strongly, or he puts on a splint, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the aposteme wound, and heal what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is that one binds it above the break, and another below. And the patient gazes at his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the hip, then one of the bands goes towards the thigh, and the other bands below the break. And also if it is near the knee, then the bands are placed beneath the knee, and then extended downwards; then put the mirrors to the bone equally with its two natural joints, and then apply the plaster, and place the bandage, so that abscesses do not form there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the treatment is done in such a way. It is necessary that you envelop the fracture thus. Bend a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then twist the leg so that the ankles come to the root of the nail, and place a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then put it on the fracture thus, and put a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to tighten the binding, then start to bind strongly two or three turns on the fracture; and as you go higher up on the fracture, and loosen the binding less; then take .ij. heads of the thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and tie .iij. sticks that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, so that you come below the foot; and the binding, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then it will not come to an abscess or an inflammation like this.
And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are pricking, then you must extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then one must break the bone, and make a furrow; and the treatment is done as we have said, until it is healthy.
And no time is the thigh broken thus as one puts these sticks, just like in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration done thus, it does not hide the evils.
And know that the blood flow is restored on that day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
of the gutter of the knee
Know that in the gutter of the knee there is little breakage, but it often splits. And if it breaks, it's not just a fissure, or a perforation, and has all kinds of wounds, and without wounds, and this feels very well.
And the restoration is when you put back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then put in the filling, and insert a round staple, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it requires, then reorder all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other breakages, such as hot abscesses and similar things; put in each accident what it requires, so that it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, because one is called by right "non-muscle", and the other is called "foscile"; and every fracture comes as it does to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely in all parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one sees it well; and turn beneath. Then adjust the extension, and make it even, and lay the bones evenly; but however, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and adjust according to its strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that surround the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and lay it in the middle, so that the leg does not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one will hinder the length of the leg, which is wooden, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the break where there is a wound; and remove it every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and both ankles, and they do not have more than five positions.
And if it happens that you break two bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on the joint where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at the plain joint, then hold the foot firmly in place, then envelop it with drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that small table I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, put on each toe a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in linen drapels, and hold the small table under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the small table, so that it touches the belly of the foot well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, which we have discussed; and attend to each accident as it requires.
from the breaking of the bone one should prick
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, if she makes it swell, then incline to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with the cotton of the nature, and put a big stick in it; then lift the woman, and little by little lift the back, and then jumps the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stick; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or eight: it will restore the breakage, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a thread around the penis, and blow into the bladder strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the breakage; then fill with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the thumb of man is broken, or of woman, if you restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the hip; and these nearby breakages are not hidden from one who applies his study and use, and intends my book. For the breakage signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration: intend to give.
In the verge, when it is broken, take an eye of a bone and put it in the verge; then envelop it with a cloth around, and leave it eight days or nine, and it will be healthy soon.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set right now, so that the signs we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is healthy, apply the vitriol ointment, if you have no other thing, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears above the uncovered chest, it is necessary that you put it in place gently with your hands, with small extension.
And if the extensions are not apparent for putting in place with your hands, then take hold of this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary in the mirror that it takes hold of 3 or 4, according to whether it is necessary in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so it does not slip on the compression above the limb at your work, and let it be straight beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus.
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed above the apparent bone; and let it be bent once, so it recovers, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it is necessary that you grasp the head of the bone, so the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take hold of an instrument suitable for this, or incision or sewing, at your power; then reassemble what is remaining in the bone, with rough and minor stitches.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure it is in its place, then apply a black sticky plaster, and properly cover it with this; and do not put anything on the wound that has oil, so it does not cause decay and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times foolish people have done this, and have caused death or corrosion on the patient; and may the constriction be gentler and softer than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents will occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in place of these, hard bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, one day or two days, to improve the wound, remove what you had put on all wine, and apply ointment to heal wounds, as you would apply tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you elevate the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowels are carried downwards lightly.
And if it happens often, and it cannot be repaired but rather the bowels return again, because there are small pieces of bone, for which reason it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause that pain.
And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter beforehand. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
of the bruises that come upon the skin
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should be; or because there were too many bindings, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to numerous abscesses; or due to too great movements, not at its proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and happiness; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the abscesses often dry up, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it regains its natural shape.
the member is twisted after the healthiness
Here is the translation:
And sometimes the node is removed by continually and lengthy rubbing with moist hands. And let there be gentle movements made to the limb every hour.
And if the tortured area is enveloped and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be removed with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, with subtle and light incision; and put caution and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be re-set back in place.
For if it is delayed, the limbs swell, and by chance if it is reset to its place; for that reason it must not be moved at the hour when it is swollen: many times spasms and other pains come.
Always, when it happens, make the patient healthy, then let him be, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on the dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
of the jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaw are in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its original position more easily.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in this manner that the ministers touch the head of the patient, and put their fingers as if grasping one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other finger of the hand should be deft, to set straight; and instruct the patient that they soften their jaws, and move them from all parts.
And the fingers place it straight, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is difficult, especially if they are the two jaws together, with warm water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset straight, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, then place a warm cloth soaked in oil of rose and wax on it, afterwards binding it lightly with soft linens.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be steady between two pillows, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor overexert himself in changing, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not strain to open his mouth while eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their place at one hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and excessive sweating come, and perhaps a solution of stomach pain, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a prediction; and many times he who has had it dies, within eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge from the joint within the continuity of the bone and the flesh, and it is dislocated many times at the weakness, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is near the hip cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated many times, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and thus it is necessary to reset the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates at the top part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the joint, especially in those who have little flesh, because in those it happens quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it happens at the points, and returns to the points.
And by chance, some men have a blow or fracture, and inflame the shoulder of a hot abscess, and think it is dislocated by that.
It is necessary then that you examine them, so that you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the axle, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them diverse manifestations; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axle touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a foreign object; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movements;
and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the touch;
and this manner of dislocation is not forced to reset, when it is new, or if the infants are sick.
And the method is that the minister raises his hand from the patient above, then places his fingers underneath the joint, and raises the joint with force above to the place; and the minister raises his hand, and stretches it above, then puts it underneath; if it will come hastily.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should gently soften and soothe, as with a decoction of altaea and fenugrec and mellilote in water, and thus be soothed.
then let the patient be warned on his back, and place underneath the seat a stick of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors at his heel on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it in this manner.
and it is that you make the patient be present, a man who is bigger than the patient; and let him stand upright beside the seat of the patient, and put his shoulder underneath the seat of the patient, and lift the seat high up, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another minister treats the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick in the ground, so that the head should be just as steady as a pestle, and not too big or too slender. then place it under the patient, but let there be soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing far from the stick; then extend their hand downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, then make this cure: take a stick of two cubits and four fingers in length, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the bone, according to this form:
then place it on the head of the stick with soft drapings, so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then put it under the bone of the patient; and extend your arm on the stick from afar, and join the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair of sufficient width, and extend your hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now be set.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary to put under the seat a layer of equal wool, then apply the plaster made from powder of soft mill, with incense and album of egg, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold under the seat strongly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand at its neck, and let it remain thus.
And it is necessary to massage little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more afterwards, five or six days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is weakened from its place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary to administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five days, and the joint cannot hold together, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is wounded or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Here is the translation:
And if after healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and tardiness in movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the joint
You know that the joint of the joint is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, because one sees well and feels well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the injured joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus, so that abscesses do not come to life, for if abscesses come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is behind; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arms be stretched out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count around, above and below, and bend the joint at its fingers assembled, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and iron at the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold fast with two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the mirror joins the joint to its hand, anoint it with no oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint forcefully, until it returns.
and when it is in place, set a dry plaster with egg white, and hold the arm firmly, and bend the arm at the collar of the patient, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not close well, restart the plaster and bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
And if he feels grievous after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, soak it and rub it well, and press until it is alleviated; or you put on the joint a fatty woolen cloth, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter into a bath. and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the cloth back on, and then enter into a bath; and do it two or three times, until he is healthy; and if you see, set on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady; if it returns to its proper disposition.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints However, it must be quickly returned to its place, at the same time that it is dislocated, so that the limb may not become swollen, or an abscess may not form there.
And the reduction is that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers of the hand, and the doctor places them evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place; then put the sick part of his hand on a table at extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand on the table, and the mirrors put their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, then hold the swelling down with a poultice, and let it settle so that it may recommence sensing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot stretch anything at all: then know that the nerves are injured, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to cauterize according to the case, and by chance nothing else will work.
And when the hand is in its place, set it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it be still for a while, then release it and let it be so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no stiffness, apply warm water compresses, and rub it so that it becomes healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any part, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
Here is the translation:
and let it be still for a long time, and then make it even that day; and of the night, as we have said, and loosen it that day, and make it move, and relax it at night; and do this frequently, until it is straightened.
and do the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations are sudden and violent, cannot be held back, and often soften some member, or the two hips or the two arms or the two legs.
And often the shinbone changes to three parts; that which changes at the back is called "gouty".
The treatment is that you should warn that the gouty disease came from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole body.
And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures proclaimed grand words, where there is no great profit in all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instructions in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before the pest, no one is healthy;
and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those unless it is properly treated which comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in a straight line, and have a strap underneath him, so he does not slip;
Then apply a firebrand to the head on the ground firmly, and another to the feet, and bind a linen thread around the affected areas of the patient, and another to the thighs, and to the knees, and to the ankles.
and two ministers tie the linen threads, one to the head and the others to the feet, among the two firebrands.
and be well fastened, the firebrand thus as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover through this cure, take a table of three long arms, and place it under the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and insert the head of the table under the patient, then put the middle of the table on the spine. and put the mirrors on the other head of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it thus in the tourniquet that turns on the hand.
And it is that you place two tongs at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the other feet, and have between each tong, above and below, a space of one finger's width;
and have in each tong a perforation, where the tourniquet runs, and let the tongs be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two tongs have one turning tong, on which the ligature turns, and have in two turnings two small tongs of one finger's width, to turn the tourniquet;
and then tie the ligature which is among the bundles to the tourniquet towards the head, and the other ligature towards the feet at the other tourniquet, and each of the ministers turns their tourniquet to all the ligatures, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then place a soothing plaster with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then an instillation from a tablet of two inches long, which grips the part of the spine and the healthy part of the vertebrae, then bind with a ligature, as we have said, and use the subtle skill of healing, so that it may be sound.
and if something comes to the end of health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the instillation that we mentioned before; and sometimes one administers in a piece of lead.
and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear of the spine behind the back, and one believes that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which reason one must not have any presumption: lest by chance death may come.
of the dislocations of the hip
Here is the translation:
And the knowledge of his dislocations is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the ailing knee than the healthy one, and cannot bend his knee towards the fire. and it is the limbs that are weakened by hot abscesses, because the head of the hip comes there.
And the signs of the one who reaches death, it is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one who has reached beforehand, it is that they extend their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and inflames the ankle, and when it walks, it passes above the heel.
And the signs of the one who has it behind, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and it is the head of the hip beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no treatment; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of three kinds of dislocations, you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch inside and outside, and move to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should apply a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one lien that is tied above the knee. and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then he tightens with a soft thread on the thigh; and another one ties the top of the thread around the hip;
and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to three similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's good.
If not, then you must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, then you should place the patient on their healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the thigh, and the limb that is beneath the angle, then stretch the thread up towards the angle, and towards the stronghold;
Then take another minister by the arm, and embrace the large limb of the hip joint, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong and soft lien above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the others.
Then let it be suspended from the top of a pole, and let it be one arm's length above the ground; then command a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister hang with the patient, who embraces the hip in its former shape, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is in its former shape, then adjust the patient, as we have said in the one who has had it reset, and tighten the lien properly on the injured leg, and on the foot also.
Then put the fire irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then place the fire iron between the hips of the patient in the form. and have wet draplets around, so they do not blister the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal in his hand to the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, you must extend the injured leg hastantly, and according to what I have said; and place the mirror on the painful area of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the hips, it does not need to stretch the patient downward, nor lift off the ground, instead it needs to be just as if the joint was dislocated upwards, as we have said about lying on the .ij. joints; and it is on his face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put on the plaster, and restrain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and rest for two or three days, then remove it, and put on the plaster above; and if you see that they are even, restrain them, as before, and leave it for two days; then remove it, and make it be well-conforted, until the limb is comforted.
about the dislocation of the knee
The joints are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, forward, and backward; and they do not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if he does not adhere to his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg as much as he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet.
then take his knee in your hands, and pull it between your two, then bend the three bones of the knee forcefully; and another minister extends his foot, until the joint returns to its place, and the signs are that he adheres well his leg to his thigh lightly.
And put the emplaster on, and make a straight line from the thigh to the hip joint, and bind it strongly for 3 or 4 days, then remove it; and do not disturb the patient's trouble further, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes sprained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the flesh is swollen, and it pulls ahead to the part where it is dislocated:
The reliefs are easier, and one must extend them easily with their hands when they are somewhat numb.
And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit upright, and tighten the bandages strongly by the leg, above the flesh;
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left. Do this several times, then stretch it high, and push the foot well up high;
and do it several times, as we have said, by bending and stretching the foot; if it returns to its place, that's good; if not, start the treatment again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a pillow firmly on the ground between his hips, and wrap the blankets around, so that the patient does not slip.
then stretch the muscles of the hip, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that it lies on the neck of the foot. then stretch each minister equally, and the pillow should be placed between the patient's hips to hold the patient in place when one stretches them.
Then put the mirrors equal to the dislocation in his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns quickly.
And when it is at the point, set the plaster and stitches above, and strain forcefully, and bind the foot to the leg, and wrap the nerves that are on the back of the knee, so the ligaments are not too stretched.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are swollen, strain; then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and delay sending the patient away for four days. and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, you must apply it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
of the two
When the fingers are dislocated, if they need to be nicely stretched without effort, and it's a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the toes or fingers, then you must make the patient sit on a flat plain or table straight, and put your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is equal, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a table at the knee, then strain firmly, and let it be for two hours, then disjoin it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and be piteous and merciful and slow, not harsh.
and begin with gentle things to calm the hot abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, if you reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscesses dry up and come to life;
and when the limb is in its place, you should administer soothing things to calm the abscess, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with desiccated remedies.
and if there is dislocation with fracture, and you do not despair, if the bones, and do what we have said in simple illnesses.
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen.
