Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I should accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and there remains nothing more of it except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is set aside.
It seems to me that I should vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will gather together the forms of the remedies of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is prolonged. And it is necessary for one who undertakes to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations from each other, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and resting of veins, and the issue from them.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the non is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest he fall into error and harm men; thus I have wanted many times more than those who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Here is the translation:
And I saw another marvel that treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large; if he carried with him a piece of his bladder, and the man died within 22 hours.
And I had already been called by the trainer, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if one touched it he would die.
And I saw another marvel that took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the marvels, plain from ignorance, held the break steady over the wound as it was by strong binding, and did not leave the wound any salve, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be undone; and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I released it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But throughout the journey the corruption was already confirmed in a limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was almost lost.
And you see another case that bursts an abscess inward, and then becomes inflamed due to the evil of its dominion.
For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into three divisions: namely, avoiding where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to take care of yourselves, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in custody, and take hold of your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised; and leave behind the grievous diseases of sorrowful sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad disease, lest you be called foolish people."
I have divided this treatise into 12 chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicinal cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments, and the iron of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest words and subtle science and secret responses; and from this speak many wise men, and agree with this; and I suffer little from their words, for I reduce the length.
I say that fire cautery aids universally for every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that hot complexions lack matter, and dry complexions lack matter.
In hot and dry complexions, they assembled matter, some devised that fire cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not effective for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot illnesses by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite, that fire cautery makes great aid for hot and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of man and his moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body frozen.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true many times through experience.
And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it's not named.
The burning medicines come from one member to another by transmitting, and cause the member to come to grievous illnesses through bad sanitation; and thus the patient is often injured.
The fire is not for its height and for the goodness of its substance, it does not do this, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I would reveal the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it debuts the diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree at the time when they are doing the cauterizations, and they choose prompt ones.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries that occur are easily treated by the help of cauterization; and also the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasten them so that greater harm does not come to the limb.
And do not think of anything, dear son, as fools gaze; for the disease that is healthy due to cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that alters the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine by the speed of its value, and by the virtue of its work and its dominion.
And it is possible that the disease returns several times according to the complexion of the patient and the virtue of the disease and its dominion; and they are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of vices and similar things, so it is not cauteries administered in place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of density against pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return at all; but it happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered methods of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth. Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish gazers.
The ancients said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than iron, and did not say that those fires were because of the quality of the gold and because of the height of its substance; and said that the uses of cautery do not make putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauteries of gold are worth more than iron, as they told us.
And however when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is quickly cooled; and if one heats it too much; they make at the fire; and thus there is enough of an obstacle.
And for this reason we use iron cautery that we have made appear more suitable to our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter of the main things just below, so that the way is easier to find.
for the olive cautery
These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for multitude of songs and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and meanwhile all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine modifying the head, either three or four times, according to whether the strength and age and habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make the head of the patient ready.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of your feet; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
And place the sign of ink on the affected area, and make a gentle incision and extracting with your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand slowly, and examine the area if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little of silk, and put it in a soft and wet cotton cloth, and place it on the affected area, and let it be for three days; afterwards put on a moist poultice; and leave it on until the swelling is gone; afterwards treat the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And so said the old ones, that the more one delays in opening the wound, the more it festers; and for this reason, it is of no help.
And some of these said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and it will be cured.
And others said that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press so hard that one detaches a piece of bone as large as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux (because the humors issue forth badly); and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and solder it.
And these two types of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvific and milder for me, and thus I often use it in assembling health.
of the old pain of the head
When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, one should use the remedies of yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of applying plaster; and if one performs the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not effective.
Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize beneath that cautery a little that we have mentioned above.
After fire cautery on the corner of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do the cautery where it is called "vasselez"; and it is put in a place where one applies ventouses; and lift your hand so you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those on which one performs cautery on the softness of the head, and that's the method.
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged by Mondifian medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases are made, and none of these profit: then you do cauteries according to the methods, namely medicine against ague and fever.
The cauteries of medicine against ague are that you take a dose of alum, and remove the scab and recover the affected part of the head, and then make a temple where the pain holds in some manner so that you can apply the dose of alum under the skin; and when it is applied, bind it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then unbind it and treat further with the dose of oil, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put a poultice on the affected part in a wrapping cloth so that it can be inserted.
After the treatment of burning, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that I have written about certain burning medicines or twelve treatments of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery to the shape it is in:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a key or it has .i. little curvature, and in the middle of a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the thickness of the skin be heated; and lift your hand so that the artery does not become hardened, which is defective, and decorates abundant blood.
After putting cotton in the seat of the wound, and placing it on the spot for two hours; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then treat the spot of burning as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to block the artery in this emigraine which is not yet old.
from migraine
When you treat migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned before in medicine do not suit it, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and mark also on the painful spot a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold steady so you do not touch the artery and do not reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the decormentation of blood from the artery when it is touched, where there is great fear and dismay in him who does not know, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the vein in the middle path; but I will tell you how one restores blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you on the spot where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. Coutelz; and these cauteries are better than that one and more helpful.
of ear pain caused by cold.
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form.
After making a point around the sick ear, or around the eyes if the pain holds in both, and you remove a little from the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the wound; and there are ten points around each ear; after healing the place until it is healthy.
of mouth torment
Torment that must be healed by cautery is not just from those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses; and do not make a point of cautery on similarities that come from numbness and spasms of nerves.
When you treat this kind of torture that moves with flows of tears and evacuations of the head and gurgling, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little below the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery exactly at the top of the ear above a little from the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery so long as the middle of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the similarity of the cautery that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cauteries be a little larger; after healing the wound as I have said before, so long as it becomes healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: one on the horns of the head, one in the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured thus as we have said before.
of the sluggishness
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient big and round mondifiants pills for the brain; after that, place on the back of the head the plaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
If he is thus insane, it is good; and if he is not, do three cauteries on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cautery of two fingers' width; and cure as for others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, do a cautery in the middle; and if the mastery is, do others on the horns, and cure until he is sane; and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be done as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of years and of what we have said before; after resetting the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery in the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is fierce, make three fire cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is reached, and lift your hand; after curing so that it becomes healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics must not use fire cauteries except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first purify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers greatly from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, make a gargling and mastication purifying the brain frequently with good meat; after resetting the head in the middle, and I make one fire cautery according to what we have said before, and one fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is fierce and suffering, make fire cauteries as I said for those who have paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and may the "olivier" fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is weak, then have them undergo subtle fire cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross humors, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for one who is paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining excessive humors into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clarify their brain, according to what is written in the division.
After resetting the patient's head; after make a well-made torc of linen, also like a circle, if you put it on their head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly in all parts; after apply the liniment, and take care not to burn with old bitter berries; and heat it with tempered fire, so that they do not suffer from the poultice; after remove the circle from within their head, and let it cool down; and do this for the patient every week once with another good government, until they are healthy.
Where you apply the fire cautery, make points all over the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then put on cotton wool in a pimple and in fat of a hen.
of the juice of the eyes When the juice comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have told in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times a day.
After the command to restore his head, and make him apply a cautery in the head, and make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of the juice is from the .ij. eyes together, or in one eye if the descent is in one; and cover all the cauteries with all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the disorder of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a little powder as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will hold it steady; and no one has ever made a cautery or burned beneath the two last ribs.
in the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear in the forehead defects; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold flatulent humors, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the treatment descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or burned beneath the .ij. bones; and if it needs more, if you cauterize strongly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
in the course of tears from beneath the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three evil humors; afterwards, raise the head, and apply fire cautery or mild olive oil cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the three sorcis, a little beneath the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it. And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive". Because this is its shape:
And if you see that three cauteries are applied on the three sorcis as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into thorns, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and they are even, then put the patient in their healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if it were the flower of a dead tree, and it is the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton wool in the glaire of an egg and musk oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery in the form of which it is.
Here is the translation:
And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same spot, as you did previously; and if the hairs are burnt, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The medical cauterizers are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and lively charcoal, one half ounce of each, and mix well together; and apply hastily, so it does not get cold, then spread on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, one must operate on one, and if both alike; and put underneath the eye a soft cotton soaked in water; and the head of the patient should be in good health and show your finger pointing to the medicine, and press a little and move all the times that the patient feels biting sensation from the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger. And when the biting sensation has passed, lift the skin of the eye, and see if you see the skin lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the spot where the medicine did not take effect, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put soft cotton soaked in water in a poultice, as long as the bitter humors are expelled, after curing the eye of the affliction which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if it's necessary that you take great care of your work through careful attention so that not a single point of the medicine is missed by the eyes.  And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on the spot where the skin is softened properly, just as you have done before; after the treatment until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of the mirte:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adapt your constructions accordingly; and do not miss the right way for him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Here is the translation:
After pressing the fistula is opened, and in drawing out the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, so the eye, and draw four fingers to the bow; after put on the hot cautery cauterizing strongly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail beneath the eye, so that your hands do not cause folly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupts.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then recommence the cautery once again, and another time you have mastery over it, and leave it two days; after I put on a cotton pad moistened in borax, and the cure of the ointment desiccative until it is healthy, and if ten days pass that it is not healthy, then put on medicine with corrosive powder so that the bone is uncovered; and take according to what comes into its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then take the fistula, and open the vein; after put in the opening a subtle camel-hair brush, which is the form: and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient at all points, so that the molten lead does not run to its eye; and it is suitable to put on the eye a cotton pad moistened with vinegar or in water: the lead if it is the lead of the fistula, and it heals marvelously through the sanitation.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then one must administer pertus to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the nose according to what is suitable for its own location.
of cracks in the lips Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks in the way we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then scorch it with a small cautery tool according to this form:
And apply heat quickly to those cavities until life comes near the source; afterwards treat the affected limb thoroughly until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes a putrid and rotten fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit: then it is necessary to have fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron touches the source of it, and behind the affected limb; and do thus one or two times, afterwards treating as we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the affected limb and cut out the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
Here is the translation:
And in this manner, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the jaw is softened, restrained, and the gums are corrupted, dry.
from the pain of the teeth
When pain of the teeth comes from coldness, where there is coldness or glass, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with wax and cauterization by fire.
Cauterization with wax is such that you take wax of a cow, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil it in melted wax, and put it on the aching tooth immediately and hold it until it cools; and thus do often so that its virtue reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wax and cotton are frozen, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron rod so that the virtue reaches to the judgment of the tooth.
Here is the translation:
When the scabs are of flux and of cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery that you apply afterwards, and it will have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery of the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or if the abscess is small, so put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus three days; and put on a soft cotton dressing in a burrow so that the discharge may be drained; after cure the limb of ointments and of tents so that it may be healthy.
When the moistures come onto the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by solutive medicines; afterwards make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but only a little. Afterwards make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before so that it may be healthy.
of the burnt area When all the diseases of the lung are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever nor cough, and it is an ancient disease, then make them two fire cauterizations on the ribs in their void; and another cautery between two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
And if you see, make a fire cautery pricking the entire cautery that is called "points" because of the form that is previously mentioned in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or however many are needed. After healing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three ridges according to this form:
And because they are lighter cauterizations, because you make three of them in a copy.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, soothe the patient on their back and side; afterwards lift the heart which is within the titillation with two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, apply the fire cautery which has .ij. ners douqueil it is the form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces just to the side, and there appears the figure of the cautery in twelve cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. ners, for the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tenth and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
And often is applied to this same nerve because it has eight cauterizations.
After placing the cautery iron with skill; after making the patient rest, and not moving the limbs for a long time as long as it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauterizations while pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one must make multiple cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe as long as you can find, dry and as large and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize. Make a cautery between the forceps and the neck, and make small cauteries descending a little in the part beneath the beard; and make cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little; and make a cautery within the foot, and another above the stomach, and between the shoulders, and as many costs of the foot defy the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but apply it openly as in smelling.
And they said that some ancients used a cautery of iron similar to a razor, and heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and suddenly the pain ceased, as we have said in the case of the aposteme of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient will die now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the spleen
When you treat the disease of the swelling that we have said in divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then there are three manners of fire cautery that are good.
One of the manners is that you make three or four fire cauteries, in a line according to the length of the swelling, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all of the fire cautery, and let the patient be calm on their back;
and another manner of fire cautery is that you heat the fire cautery which has three nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart that is above the swelling, or where the blood vessels of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the length, according to the length of the body, and the fire cautery is according to the width of the body.
Afterwards, you inflame the three nails so that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then you remove the fire cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, you cauterize all of the fire cautery with three nails. Afterwards, when it has been treated by prolonged tension for a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery does not benefit the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary to perform four cauteries around the stomach, and one above the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the thigh; and let the cauteries be very close to the skin of the heart.
Afterwards, let the cautery open for a short time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's illness after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be a club-like shape which we have shown beforehand; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously mentioned.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in someone who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not insert too much deeply, lest you would make the citrine water worse, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After doing thus on both legs, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from the length, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing, that the water is expelled; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the swelling
When the solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by manners of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and strongly, if you make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken before or cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel to each subtle cautery, and three cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each island, and three small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the foundation, one or more, and are old and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all deflected downwards near the anus, and one cautery below the bowel, two fingers.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one applies great cauterization to the stomach, as it has been said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the clavile cauterization; and let the cauterization be long-lasting. After curing the limb so that it is healthy.
of the skin condition named "thelul"
When you encounter thelul, if you heat the cautery that seems to rasp, and then apply it all ablaze on the affected thelul area; and leave your hand so that the cauteries come to the base of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is much of thelul, if you cautery each one as we have said; after the treatment of joints becomes profitable until they are healthy; and if you apply a large cautery on the affected area, it will be of greater aid.
of a badly healed wound
When the patient cannot suffer the cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Here is the translation:
of the kidney disease When pain from cold comes to the loins, and from great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you do cautery on the loins on one side and the other at the clavicle cautery which we have mentioned before; and if we place the cauteries in a row, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is mole and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should do cautery on the part of the back above the bladder, where the hairs of the tailbone begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery is as long as the width of a thumb; and you should do one cautery above the back, or three if you have need of it; and the clavicle cauteries according to the form mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for this reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: then it is necessary to make .iij. cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and .ij. cauteries across the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the hip bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of departure are visible, so it is necessary to cautery the patient on the hip bone with a .i. cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
And if these cauterizers are not present to you, make three cauterizers of olive wood, and let the cauterizers be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until they are healthy.
of the pain in the thigh When pain comes in the thigh area, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After making the cautery; and the way of making the cautery is in three ways: it is to know that medicines are burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the thigh area in this form, and make a good profoundness and greatness, and have between each cautery a space of the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be of olive wood; no one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the thigh area, because there is three of them in this form:
And if you see that the circle of the cautery should be on the circumference that we previously mentioned in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
And it is in this manner that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, then make .ij. cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little on the left side; and let the cautery be circular, and let the spaces around the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or near the foot, then apply the cautery where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called "points".
And if the mastery is, then do more; and if it seems that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a circular or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was perceived as corrupt and rotten to the point where they died from a wound in their belly. After which they had a mortal outcome.
And if the pain is in two adjacent parts, do cautery on one and the other, in this manner. // And the wise men say that for the cautery of the thigh, it should be done thus: make a fire iron as thick as a small finger nail, or slightly less, and insert it between the skin and the flesh to measure the quantity of a thumb's width; and let the irons be above two inches apart, and also like our nails, and have a well-made iron handle; and that is the form:
And let it be heated until it is entirely red and emits a sweet smell, and then place it on the affected thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment is finished, until it is fully healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery little for fear of its roughness, and we see few who use it; and nonetheless these are good cauterizers, which can suffer, and there where it is applied.
of the pain two backs
When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar signs of cold expanded matter, none of these signs is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after this, that the patient is void of filthy pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauterizations at the claw-like cauterizer, according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted spine when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the upper part of the back and in the appearance that comes onto the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you want to cure it, then you should cauterize at the cautery site according to this method.
If you cauterize each part of the spine equally. And if you want to, then cauterize around the spine at the poignant cautery site .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the joint so it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in a place of nervous spasm.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold causes and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-like according to this form.
And if there is need to prick on the face of the foot, then make cautery at every spot they call "point". And if the pains come just to the knee and other joints, and this happens often, then make cautery on each knee .iij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, to all the olive-colored cautery; and if you have a greater mastery, if you do more, but do not hold your hand further than as long as the space of the heart is burning.
And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge flux, then it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the rupture of the vein
When the patient comes to the doctor, and the swelling goes down into the groin area and it is newly inflamed, if it is necessary that when you want to cure the wound, it does not eat anything that day; and it uses things that ease the stomach, so the veins come down from their belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the swelling is being repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and mark a sign below the wound on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat up the cautery in this form:
as long as it is pale and it throws out sensations. Then reset the swelling to their place; and the minister holds his hand so they do not return back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and a sheet on the thighs, and another on the chest that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so recommence again until you reach just to the bone; and beware subtly that the swelling does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and of great people also great according to their measure; afterwards .ii. days cure the place of the cautery of butter so that the burning sensation is removed; afterwards cure other ointments so that it is healthy, and put the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well sucked; and it is necessary that their nourishments be lassatis for a long time, so that the swelling does not burst when they prepare to go to chambers.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made splint, and for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drink and food, and too high spirits; and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I shall describe the treatment of cutting in his chapter afterwards. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, have him make two cauteries of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be heated by the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cautery at the cautery with three angles according to this form:
But first mark the place of the injury and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the curved parts of the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes in no member, or from falling or striking, and that pain lasts long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a cautery called "points", and be the cauteries according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of twists and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, recommence another cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it should move to the member that is nearest, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
of the messenger
The messengers are helped many times by cautery with great aid, and likewise the illness that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy. When you see the disease is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not descend nor delay, lest you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the entire disease, then make the cauteries thus on the head: one on the forehead near the nose, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and one on the horns, and one behind on the temple; and leave your hand so that the cautery comes just to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit; and cautery on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the messengers are scattered throughout; and it appears manifestly, then you should make the cauteries of these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in some nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and one other at the sides, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the thigh, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the rear of the calf, lest you burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you make of cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery as long as they are healthy, because the body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the fevers. After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
of inflammation
When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and plasters, but it does not heal, then you perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little way into the skin of the heart; then cure the obstructions until it is healthy. And sometimes one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the inflammation is removed; and never intervene unless you are familiar with the members and issues of moving nerves in the body.
of abscesses
When the disease called "abscesses" is concealed, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of veal and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almond, each a part; and mix everything together, and tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the body until it is healthy.
The treatment of chancre by cautery
When chancre begins, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle around the entire chancre. And some wise men say that one should do cautery at the middle of the chancre; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and the more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the inflammation that cannot heal
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluousness that it does or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say, too old) and there is little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten healing: then cauterize around many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be. For it will hasten healing.
And if you pierce the view of all the cautery, heat up the cautery of the form it is.
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery pierces the heart, and let it be such that the patient feels relieved in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated. After the treatment so that it is perfectly healthy.
The treatment with fire by iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a mangling of the limb, for it mangulates the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery with fire, then heat up the cauteries little by little, according to what is needed at the site of the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you extract all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted may be removed. And then let it stay .iij. days, and apply the cauterized limbs with oil so that the burns from fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the treatment of wounds engendering flesh.  And if you see after .iij. days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this mangling has often been cured by medicine applied with fire cautery in the limb; but all fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine applied in the division: take as much as you need.
of the pores that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large false thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two manners. It is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery made like a pen of vaulted iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle margins; afterwards you put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it be thus for three days until it begins to putrefy; then make a poultice of soft savages boiled with wine, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be disrooted from their roots. Then cure the foot of joint pain by anointing so much that it is healthy.
And if they are converted by the flow of blood to the body, and many times it happens in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply hot water cautery; and it is in such manner: take a cane of iron or a pen of vaulted iron, and put it on the nail and the flesh, that is to say for wormy pores; and put the cane thus that it pierces all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and then finds the hot water way deeply to the root; and let the patient feel a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot all from its roots. Thus do one after another, until you clear those which are in the body, then cure the joints that cause pain.
the cure for trembling
When some shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cauterization between each spine; and one fire cauterization or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive fire cauterization; if they stop shivering, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
of pus-producing boils
Not once do they appear through decay of the bathed body, or pus-producing boils, which come from gross corrupt matters. if it is necessary first when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle fire cauterization of mistletoe wood, so the point may be taken in the fire, or of aristologe root, or of lentricular cautery. And not once do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are dislodged the superfluous things that come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great decorations of blood from the artery that is cut into the wound that comes to the outer skin, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And every time it happens to no one, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very tightly so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and does not issue further; then apply the olive fire cautery, more or less small and large as it becomes all red; then take, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and apply the cautery on this vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery until the blood is stanched.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood issues from the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to staunch blood; and let it be tied and held firmly in place.
When one administers a stringent tightening of bandages or meter things burning on, or similar things, it does not profit if they do little.
And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten well so that it is tightened over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still in cold water so often that the blood is congealed and thickened and tightened; and make an inquiry beforehand about those who need cauterization and medicine.
We have said in the first chapter all about diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the instruments and causes and equipment and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the head of the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds more easily what one wants.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. Some come who are so afflicted with their illness that they die quickly due to the severity of their disease, and the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of this. And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is despised. It does not become you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather take greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long-lasting memory.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or behind the cautery, which I have devised from head to foot, because you will find it easier to understand what you have mastered.
from the head full of water
Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too tightly; and it never comes from a known cause that one cannot explain.
And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen it hastens death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work on some treatments.
And I saw an infant whose head was full of water, and the head was growing so much each day that it could not be supported; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it became death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and be as long as we need, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head overhanging each part, and the water spouts out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after cutting, extract all the moisture away. After holding steady the edges of draplets and powders, and add wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and let the head be adjusted, and give the patient dry meat little by little, moistening it so the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine whether the opening of the abscess is large, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and let it be according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and beware of bleeding blood, lest the patient dies from the corruption of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of swelling
When it happens to have a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not profit at all, then the last resort cure is cautery with fire, which one covers the arteries.
It is necessary, therefore, when you cover the eyes, that the patient makes a movement with his head; then rub the area of a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, and then the patient stretches out his neck under the entire cloth; then look where the veins beat, and the lines of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly bent back; then mark the lines of the notch, then cover one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument so that the vein is reached just to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the top of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cover above, cutting as much as two fingers' width in traversing.
And when the vein is covered, then the blood flows back up continuously without stopping.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and as it is necessary to put blood in order if it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains upon the bone point of the syphac, if it seems that apostemes are forming there, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment with ointment until it is healthy.
of migration
When an old migration comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by methods of cures of medicine and all this does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterizations, as we have recounted.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of his temples grow back, and tends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is a little restored before some homes that are too cold; and if it is restored, then extract from the patient's neck some drapels, then rub the bone with some rough drap, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of the shape:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
For the fire cautery is aid to finish the swellings: for it is of greater aid against the swellings. Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vessel with much cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when you remove them, be cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, until it is healthy; and if without delay from the artery as soon as you feel it open, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the vessel with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the vessel until the blood is congealed, and raise the vessel of cold water until the blood ceases, and be steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery of .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to wait longer for their healing. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of the blood. And you should have between the .ij. cutlery .i. degree of thickness, and then when you have signed with the .ij. leus, and you put the iron rod on top until it reaches just to the bone, and cover the vein in .ij. leus; and be separated between the .ij. joints for it is not supported by this cautery from all to all; and that is the form of the cautery:
of the tears
When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are above the soft part of the forehead, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and they feel like they are walking with a tremble as if with phlegm; and thus they are tired and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, so it is necessary to use this cure.
And the ancient ones called it "counter-strike cure", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs that they have on their forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three digits going into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others three digits along the edge above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound have the quantity of three fingers at the joint.
From the incision that is to be made at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the crust that is between the two flaps of skin to the very bone which is above the eye socket, then make another section of the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like instrument.
Here is the translation: And place the cauterizing iron near the raw flesh of the heart, and the gentle cauterizing iron towards the bone, and the instrument as far as it reaches the middle incision. And cut away the veins that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues until what opens at the heart, and then further make an incision in the middle until the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the vein for the blood taken; then put in each incision a piece of old cotton, and put on soft drapery moistened with wine and oil and vinegar, and be careful that no abscesses form there; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a great quantity of tepid water, then cure with basilicon ointment and other cures for wounds, until it is healthy.
"to remove the eyelids"
When none of the veins flow with accustomed fluency, and you see the eyelids small and weak, and to dim the vision, and the burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in perpetual pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and that catharr are not from many veins, and the death cure that it is, if it is this.
And you command the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another of equal size. First, begin from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the incision reach just to the bone; and hold your hand near the temples that move with the finger; and when the bone is exposed, suck up all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton; then lay a warm drapery soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is inflamed, you must rub the bone so that the flesh begins to grow, then cure with things that expel char.
In this manner: take nine parts of flour of wheat, and of colocynth nine parts, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to heal them completely.
of the swelling of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of these nine things: either grains, or beasts, or rock fragments or similar things like iron; or seeds, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear rock or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the rock, if you distill a little violet oil or sesame oil, then make an extraction; and when you have made an infusion, and the nostrils are cleared when the infusions come, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and hold the ear above. Many times it comes out through this cure; and if it does not come out, then make an extraction with subtle pinches, from which is its form:
Here is the translation: And if she does not sweat from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear in this way: an abscess appears with a vein and spasm; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until he is healthy. And if it is a grain that is in and it inflates, then administer extraction; and if he cannot urinate, then administer the spatula with subtle touch according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not make it so when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus like a pimple and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel, thus begin the extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, thus it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if no worms appear, thus take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, thus take the candle of what is their form.
And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck forth in the form of a candle; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, thus block with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not escape thus, thus begin distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to its form as you see.
And it is of silver or copper narrow below at a small opening, and above overs to distill; and to press within the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the rasping and wrap around the point with cotton; then throw in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the rasping all the cotton, and press your hand temperately so that the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels it within, and thus are the distillations a little warmed by fire, just as one distills it in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born who does not have any hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a flesh born inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes go deep into the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole is small and one sees them well.
That which goes deep, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this you see that you must put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look within: if you see apparent opilation, if the work has all this spatium from which it is formed.
And let it be smooth and straight in front and behind, all plain, so that it does not obstruct the ear; if the opilation is from flesh born or growth of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until this flesh is completely removed.
And if the opilations are deeply seated in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation that the patient feels great grief in the ear, probe lightly, and beware not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and apply gentle pressure in the Egyptian manner.
Do not leave it for a day until the wound is sewn up, or take a tent and apply gentle pressure in rose water, and sprinkle vitriol powder; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another gentled tent made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is gone; then cure until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
from the flesh of papyrus
Here is the translation:
And if they are without decay, if the cautery of the subtle lenticular fire is good, and the cautery operator is skilled after the incision is effective; and many times they repair, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
of the crust
Many times things that seem crusty in their form and hardness come from the eyes, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the works are such: take warning if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make a donkey's pace large, then lightly scratch each part, and take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing a little of the crust, do not grieve anything to the patient; and if the fissure is great, assemble at a costure, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointments restore it quickly and injure the flesh.
And if the grandine descends to the depths of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the crust, and hold the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the crust is separated by incision, do not grieve anything; and when the grandine is covered, leave the salty oil, and cure the limb of what injures the flesh as long as the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is deposited in the tears of the eyes above, and this happens more to young children, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have a morning discharge, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces again, and sleep on them, and their eyelids beneath are moist that the inflammation and appearance are covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press your fingers against it and feel the exinach entering within.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then place it on them; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make a small incision in the moisture at the sharp edge, and let it not be larger than the wound made for opening a vein; and make the skin deep enough until you reach the exinach; and in many dispositions comes exinach from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract then a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is expanded; and beware that you do not touch in the incision, that you do not reach the entire sharp edge just up to the eye, that you do not blur it.
And if the patient does not open at the beginning of the wound, apply a little pressure to the wound lightly so it opens; then hold steady as we have said, then wrap in soft cloth and water, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that is delayed. Then heal until it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then heal with emplasters soothing until it is healthy.
of the hairs of the papers
When papers grow hairs unevenly other than natural, and are enveloped, they harm the eyes, and bring on ways of sickness such as accustomed tears and mollifications of the papers and albumen, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three ways: either by cautery with fire altogether, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, stick a needle all the way into the filament; and let it be beneath the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull the filament to the top of the paper, and turn it to the ruler; then do in the part beneath the paper, beneath the hairs aligned, all the way to the spatula, from the great hammer just to the small one; then extract the filament, and place beneath the paper a small cushion of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, as if the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
And if you have a task to cope with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened; then do all the way to the spatula on the .ij. lines that you signed, and start from the great hammer just to the small one; and let it be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then stick the needle in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then scrape everything; then assemble the .ij. lips on a thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make an adjustment to the superfluity of the threads on the .ij. eyebrows all the way to some sticky things, if you see fit to do it; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the thread and the filaments for three days or four; then treat the wound without a thread of dry and constricting things, because the paper relives suddenly at the touch of the wound and its assembly, but the thread is putrid (as the ancients said), and it is a work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, to three ounces of subtle wool according to the form which is here.
then apply the ointment which surmounts the small equal forces harmoniously according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or it has a thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread from the large latticework, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a cerote and similar soothing ointment.
and often it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and in the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it thick according to what I have said, and then make artificial seams by art, and subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and apply thus the heads of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the form of the parchment of the eye, and extract the artificial seams from the formed parts; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin which is restrained will become more tender and numb and porous, until it falls off by itself.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if the hair is treated and the hairs do not come with it, then pull the hair to the bottom along the entire thread that you have ordered, so that the hair comes forth through two pertuses above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull the hair and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 9 or 10 days, until the hair takes root in its place and grows from the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with a long natural hair, and be elevated with that one you leave, so that it is elongated and then set free.
from the sight of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the sight of the eye comes, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a burn, and similar things.
And the way of working on it is that you close the wound, and separate the lips from it, and put in tentes of flax, and leave it until it is healthy; and do not think that you should use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first; but working with mollifying things, such as fenugreic; and rose water or sweet milk, and a seed of flax is cooked, and an ointment of dyapilon is founded in none of the eyes, and it is enveloped in a tent, and the treatment of this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to not let it slip according to the form it was in before; and these works that we have said are only addresses of this illness, so it does not relapse according to the form it was in before.
of the flesh that comes into the eye
This illness that is beneath which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread goes into the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a spatula large.
And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is desired, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the fracture, and turn the papyrus, and make two fractures or cuts within the papyrus; and be the heads of the two fractures of the two angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as good as the figure of a letter which has no "j" curve; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are thus gathered, from what follows the papyrus, then join the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then apply the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and of tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a wound or a break or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is before; then uncover between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make it return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of treatment and of remedies in many different ways.
by sudden movement of the paper
When this joining has occurred in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it up high; and hold as pincers, until you catch what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too sharp or cutting the oil; and make your incision, removing what is assembled, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and it is all healthy, and never again in the sharp oil, but with gentle lifting, and with a bandage; then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of water; and after three days use gentle bandages and soothing things as much as possible.
of the corner of the eye
Know that the corner is affected in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard thick scab, and another which is not nervous, but similar to a pale moist congealed humor, when one touches it with iron and cuts it with pincers, if it cannot be removed; and both appearances begin from the great artery, and gradually increase until it covers the entire sight and light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and holds the paper with one hand, then coils the corner with pincers of small double curvature, and stretches it upwards; then takes a needle, and inserts a horse hair, or a cow's hair, or an ox's hair, and a strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and fixes it in the corner, and pierces it with the entire needle, and ties the corner with a thread and stretches it upwards, and removes all the surrounding hair from the corner which takes away the pruning and the sewing of the hair just to the head, then cuts the remaining part at the root of the artery with subtle and small forces, and leaves the natural or arterial flow, so that by the incision the body does not lose its accustomed flow; and no time is it stretched to the corner solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then removes all the subtle parts surrounding what is there in this form:
And be careful that the artery does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision, puts a little of warm broth in the eye, and makes a collyre of litargire, and leaves it until the next day; then cures what is there, as much as it needs to be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medicines; and grows as I have counted in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly and gently according to this form:
And raise the nail subtly, and if you see it diminishes to a point and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the collier eye making litargyre and red collyrium and broiet, and stop up the eye just until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method of opening, until it is completely restored.
If nothing opposes you in the eye, just as an aposteme heats up, then milk it, and first cure the heated aposteme until it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts at night in the eye by great nuisance, then suspend it on the onion, and cover a part but not entirely, because the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the red collyrium eye which is made of litargyre.
of the flesh that grows on the thumb
It is the eyes of certain men that grow a red flesh, and cover the thumb and restrain it with bandages and turn it to the duty, and seem like a rose of baluster; and the works are such that the patient puts his head in his healthy state, then he opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as uncines convenient to him, and holds it with strength; then he covers the first flesh, and goes entirely covering to the raspier until the end, and take care not to blister at the work; and be the incision so gentle spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail and the small forces from which one detaches the sebum, just like the form after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, apply the oil of that broiet or where you distill coliere rouge and seem corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with vinegar and water, so it may be assured against hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the blood mounts to the surface, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the eye and cure the abscess with appeasing things for hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make many characters that are adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
But however it is necessary that you elevate the cure of each oil weak from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they obstruct the sight and make the eye weak every day. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which part it is, if it is outside, and there is no other illness except for the vein; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then hold those veins on the entire eyebrow according to his wisdom, and let the fine double eyebrows be subtle according to this form.
And let the eyebrows be divided by degrees in the body according to this form:
then coil the veins subtly, and extract the blood hourly after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not blind the eye at points of the spectacle, and perform this operation at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your operation so that you do not cope with anything except those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is remaining of the vein.
And if you cannot collect all this at that hour, make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are eased and are assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is presented beforehand until it is healthy; and this is the form of the remedies.
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the abscess, there where it must be opened, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you remove all the instruments of which it is the form; and it is called "asperous head", and make it into a iron instrument, and sharpen it like a lime as it is in the present form.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Then place it on the patient's joint where the artery is, and withdraw your hand from the eye .i. little by little, then turn until the entire forearm reaches the joint and the patient feels it through what the veins are in this way if they hold their hand near their nose; and then restore the patient's limb with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and endures the limbs, thus goes the matter to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open fully everywhere, and it does not come to disturb the nose, nor diminish, thus you must bind the patient; then the healthy, then place cupping glasses or heated irons to suck without piercing, then put on the eye .i. make a mixture of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and apply a plaster made of bandages and drapels; and the way of the drapels is that you take drapels quite soft, and double each in .iii., and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs most; then strain with a hard bandage formed, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and let the eye be strained day and night, and if it becomes inflamed, thus you must stretch it much; then remove the strap after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, then reapply the plaster and the drapels and the strap and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
of the tearing of the web-like membrane
When the disruption comes to the veiled pupil, then opens, and comes forth like grains of resin, and is astonishing to see; then if you cover the sight, the works are such that you insert a needle in the root of the part below, up to the one above, then insert another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cover the whole with the double thread and tie a part of the pupil around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put it on the moist eye in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads stick with the pupil, then heal the eye with comforting things so the wound is healthy; and often the wound is restrained by the pupil, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes make a great appearance, if they pierce through the subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends to the eyes, and enters immediately; then hold it until it is healthy.
of the hollow of the eye
Here is the translation:
the eyes of the eye
We have the similarity of eyes in division, and that which must be pierced; if it works according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye steady and extremely firm; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right side; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left side, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right side; then put the point of the instrument at the crown by the thickness of a hair from the edge of the eye to the lesser eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" carefully, and twist your hand until it penetrates into the edge of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the opening in this paper by the clarity of the woven fabric, and then put the instrument next to where the eye is, then press one way after another. If the eye descends now, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest, and if the eye rises a second way, put the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the eye a little of the gemstone's seal, and remove from that the eye within. Then put on top of the eye estoupes or lainne moillie in oil rosset and abundance of egg, and tie with the healthy eye.  Us, and those who are of our tension, put on common broth with abundance of egg.
And if the medicine cannot enter the eye due to its thickness, because there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is of this form:
And then pierce the conjunctiva slightly, and do not press too hard in the front, but make it subtle, then put in the medicine, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient dormantly, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is necessary not that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten for that, because the water mounts hastily.
If abscesses come, you should untie the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, then untie the vision and put on his face a golden ornament to cover for no day, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and settle into its cases; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made a certain medicine called "almagda perciet", which drew out the water, but however I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly prepared.
And thus the head of the augurs of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angled points.
of the flesh above the nose
No time born or nose chars joined diversely, because there are some that seem scorpions with many feet; and if there is such a one where the flesh is colored with fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In this way of those chars which is soft, and not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open their nostrils, and cast the onion at those chars, and draw out the fibers; then hold what you can sustain with the subtle spatula on one side, so that you know that this char is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, drain it as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then pour in water or vinegar and wine.
If the nose does not open, and moisture comes up to the palate, it shows that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as needed, it shows that there is new flesh in the above-mentioned bone, with which the instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary to insert .i. a thread of linen, a little thick, and sew it with our hands, and have an interval of about one spatium; and put the patient's head at the end of the thread in their nose, and draw it out by pulling so that it comes through the nose into the mouth; and often children do this as a game, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after another while being careful as we are with thread. Do this until you know that the nostrils have cleared that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a tube in the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, with which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose:
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a tube, and lead them thus; and if you see, make a close tube, and let the instruments be plain for cleansing the head; and have .i. a holder at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the flesh over the nose
Many times a malady called "telul" appears on the head near the nose, and grows and becomes large, until it is visible to behold; and therefore you must cover it at the beginning, and remove all hair, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay covering it until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an abscess that grows inward, because when one covers it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that you can cover it entirely, then the patient will be relieved and the treatment of dry and constricting things.
when the nose is covered and bruised
Know that when continuous solutions come into one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, for in some homes. Therefore, it is necessary to observe if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the .ij. veins to a joint, then cure until it is healthy; and if the veins are already separated from one part and another, it is necessary that you scrub all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the .ij. veins to a joint, and constrict, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and burn incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The manner of stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, hard, resembling grains of vezes, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them with pincers and cover each part; then apply the liquid after the incision of vitriol broth, until the blood is stanched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the lip of dry things until it is healthy.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times a sore appears on the gums where it is attached, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary to support it with tongs, and apply it to its root, and let the blood or sap flow; then put on top of it vitriol powder, or other drying and astringent powders; and if that sore returns after the incision, and many times happens, so apply it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return anymore after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatment for covering.
of the abscesses
Sometimes abscesses gather at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, ulcers that are wide and tight; and sometimes the black, yellow, and green teeth, as long as the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their heads be in your holy, and take out the teeth or ulcers appearing, so that nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, as long as they are removed; and if you remove what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatment to be restored, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one removes from the teeth have other forms than those between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you well-prepared.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay to treat it as soon as you can, for this should not be done otherwise; for it is a very high substance just up to then so that one has no excuse to delay. Here is the translation:
After extracting the right tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out by itself, take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each part lightly, and remove it as you had done previously. And if the teeth are perceived as being gnawed and worn away, it is necessary that you fill them with material, wherever the gaps are; and if you hold it subtly in place with bandages, so it does not break while holding it in place; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take care not to break it, and leave a part remaining, and reveal to the patient through the malice of the root, which causes greater pains than at first. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not heal what we have recounted; but rather come frequently through the observation of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or through the instrument breaking, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is decayed, wash it with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows, which often happens, apply vitriol ointment; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, which you use to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be large limbs so they do not bend in the stretcher, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be tightened by muscles to hold.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the stretcher, then you must put on the cotton cloth soaked in bitter water on the third or fourth day, until the limbs are softened, then you apply the clamps called "algefri", of which the head seems to be a beak-like instrument; and let them be made thus like a file and that is their shape.
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these clamps, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
And be strong and big so that it does not break, and if the root jumps by itself, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, from which the forms come here afterwards:
And if one helps with this instrument that has many grooves, from which the form is:
and other instruments that are in front of the rows of teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
And be these instruments strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their work and the illness show them, because there are some illnesses where the ancients did not teach at all about an instrument due to the diversity of wounds, and it breaks or cracks in the cartilage or other bones, or it rots, if one seeks these instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, from which the form is: And be thick and well-gripping to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but then holds and opens; and then restore to the bone suitable medicines according to that, and if there is porousness in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its form is ugly, and especially in small women, if it happens that you know the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot soothe or file: then take the root; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron sharpened at the tip.
And the coping is little by little in the jaws for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a similar file as its shape.
and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the jaws gently, so that it does not move until it settles; then smooth out the roughness at the end without any rasp, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it happens to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the tooth falls out
when the front tooth falls out, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it doesn’t fall out, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, but it is of no value; if they need to be restrained with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and let the medium-sized thread not be too large or too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the sound teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the sound tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all; and let your thread be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then take the heads of the thread in pincers, and assemble them, and put them back between the sound tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its life, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the sound teeth, and of the bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, gradually, as we have said; and do not meddle with those who are not skilled and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and let it stay and serve thus long life.
from the burning of the thread of the tongue
Sometimes it is the thread that comes from under the tongue by nature, which you do not see; or by accident of a hidden wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous thread as large, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you remove the uncleanness and cut as large as the ligament; and beware that the wound is not too deep in front, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the water of rose and of hay, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and tie the patient each night, so they cannot swallow. And if bad blood comes, put on the lead vitriol bruise; and if the blood does not come, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for that; then cure another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see the thread of a foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it declines into a whitish color, and there is moisture, then remove the uncleanness, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not come to your work, put on vitriol bruise as large as it can be stained, then return to your work until you treat everything fully; then lift the water of hay and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle with tongs, because it is of the same form:
And be cutting on one part and naming on the other part; and when you have taken hold of one of the embers, take hold of the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and hot and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching pomegranate seeds that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then heal it so it is healthy; and no other abscesses will grow in the throat except for the .ij. embers, if you take hold of them thus like the .ij. embers immediately.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was situated deep in the throat, it is to know .i. a small abscess of little sense; and had almost entirely closed up the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess had grown so large that it had almost filled .ij. veins through the .ij. pores of the nose. I hastened then, and inserted an onion, then made a poultice, and in the poultice put a great portion of wine; then I did another part in the other pore of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the onion into these abscesses, and cut away a part, and only issued forth a little blood; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began to drink hot wine, and did not cease to lance this abscess for a long time; and the abscess receded again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it deep in the throat: thus remained without growing worse; and I departed from those parts, and knew only that God did with her after me.
of the grape
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
This cure is safer than incision, not that of cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put it thus, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot there is an instrument that cuts according to this manner: And it is of silver or copper, and one of the heads is placed in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, it recommences often, so that the eye dries, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this for fear of the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the head a piece of egg white, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat; for the piece of egg white does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or anything; so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie the thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then you will extract further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument for extracting according to this form:
And let the curved instrument be at the top of the head so it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may go wrong, nor insert it within; and it is worth that the patient inserts the instrument, because it should be inserted or the thing is in vain; if it goes below, where it draws everything equally, as long as it goes equally.
from the sensitivity of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the sensitivity, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit at all, then gaze into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sensitivity, draw everything out with a small hook, or subtle tongs that are worth this. And if it is not worth it, take a hooked needle, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then insert or remove the hooked needle with gentle movement, and do it repeatedly. And if the patient feels all day long, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and gargle in sense of swallowing, and move it with his hand repeatedly; and if you feel as soon as the sensitivity feels the cold, spit it out.
And if it does not spit out as we have said, then subfumigate the patient with absinthium, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the uva; do this many times, for it will soon clear. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let the post be covered with a pierced tin plate in the middle, and in that perforation let the head of the instrument be; then you make the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but reaches just to the sensitivity; and the sensitivity will clear now, and if it does not spit out, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then the liver will be purged by this governance.
And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the wound, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see there the shape:
the surgeons of abscesses
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings here after one and another in this book, and they diverge in perforation and in size; and it is in .ij. ways, one of which is in its own resemblance, and from what it holds moisture. And the second way is through the veins where they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is ripe according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that one must pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are of the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is of the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is of the foundation, one pierces it so that it is ripe; and one must not pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for the one that is of the foundation, which does not ripen in the front, and becomes long within, and it creates a fistula; and one cannot heal it in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is mortal according to the completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure from the fever, and the diminishment of the pain and of the redness, and the soft debating and of the appeasement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it appears most; and be the perforation of the long of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and in the veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no putridity.
In these that putrefy, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is necessary that you leave the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, the body will be full of great disorder; and by chance the lips and the deep parts of it will harden. And if there is an abscess that is pierced according to the largeness of the body, according to the member that has most need.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
of sores
Where the skin of the head comes to form small abscesses, and there are ways for us that are in tiles, just like a layer of jelly, and much of it has similarities. There is fat and such things where moisture accumulates, just like poultice; and if there are such things that are hard and rocky when cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary. And the work of the cut is that you should try everything .i. instrument that is called "entromissoire", because its form comes hereafter, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then the poultice is made above the lonc. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns again when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; otherwise, with water and vinegar, and treat the wound, and let it be until another day; and this continues what has remained of the nit. Then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not remain of the nit; then cure the wound with ointment suitable for that, so it may be healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. a fat nut, then cut according to this form, above the lonc; and throw away your onions, and scrape off from all parts, and put all your treatment in order to make the skin where it lies; and if the artery does contrary to you, then do what I have told you after. And thus do with the abscess if it is rocky, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
And the cut above the rocky abscess and the moisture, is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and of those .i. abscesses that I treated on an old woman's head; and found the abscess just like a rotten stone, rough and whitish, and could not be broken; and if one had taken out any, one would have done well to make a wound as from a rotten stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, because they come as heads of children and roots of ears, the treatment should be done for at least ten days, depending on the need to remove the pus; and the cures are done as it is necessary.
of the scabs
Many times there occur abscesses on the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groin area, and sometimes they come from another part of the body. And they are numerous, and are joined together with each other. And each abscess has its own proper place, just like the nut and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these abscesses are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case, you see a good disposition in the body, and it appears similar to the color of the skin, and changes in each part and is not airy as the nerve from the neck or the artery or conduit; and it is not deep; so you should cover it from above, and scrape off each part, and make the .ij. veins of the heart as usual, if you are skilled in this, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and pull little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not cut too much, so you do not touch what you should not.
And if you touch the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put a vitriol ointment on the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then seek with your finger to see if there remain any small scabs, and cover them and bandage them. And if there is a great vein at the root of the scab, it does not seem that you should cover that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal.
And if you cover the whole scab, it seems that you should assemble the .ij. veins of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no longer any superfluousness due to the greatness of the scab. It seems that you should understand how to cover the root of it, and pull firmly, and sew as we have said. Those scabs that hold superfluousness, pierce where they appear; and pierce thus as was previously stated, depending on the circumstances, then you will mix them with ointment and similar things, so that they do not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well bandaged, heal it with ointment in a warm manner, until it is healthy.
of scalping
The old ones said and spoke of the surgery of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it's the scripture of their words.
For those who have scalping, it is necessary that the partition of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the mouth of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws. When the disease is in the channel of the mouth, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four a small cut through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut through the surface, not in the cartilage.
and if it is convenient to cut at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough to be freed.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to the whole onion, then cut the heart as far as it reaches the os hyoides; and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the surface, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the os hyoides which falls through the place that is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
and let the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed from which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with gentle care, and sew it all together without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
But beware that one does not do this just then when the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacks breath. Then one should cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is protected from death.
and therefore command the old man to let the open wound be so long as the evil of the disease is not passed, and it is passed in three days or in two days. And then they command to cauterize the wound and treat, until it was cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinew of her arm.
and I was called by the curator, and found him almost as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered with a bandage or dressing, except for the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
and I did not have to cauterize the young woman because she was hoarse of voice, and recovered afterwards according to her condition.
because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or natural does not have any engagement.
And the accident is according to two manners, one of which seems to us like a thick abscess, and the other manner seems to us like an abscess that comes from our arteries. and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate with fierce fires except in the small one, and it proves and searches for all the interior of the abscess. if you find it thus, as if a thick abscess, and it does not penetrate to any vein, so the blow, so as one blows the nostrils, and it draws out all its filth, if there is a point. and examine everything well, and heal it so that it may be perfectly healthy.
of us
There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is suitable that I tell all the differences that exist between them and this.
I say that the illness is fever and chill, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it is accomplished by the putridity; then the fever and chill are restored.
With the ninth node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large;
and they are according to the appearances, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are thus as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form will be or chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nodes is that you take or make more moist the spot where you find the abscess, and turn your two fingers thus, thus, until you feel that the instruments have perceived the kernel, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this, that it knows how to force.
If the corroding humor flows, which has its color, then it does so as I have said about other abscesses.
and after the entromissoire no corroding humor comes, it knows that it is fat, then it does so in a cross, and takes it with pincers, and lightly scrapes each part and turns the coat where it lies, so that you treat it healthy with the nouement.
and if you cannot treat it healthy, then divide it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if he remains there, he returns to us many times;
and if he stays there a little, and the wound does not grieve him, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat other wounds until he is healthy;
and if it is great to us, then cut the edges of the wound, and treat what injures the flesh.
and if the vein is swollen against the contrary or otherwise, then hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol, and let it stay for two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterizing what has been delayed from now on.
Here is the translation:
and they are like the needles with which one cuts the sores, and are of iron citrin, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow, and are more experienced at piercing the black pustules to encircle the fistulas;
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three curves of three manners also;
and if there are lancets that have three curves, and they are also of three manners; and if there are lancets that have two curves, and some with a single curve only, and they are of three manners; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these is cut into sections, and of those there are some that do not cut except for one part, from which the nails are scraped, because they do not touch the vein or the nerve.
and of these introjections are the humors collected in the joints, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and moderate, as you see.
and they do not move except in the clear skin, as in the legs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to a fistula scalpel, according to this form, in order to staunch blood.
and one places it sometimes at the healthy spot that connects to the veins, and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Sometimes the limbs of some men, when they begin to be corrupted, seem like those of women.
and they become weak and inflamed, and those who want to cure them, if one wants to succeed according to this form of these lines up to G. then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in the manner of a charm, then join the lips of the wound to the scar, and heal it until it is healthy;
and the breast is sloping downward, and it is swollen because of its greatness like women have, if they make a scar above, through similar fissures; because one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B up to line G; then scrape off the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and mix together what we have said about scars and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil. and let it be until it absorbs the residue and fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the seats
These abscesses that come from under the seats are a kind of hard scrofula, where there are ribs, and it is because they contain moisture.
Here is the translation: And when the entire abscess is empty, fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment to make it healthy.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes hollow, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and it also happens to have an inflamed vein and abscess.
and if one recognizes it then as much as it is through the artery, then are the abscesses long in advance; and when you feel it with your fingers, then feel the contraction; and when it is through the vein, then are the signs of fever appearing;
and it is foolish to hide this abscess, and likewise when it is under the arms and in the groin and in the neck and many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to avoid the treatment of iron, and he who is at the head must avoid it also, and in him who has a inflamed artery, it is done above the skin of the long muscle;
It is necessary then to avoid the treatment of iron, and he who is at the head must avoid it also, and in him who has a inflamed artery, it is done above the skin of the long muscle; Then work the waist as onions, and beautifully detach the artery of the veins, so that it is discovered.
Then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce right up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two veins, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the place which is between the two veins of an introductor, as much as the blood flows out from it, and let the abscess be drained.
Then apply the treatment that induces a flow downwards, so that the vein is cleared. then heal this one of anointing coming to this one, as long as it is healthy;
and if the abscesses are by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin; then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as one ties a knot with double thread;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then rebury another needle entirely in the same place beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three loops;
then cut into the abscess until the superfluid comes out, then cut away from the bad humour and let what is tied loose;
then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the kidneys
Here is the translation:
And it happens more often with joints and fingers or toes where there are joints, and this is the grievous abscess, and its color appears like the color of a dead body, and it is in many painful conditions.
and when one extracts forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not like the depth of the body, but beneath the skin;
and it must be well examined in all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and the one who is in joints does not deserve to be treated with iron: perhaps there will be contraction;
and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin rough and scaly. If the abscess is small, if it has a tender hold, and the head is in its root;
and if it is large, if they suspend from the groin, and scrape, then cut into the bone and assemble the wound to the ribcage, and treat until it is healthy.
of thick bulging swellings Never has it occurred in the belly and not another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance, and it is a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw a man who had .ij. or wind in the belly which was more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little root, and it was cut here and there, and it was corrupt with moisture.
I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you see if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with subtle roots;
if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when the tailor comes, often too great a flow of blood occurs, and if the wound does not close, then hasten to give the cautery;
and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with the iron, take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it .ij. days;
and then hold it back, and do not cease from holding the thread of the probe as long as it touches the joint, and feels by itself without effort; and if the roots are thick, then you should fear to cut them immediately for the belly, but you can well cut most of it,
then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of faulty color and of poor sense and of bad regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscess hereafter.
when the swelling is full
Here is the translation:
and it is by the rupture of the skin and by the outlet of the boil, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various outlets. And if it is by the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it recedes, and then returns, and sometimes it happens that it becomes narrow, and grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong effort.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
and if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine if the appearance is by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be straightened out entirely, then sign from below around the bowel. then instruct him to place his hand between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed to the entire spine, then is the majority of the abscess above all the great groin;
then operate on the majority of the abscess extended above the joint, and you should press with your indexed finger, and examine the intestine; if you find the true veins of the joint, then dislocate them, and press the intestine back into its proper place in the belly;
and if you find the boil, take it on the ankle, and cut off the excess flesh;
and if the artery makes a counter movement, or the vein, if you go slowly inside, then return to your work and take nine needles, and push nine strong threads, and push the nine needles inside so that you have done it in a crosswise manner to make it pierce;
then strain the abscess in three places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb rest until it purifies, and clear the dead flesh by itself; where you cut when it is subtly purified and purged, then cure what needs to be cured, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you cut when it is subtly purified and purged, then cure what needs to be cured, and shave the abscess as we have said; Here is the translation:
where boil
We have said in the division the similarities of boils, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron; and let us say that a boil is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is necessary in its treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are on the skin or where they can be rooted out like a boil that is in the muscles, and in the hip, and in similar places, and it must be totally excised when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal it; nor has anyone ever healed one before me.
And the operations, when it is on the skin or where they can be excised, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make them healthier if they show obvious repletion, then make the patient ready for the operation; then cut into the boil or chancre, and shave all around, and remove everything without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the skin with your hand or anything else, and see that the remaining blood does not contradict the incision of the artery or vein, so cauterize until the wound is staunched; then treat with another treatment until it is healthy.
of dropsy Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
then look to see if the dropsy is in the direction of the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the navel .iij. two fingers right above the pubic bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient guide themselves according to the incision, lest the superfluous fluids do not flow to the weak spot;
Here is the translation:
at the top is the almond, if it happens that the strument comes to the water, if you sink now on the instrument; look at the finger then, which part or the third part, for if you sink more than it doesn't suit in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he becomes powerless, or he approaches death;
but look at the finger according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick signified, and his pulses; then touch the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the cord that closes the passage which is on the skin, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of water.
do it on no day, and guard yourself from fooling around until there's only a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the tomb or sepulcher is hot, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and you abstain from drinking; and the treatment with desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the flow Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the rod and the handle similarly to the size of a pen, so that the perforated knife cuts in the middle, as it should; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, then staunch what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
the pimples on the rod Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad ulceration; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a subtle onion-like application, and cover and bind all, then put on a soft cotton dressing in an Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment application thoroughly until it is healthy. And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, then you must apply caution. When you have covered it, and the ulcer is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is softened, then cure what is outside. For when you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into the rod or in the conjunction; so you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply the poultice made of honey and flour which is made from crushed pomgranate seeds and veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, one must aid the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries are of ten dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must boil or conduct a vein of lead, and piss on the patient; and when the skin is dry at the head of the rod which has been in those who have not been circumcised, either from wound or abscess, then one must scrape it with a .i. instrument that cuts, so that the veins are loosened, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts;
and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then one must scrape it with a .i. spatula at the head of the rod and skin; then separate it gently between .ij., and put .i. subtle drapery of linen on the wound in cold water, so that it does not become dry again.
of circumcision
Here is the translation:
I say that the old men did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing but what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greater part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in this way, and with great force, and to a new incision; if they found the cord because it has two layers, and by chance they cut above and delayed below.
Now they recover the copula, and the pain is double, and in the mundification which is not assured at the point of the limb; and in the mundification of the ankle by chance they escape the iron, and corrupt the vein, and many times they are born thus that they have no need of mundification and I have seen it.
From the mundification which is done with great force to the entire thread of the filament, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in the entire soul's tension; but the thread should be well stretched over the skin; and be the manner of the first work so that you make the infant think, if it understands, that you do not make him suffer more than to tie the thread around the rod as gently, and then make it relax in all the ways that you can. then make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in place; then clean well the ordure that is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie beneath another link; and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouchet and at the index finger, and cover between the links, then hold the heat above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
then make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in place; then clean well the ordure that is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie beneath another link; and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouchet and at the index finger, and cover between the links, then hold the heat above hastily and pull the head of the rod. then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a dressing made with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, congealed with oil of roses, good and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it can be healthy.
The shape of the forces for the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be trenching, and should be the heads as large as the equal measurement:
Here is the translation:
And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be so long as the abscesses are appeased, and scrape lightly; if you cut thus as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm him.
Herefore heal the wounds made by powder, that we have spoken of in treating powders, and if you cut too deeply outside measure, and it goes to the bottom, it will not harm; heal herefore, as we have said, until it is healthy.
due to retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or carnal nerve, or similar things, that we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not flowing, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and his belly should be stretched out above his back, and he should hold himself straight as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine is not flowing;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "siringue", of which this is the form: and let it be of subtle silver, light and thin like a bird's feather; and let the tube be one palm long and a half, and let it be subtle at the end.
And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double filament, and tie it to the end of a thread or cotton, and insert the end of the filament into the siringue; and stop up the excess thread and insert it just at the end of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and olive oil, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist oil and oil of olives and warm water.
then insert the siringue gently into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowl; then insert the siringue just before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty vessel, and this is not done according to this order for fear that the conduits or it will be twisted; then stretch the filament throughout the entire thread little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then extract it forcefully, and make the urine flow.
and instruct to apply the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient's aligning should be alleviated.
of the diseases of the bladder
When blood or pus accumulates in the bladder, or when putrid matter is gathered there, and you have seen it distilled into waters and medicines, thus make all the instrument called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has .iij. perforations: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the veins are chosen by which the medicine flows so well that it stops the flow of urine sensibly, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and expel when necessary.
and when you see gather your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizing instrument in the moisture, and draw out the drawing-out instrument that is inside; if you draw out the moisture to the cauterizing instrument, and then strongly reinsert the drawing-out instrument inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the subtle form of theclyster that one uses to clysterize the bladder: this is it:
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below are the veins or sinews of the back; then take a bladder of a sheep and put in the moisture that you see clysterize the bladder, then tie it between two filiform double-layered bovine fibers, and heat that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of theclyster into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to bring all the moisture together, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a doll, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done for the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have told the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtlety; and it openly hurts, and grievously afflicts the patient's penis, and they often suffer, and then become swollen; and many of these symptoms are the foundation; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very difficult for the old, and it's as if it's a medium age, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a clyster, to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the stone's removal.
Then take the patient by the feet and pull them out and move to the bottom, so that the foot descends to the front of the bladder, and rises several times high up; then make them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands should be beneath their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely leaning down; then you ask and touch from within.
If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone. And if it does not fall at the touch of everything, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your left middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and place it at its foundation, and ask about the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, anoint it at the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you saw to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand above the loins, and with their left hand lift the skin that is beneath the loins in the part where the cut is made; then they place the spatula-like instrument, which is of this form:
And make a space between what is between the loins and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left nipple; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers should be at the foundation, and be the cut traversing so that it is wide by default, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put it on with a covering of soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove it, rub well the area with oil and water, then apply the treatment of diyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without a sound with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy.
then lift the wound with water and sage and silk, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the sores that you cure, that you bind the joints, and assemble the medicines on the affected area.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; if you cure it in this way that I say, that you often cut, it is excused from the cutting by this cure. I have already proven this.
Take a forest of iron in this form and let it be at three angles fixed in the tissue:
Then take the thread and wrap it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the iron in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another part; if the urine comes out soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the rod. If it breaks thus, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this because of some obstacle that bothers him, then thread the stone beneath and another above, then make the rod in the place of the stone between the three ligatures, then extract it forcibly, and untie the ligature, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until he is healthy.
of the stone of women
It rarely happens that a stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens sometimes, then the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well acquainted with her own body, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well acquainted with this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's womb is more deeply embedded than the stone in a man's, because it fits more deeply into the cavity, and there is great fear involved.
And if it is necessary to remove it, then you should take a wise and well-acquainted midwife, and prick the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle and chaste midwife; and she presents a wise and knowledgeable life among women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command her to do regarding the inquiry into the stone.
and carefully examine if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her finger or foundation on the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she put her finger or with the patient, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder in formation.
If she finds it, then she must move it gently from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft confluence, where it appears moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and let the waist be at the first small size.
then put the ruler on the waist, if you feel the stone, increase the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many types of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges. Know the similarities to know the issue.
And if the stone does not come out, put the vitriol broth on the spot, and hold it for an hour so that the stone is stained; then return to your work, so that the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as tools to help you in your operation.
and if he has no sense, and it is of the artery that is injured, then put powder on the wound and hold with tourniquets and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the veins are rested, then return to your work, until the stone is removed.
of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white flux, which is beneath the skin of the intestines, containing the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the intestine between the white flux that we have spoken of; and this has not happened often.
And the generation of this remedy is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that material.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it's a declining yellowish hue, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or pale as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, i.e. almost long as the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white surface, if it feels very good; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the interstitial quarter thoroughly, because its form is here before. According to what comes after the interstitial quarter, judge from what is within.
According to what comes after the interstitial quarter, judge from what is within. And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should lean on his back, on a somewhat elevated thing, and put many folds of drapery under him.
then he should sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the hollow of the joints.
Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just below where it pricks, and make your incision straight in dividing the skin of the joints until you reach the white fascia, and carefully scrape off the subtle layer according to what you can do.
Then pierce the white fascia with a large perforator, and remove all the fluid, and then place your hooks, and let the fascia be above; and do not touch the core of the joints, but only the fascia should; cut out all or in pieces the cartilage of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
and let the swelling subside for a few days, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the fascia; then assemble the two leaves of the core of the joints into a union, then cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the swollen area corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the deterioration of blood; then cut out the joint with all its suspension, and remove the swelling, and cure it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a soft oil rosé.
and put further another soft linen in wine and oil, and put on the two cushions, and put above doubled drapery, and bind it with all the lien that is according to this form.
Then take two drapery, and fill with linen scraps according to this likeness and be assembled by sewing in the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes on the foundation just up to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and another two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
and at no time is medicine made from this cautery iron rod, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the cushions, and be warmed up as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the aigue is uncovered.
If you take fire cautery according to this form, and prick that surface as on an onion, and scrape it with this subtle fire cautery thus:
And take the scalp in all the ways that you can, as much as you stretch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of the flow of blood, and remember that the operations of the belt.
and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses burst or flows of blood or other things, then cure what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horribleness, then make a small perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining watery discharge, then treat until the wound is healthy.
and let the white cloth not allow the watery discharge to issue from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a pen or instrument through which one treats the watery discharge of hydropic wounds, because its form is thus before; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the watery discharge returns, and is gathered together after 22 months or within, and when it is gathered together as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear of more severe complications, because it seems to me that it is worth leaving it, for I believe it will be worse.
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and similarly from bad humors; and it is for many cases.
It is to be known by excessive bitter anger and fever, which is spread through bad humors, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance it is a painful abscess, green and pierced, and of changed color, and sometimes comes from the swelling of an artery, or the inflammation of a vein.
When it is due to the swelling of an artery, it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and do not think that you should touch it.
That which is made from the inflammation of a vein is known by its arrangement at the expression of tender touch with the fingers.
and can well make the incision according to this likeness, and on the other wounds; and it is that you cut the cord of the veins, then place the egg white above, and remove the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already mixed with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you remove the egg, and cut it.
and if it is on the skin, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you remove all of this tension, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of flesh is where the back skin is, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of lime and rose oil and wine, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the groin
These are abscesses enveloped in a wrapping resembling a .i. bag, with the softening of the groin, and the patient must be gently moved when they walk;
and the treatment of this illness is well pressed as much as possible beforehand.
and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high seat, then bind him with suspensor strings from the hips down to his toes. to all the vessels that are close to the edge, and prick the masters, and stretch them forth;
then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the place of the vessels, until they are discovered,
and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
then fix a needle or where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the vital spirit has come, and then tie it again to another head; then he applies the cup in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupt humors.
then heal the wound as if the others or an injury to the bow, so that no vessel bursts which nourishes one of the intestines.
for through this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of this face The events of this hernia are by the section that comes from the face, or the extension onto the belly in the region of the loins, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the flanks;
and this route is from the face, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the face, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is equal abscesses just as far as the pelvis, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of the swelling, which brings about sudden severe pain at its onset, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the body's weakness from the swelling.
And sometimes it descends with the intestine, and is retained within, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron to fear, because they think it will escape them.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to hold their intestine in their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter it. then be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
then stretch out the cord above, and cover all the skin of the thighs from top to bottom. then thrust inside the kidneys of the waist uncinated according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes may issue forth.
Then scrape the dead skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, so much that the white skin underneath should be uncovered on all sides;
Then put your index finger into the one that guides the joint, into the one that is between the white skin underneath which is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second skin;
and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white skin above with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the skin near the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein upwards, and separate what is behind the ligament;
and if you find a point in the intestine wrapped or white thick syrupy and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
then take a needle or it has a large thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the rear part of the thick syrupy substance, which is after the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the thick syrupy substance, which we have said is beneath the skin of the intestines, with a strong bond of two parts; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them cannot enter there, lest an abscess forms and does not heal; and put the bandage according to the first bandage long; it should be two fingers wide, and after these two fingers let the swelling that is beneath the heart of the joint, which is the biggest part of a finger.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the joint, until the vein flows, and the bow, as we have said before.
then soften the mole in oil, and put it in wounds, and I soften the bandage that we have said. And at no time is the white swelling cauterized, as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of blood corruption.
Here is the translation:
Then cure the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a flesh wound
In this case I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done in the same way as the wound that is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting slightly underneath.
then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who labor, as long as the vessels bleed; and heal it in the way we have said, until it is healthy.
No rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and opens the limbs; and do not dissect any of the intestines to the sides, and if you do, it is little, and repair all hours;
and always, if it remains too long at this point, the wound or sphac thinks, as long as the intestine dissects;
and this occurs through the extension of the swollen veins which are in the limbs, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflated the limbs and opens;
and the treatment is by fire cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this way:
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then cover the affected area with a large poultice according to the quantity of two dot doi.
and then extract the superficial skin that is under the skin which is inflamed, then take the remedy and put it on the apparent affected area of the superficial skin;
and apply pressure at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent skin lesions of the superficial skin on the head of the remedy, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch the point of the swelling that it does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
then heal by healing wounds. And when you touch the fibers, if it is swollen and heals the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
The swelling is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are moved away from this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the groin
Here is the translation:
do cautery of fire
Here is the translation:
Of the hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoid is of two kinds as follows: one is when they are between the buttocks, shaped like a woman's figure, where it has hair, and sometimes blocks the urine.  And the other kind is in women, and it is on the perineum like a rod with two buttocks.  And the treatment for men and women is that you cauterize all the affected areas, and treat them as other wounds; in the second case, of those from whom the urine jumps through the skin of the buttocks, there is no cure.
of the tendonitis
Tendonitis is an affected area on the natural part, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tendonitis from your hand or fingers, and treat it lightly; and don't apply too much pressure, lest the blood does not flow, then the treatment will be ineffective; and there is another affected area that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and swells, and by chance becomes feverish, and resembles a cow's disease, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow's disease". It is necessary that you treat it, as we have said for tendonitis, and treat it until it is healthy.
of cauterization
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation:
of the abscesses of the marrow
Many types of abscesses come into the marrow, such as cancer and abscesses that pierce and herpes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that comes into the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe how the abscesses are affected at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hesitate to pierce, but make a small incision while the pain is alleviated; and then seat the patient on .i. stool, and have .ij. small stools or he leans against them, and supports himself on his back and joins his feet as far apart as the width of the leg; and let his thighs be expanded, and place his arms below his knees, and bind them well with a linen thread; then suck out the pus from the deepest part of the marrow, so that its form appears; and it is necessary that when you have sucked out this instrument, that you make a small incision at first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further in than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapauls, so that the instruments do not hurt; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand, it is necessary to cover at the top, with a spatula or a small spoon; and when the pus is evacuated, it is necessary that you put tents moistened with rose oil or green oil into the wound, and place the tent above the wound at the depth of the marrow, and put below the marrow and on the smooth skin a net of moistened linen threads; then cure after .ij. days of anointing, until it is healthy; and many times lift up the marrow and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristologe so that they are cured; then return to the anointing. And if the wound is repeated in the marrow, it is necessary that you beware of cauterizing with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
of the swelling
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
from the issue of the child upon its feet When the infant stands on its feet, if it needs to be supported from above; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
When he jumps just as the joints, if he instructs to grasp, and makes him steady with condition. if he jumps far, then God wants it.
And if he does not jump far as we have said, then he turns a little and a little, until he is according to the natural shape. For then he is lighter.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take a poultice of alum, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and crush everything into a mortar. and put it on the natural place of the woman within and remove this joint, then make her sit in warm water up to the loins;
and when she is moistened below, make her a belt of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; Then make them sit on the seat, then make them lean back and hold their mouth and nose, and take a light hold of their belly, for they swoon now. from the issue of the child onto his knees When the infant comes in this form, if I place my hands on it little by little.
from the birth of the child who comes with a large hand meanwhile One must learn to reset the hand: if one cannot reset it, then make the woman rise and walk;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and flex her legs forcibly;
then massage the muscle that I have mentioned;
and if it does not become swollen, make it sit on a chair, then study how to move the hand back; and guide the child according to their natural posture, and make them stretch, and instruct them to take hold as much as the veins are loose.
from the exit of the child on their neck, and they have spread out their hands, and their face is turned towards their mother's back. I think that you should hold your hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly.
and when it is even, then place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady. in the same manner for all the secondary ones
in the same manner for all the secondary ones When it comes to be in this manner for all the secondary ones, then cut the secondary one at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated.
and he puts his fingers on his face and on his neck, if the top of the swelling, so that it is not retained, and kills the infant;
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it fits, and instruct the woman to take hold of it at no time:
from the issue of twins Here is the translation: They are strange things, and do not live, if they receive a name.
I know that, they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the belly.
and no time do they issue naturally like all those below, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle vein be, and make it thick and light in its doing. and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six, or many up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom,
and it is evident that the wise one knows all this, for it seems by chance that these things have happened; if one does according to what is suitable.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has had a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation; if it is suitable that you know the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
It is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her knees bent downwards, and her legs raised.
and the midwife hold the sheet of skin with two hands, or she be tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart during the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with oily moistures made from altaea and fenugreek, and sown with flaxseed, then anoint her belly with these oils and muskilles. then insert them lightly into the mother, then choose the suitable place where she inserts the fingers that are convenient for her to do so.
and take heed that the veins are prepared so they descend upon their head; if you prick the tonsils in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
and if the dislocations are on his feet, prick them or puncture and massage the moist spots;
and it is necessary to hold the tonsil with his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently move his whole hand, and prick the tonsil in none of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the void spot;
then prick against another onion, or the third one you have in hand, so that the extractions are even;
and then they are even in moving from one part to another, so that the juices issue forth, and the onions are held in place by the muscles, as is the form:
And if one part remains, then oil the joint with some of its oily fingers, and bind it in that part, and treat the other part;
and if it remains pointed, set this anvil or higher up, and do that until it issues forth all its force.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to straining. then you must envelop it in a bandage, so that it issues forth completely.
then put the cupping on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and similarly with the feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at the joint, or it has an acute assembled head, it is necessary that you place the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and extract the acute angle; where you round it to the instrument called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus in the same way make the infants have a large natural head; and then treat for the bones as for the ligaments,
and if the head jumps forward and it holds to the strength, if it is broken, so long as the moisture that is or worse comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it by pieces in the muscles where you can;
and if it is inflamed in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as far as the moisture flows.
And if the veins are on their feet, it is a light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the marrow are light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or in the chest, it is necessary that you extract it with a drapery enveloping the hand. and open the belly or the chest, as much as the moisture that is there corrodes.
and if the other limbs are dislocated, and the head remains, If you thrust your hand deep into the marrow, and pull it just up to the mouth of the marrow; then you thrust a finger or two, and pull strongly;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then you must not trouble it; then you must handle moist and fatty things; and the surgeon applies plasters, and it is in watery softening and loosening.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then apply what we have said in the living infant.
and so that one has no power, if one draws it out by pieces, and leaves nothing of the secondary.
And when you have done this, then apply what we have said in abscesses that come from the marrow.
and if the flow of blood comes, it should be stopped by tightening, and one should try other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead one. After long tension, he came to have abscesses in the bowel, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted a bone, and after some days another. I was very surprised, because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and let the woman hold the lancet steadily for a short time, and thus she will make a little hole in the skin;
and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
to return the thigh to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, to which one adds the books; and at 10 turns as 10 heads of the ligaments. In every way, the tips should be more subtle of the restraints, and made of ebony or boxwood.
and let the mouth of the shaft be of a large tree, and the margin of the trees should be thus, and one palm and a half in length. and within the same measurements, let the adjustments of this same shaft be firm, closed at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more.
and this adjustment is placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the same horns.
Another form, similar in appearance but more subtle and lighter, should be made from wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tongs. and it has two joints, if you see, a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
and when you see open the marrow to the entire instrument, then make the woman sit on a seat, her feet hanging and her legs covered; then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then you should put your hand on the entire instrument, as you have done to the tendons evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, until the boil does what it wants.
These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have been prepared, so much more hasty is the work, and higher are the homes according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in the enfantement, then you must command the patient to retake his wing, and then the fait is discerned of conditi, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose. and let it jump through that, it's fine.
If that doesn't work, take a pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the abscess, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomille, cassialigne, and centaurie.
all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cloth or poultice from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the abscess.
and let it steep until the vapors come out of the abscess; then make it settle, as we have said. If the secondary inflammation hurries. And if it remains after this treatment, and is not a fever, then instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or in a mixture of alta, and then apply the poultice to the affected area.
and seek the secondary; and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marrow does not break during extraction. but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then draw it out; if it comes and disentangles itself.
And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted, we have said the treatment of sternution, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it does not consist of all that we have said, so be careful that you do not fall into error;
but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you apply it to the womb of the woman, then cleanse it with ointment of tetrafarmaçon;
if the pores open and close again, and come forth fiercely; but however, when it pours out in this way, a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Here is the translation:
The shape of the instrument is for when one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, it is this.
And it is to be seen as similar to a dog, and put the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tincture as long as it is exhausted, and begin another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, then it is obscured by subtle signs. it is necessary therefore to put the finger on it so that he feels it with his finger, and does not touch it with spatula or ague, and makes the ligature so it does not touch it.
then put on the affected limb a warm wine and oil compress, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will not recover, then put or apply a plaster of pounded herbs, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes these sudden swellings of wounds or abscesses come; if it is necessary to drain the sudden swelling: if it is treated, as we have said about the treatment of a swollen pimple.
of the fistula from its bottom Fistulas that come from beneath the fundament are swollen, and those that come from beneath the fundament are painful, or in the space of the aforementioned parts,
if there is a fistula or more; and when that swelling is ancient, it has worked, and has moistened the white or subtle wound.
and sometimes these are fistulous abscesses; and they are recognized by the fact that there is inflammation or swelling when the patient makes an effort, and by chance one jumps towards it.
And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod, and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the fistula that penetrates to the foundation, and does not penetrate further. and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if he has twistedness, if you apply a subtle layer of plant material, or horse hair, until you feel the layer or the hair on your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come with gentle pertussis or windy verbosity or truth, as we have said; know that it does not penetrate deeply; if you hasten to cure quickly.
And when the fistula is near the bladder or near the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and it cannot be treated with medicines.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, it is the stretched vein coming up to the place. if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that he has immediately bowed, and there is no medication nor sudden healing by anointing.
and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except through work, and the foolish doctors who meddle with them.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips bent towards his belly; then put a tent of iron, or of lead if it has twistedness, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger there,
if you feel then that the tenderness has been perceived; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if one does not work it cannot be healed.
One can hardly heal all at once, but this happens rarely.
and the help that one does, if it is a subtle fire cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. and the entire hot iron in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized places are burned, which resemble a bird's feather.
and then the treatment of many wounds in a bruise, as long as that flesh is swollen, then the treatment of joint dislocation by softening and strengthening.
If he is thus healthy, it's good. If this one cannot be otherwise healthy;
and hold it between, and do not prick except to the finger which is at the bottom, and between your finger and the holding a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the wound; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and cut again before holding, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
and it will be freed from the holding, and will fall away; then I will show you those withered skin flakes that resemble a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
And if the wound is failing to heal, and becomes short between you and the joint, then cauterize it with fire or medicated water.
For the fire cauterizes assemble in this way: it is to know, the drying of these joinedchars, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the treatment of swollen limbs in mud or in broken crocks, as long as the joints throw out pus, and it issues forth from the joined chars into the crock.
then treat the wound of the fingers suddenly with a hard dry medicine, and these are the dry remedies.
For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes almost to the deep foundation, and is separated from the body, you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the cloth or the siphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no others that way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut almost to the bottom, or if you can put tenses and cures as before;
and do not go too far in depth, that you do not touch the tendon which holds the foundation, and come gently with the senses willing to guide; then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy, or you separate that covering and the bundle then that it is touched by the foundation, or by tension or by another appointed instrument; then I will define that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that undermines the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where it touches the bottom of the foundation beneath the skin above. if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head: And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is stuck in the margin of the deep wound, then extract the thread of that pierced one, so that you stop your finger or foundation;
and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the joints together, and hold one to the other, and let it be so for a day or two.
and hold it back many times, until the threads seize the flesh that is between the two, and cicatrize.
then heal the wound so that it becomes whole and healthy.
If the fistula does not pass through, then make it pass through in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Because it does not fit to do for the copper setting if they perforate, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spine-like instrument which they make into a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting. and not on the other part, because one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Here is the translation: and if there is one or several, they are lacking foundation and at the bottom of the foundation; but those that are lacking have little moisture,
and yet they have a bit of citrine water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a chamber bed, as long as the foundations issue forth, and they appear as threads; if you hurry, and bend it as in shackles, or hold it to your finger, then cut into its roots;
and if they cannot hold them back with their moisture, take them at the drapil, or at the couton, or with a piece of camlet cloth. and stretch them to your fingers, then grasp them, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery. where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then heal them with other treatments until they are healthy.
and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient with a cleansing cluster that bites and is harsh to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can issue openly.
When the patient prepares themselves, and their vein is far from the foundation, it is a light cure; and it is that you take them to your finger or nails, and you touch, then you treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and they fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you thread the vein in this manner: take a twisted vein, and put it on a needle, and then draw the vein above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the vein below the needle. and if it is too large; and hold the vein firmly, then knot the vein, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one open to correct the excess of blood.
Then put on the foundation a small cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that they should rest.
and then let them sleep as much as they wish, and when they have slept, if you apply treatments of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
due to excessive dryness of the veins or foundation Many times there is dryness of the veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you make an incision at the tip of a spatula or on your finger nail above, which does not allow it to become moist. then heal it as soon as it is swollen thus as it is necessary.
and if it cannot be soothed, then recommence the rubbing more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much and is scarified. then heal it as soon as it is healthy.
do rubbing A formice is a small, false appearance that goes under the body, and goes much in depth;
and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it just like death from rubbing, and it comes into the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a thread of an owl's feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and place that thread on the rubbing, so that the circles thoroughly encircle the entire rubbing. then turn your hand to the entire vein as you feel everything around the finger, and put it in front, and scrape the finger from its roots.
And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper in this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
do not pierce, because you must hold it at the finger, and press; And if you see, then cauterize the finger, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
of the form of a cluster Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of tin foil or maillet; and never make any of these small and large instruments, according to those which are at hand.
These then, which are used in the treatment of children who are fragile and painful, are small.
The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this method:
and there is a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived within; and it has on one side a perforation, and on the other side a perforation.
and it be the belly or womb where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and it be pierced all around with small holes,
and have between each hole a space of a thumb's width, then insert into these holes a strong thread made from twisted flax or hemp, and assemble the belly as if it were a bag; and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clusterize; and that's the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cluster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then insert it lightly;
then the servant holds his two hands together, so that they are completely visible, then extract the cluster, and lift the patient's legs at the partition,
and if he takes the medicine as it is issued, so much as he can; and if he sleeps a night completely, it is more great aid.
And if you administer a clyster for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to be issued, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or abscess, so let the clyster be as subtle as for an infant.
and it is the form of a subtle clyster on whom the skin is held back:
of wounds
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about manual and medical treatments, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, beware if it is a sign of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great, and you doubt the aposteme's heat: if it makes the cephalic membrane sick at once, as soon as blood comes from the wound, and let the healthy part be contrary to the wounded part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
And if he does not want to recover, let his food be diminished, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat.
and apply to the wound, a poultice of hot oil, or cotton soaked in rose oil soothingly, or in wine stippled.
and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little about later.
and he arms are numb, if you put them on some joints, so they may be healthy.
And if the wound is large like a sword's blow and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tugging, if you assemble them by sewing, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the sewing.
If the wound is discovered to be bone-deep and painful, and does not hold but for a little, if you cut; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of leather. and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, like tested and roasted meat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a wound that has become putrid, and it does not adhere to the bone, so cut around the entire putrid area, and throw away, then cure.
and if it has formed an artery in the wound or vein, which lacks a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in this way that the wound has moved.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense in one part; blood of dragon .ii. parts; quicksilver .iii. parts, and subtly grind the powder, and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap;
and then bind it well, and let it sit without loosening, so it does not become inflamed; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
And no time is spent on quenching the thirst with quicksilver, when one does not have incense or the blood of dragon, but rather the arsenic has not touched the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved to the wound, especially in this case, if you don't put some of this powder.
but instead put on some digested ointments, or poultices made from water and honey, until it drips through. then heal with other remedies until he is healthy.
And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then remove it with subtle pincers.
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be soothing, as you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in warm water, and other remedies of mine according to this method, and apply moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce or open it lower down.
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is his trade.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduit is guarded, because that's where the blood goes, if you cut the jugular vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and let it rest for some days, then heal the wounds of the joints until they are healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it out; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers; and be careful and adjust the outlet;
and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
from a wound of a spear or a dagger
If it is a blow from a spear or a dagger, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has become putrid, because you will know then that the patient is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply, and inspect the body, and look at the patient; but I put attraction in the affected place, and apply it several times a day;
and if you don't have attraction, then put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound several days, or two, or three, or more; if there is no spasm coming, nor evil trembling of heart which are not tokens of anguish; and when you see the good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed. Heal the hand then with tents and other cures, so that it may be healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and becomes an ulcer, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is done as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, if the treatment of that which is in front;
if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has seized pieces, thus cauterize the wound, and remove foreign bodies if they are dislodged; and if they are not dislodged, let the wound putrefy, thus lighten the extractions;
and of other wounds in other limbs, the judgments are as we have said.
Here is the translation:
The ruptures of the belly are great and many and small;
from the great wound often bursts the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the intrusion from outside;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and often a small wound is worse than a large one;
because when we replace the intestines in, we do not put them back in order, from hot to hot; Because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return to points,
and because of this, it is necessary to treat the inner wound, because one must reset the intestine to its place like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
the common fractures often occur in the fracture of the belly,
and the fracture of other wounds of the body and other proper fractures are common to other wounds;
and they are more suitable with the bandage of the belly, and I will specify each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestines are outside, and grievous thing is to replace, this is by one of the ways: where the smallness of the wound, as we have said, because of this the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is frosty, warm it in such a manner: soak a sponge or a cloth in hot water and apply it gently, or you cook in hot water steeping and macerating and soaking, and raise the intestine as much as the swelling is reduced;
and many times they make these restraining vines, and it is necessary that they be loosened by unswelling.
And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or wine and evil humors are cooked, for it is aligned to the entrance of the body by a small amount;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument with which one collects the blood clots;
and the first treatment is to remove what is superfluous in size, that we should not cut without great necessity that it be;
and these are the instruments for cutting:
if you cut deeply into the curve and do not dig further, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst out, if you put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper location, see if you can put it in power, for that is worth miracles.
When the wound is large and it is on the lower part beneath the belly, it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
and also the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parties if you set it straight so that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus you must manage it as I say in great wounds and injuries.
Small wounds heal quickly when they are well-dressed.
then put it between your hands, I mean minister carefully, you should hold the entire bandage in your hand, and bring the lips together; and that is the common way of suturing,
and that is the common way of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then let the head of the wound be, I give a space, and I fix a needle or it has, I have a strong thread; and prick the two heads of skin with the two heads of the suture,
then strain through a double thread twisted around the needle of the vein, part by part, then gather the four heads of the wounds approaching,
and then let the two fingers of the span, and fix another needle; then thread the second filament as you did the first needle and do not cease from doing that according to what you have mastery of the needles until all the wounds are closed;
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large, because the subtle needles penetrate all the flesh, and the too large ones cannot enter well: because it is necessary that they be tempered;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
so that they do not penetrate and open up the wound before the suture;
and then cut the heads of the veins, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and I hold taut or wrapped around the heads of the veins to keep them steady, and let them be until the wound is sewn;
and this method of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds, because he suffers from a needle or an ulceration.
The second wound is common, and it is that you gather the ulcers of the skin and the ulcers of the flesh together into a needle or where there is a strong moist filament; and when you have pierced these wounds all together,
and when you have pierced these wounds all together, If you reset the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and place a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
this stitch follows the bone,
and I sewed up a wound that one had on the belly or stomach,
who was wounded by a razor, and the wound was more than a palm's width large, and it was nine palm's widths of intestine,
and the wound was in the belly. I restore the intestine then when it has been 23 hours without food.
and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not heal him with ointments, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicines; and apply a remedy more on the wound with much cotton frequently in the day, and wash it with honey water until he is healthy.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and sew up the part that is deficient just up to the inside;
when it has pierced the right heart in the right direction, if you have sewn up the head of the suture or stitched or you have placed the needle,
and let them pierce from another part of the inner side up to that defect;
and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew thus as the furrier makes the pelts, and let one side of the suture remain for a while, and take it up again from another side, until the treatment is fully accomplished.
The second method of treatment, which Galen properly described,
if it is thus as a certain spring, which naturally assembles the injured parts together. and applies one head to the other head, in such a manner:
fix a needle or head of a probe close by, and make it pierce the limb slightly, and let the injured heads settle; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce the weak part just up to the dent inside. as it reaches the head of the swelling;
then pierce one and the other of the weak part just up to the dent inside, in the other heads of the swelling that are on the other side;
and it is the worst way of stitching and the most common.
Here is the translation:
One must cauterize the belly with two needles, or it has thread in each one;
and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is a suture more grievous than other wounds of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus the art has moved, then reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder irritating flesh,
then reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder irritating flesh, and the art has moved it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and they inject the filament, and are sewn up the suture, and the scar. then heal the wound like the others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, cotton much, and remove it several times a day until it is healthy.
For you have no need of other medicine in many conditions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light ointment of tempered heat, or in a rose oil, and put it between the joints, and beneath the spines;
and if they feel pain or decay in the belly, and often happens, if they are given a cluster of black wine immediately, and meanwhile the decay reaches just up to the intestine;
and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is through the plant of the veins that they are, and through the subtlety of the whole body, and the approaching of its natural strength.
And if the wound's suture breaks, set it back as it was when the intestine is fresh;
and if it is old and becomes black or dark, then you must lay the black lead that removes blood which does not come from life, for there are veins and arteries;
then touch what is between the eyebrows, and place the fingers pendant from the part below the wound up to the furthest point to ease the extraction when the nerves are cut, and the wound is swollen.
from the rupture of the eyeball
When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, if one cannot restore it in some homes,
because I saw that a man was pierced or wounded by a spear in his belly;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus blocked the evacuation and flatulence;
I will translate the sentence:
And when I saw him sweating, I doubted that the patient had a bad condition in his belly; and there was no point of pain, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a manner: take firm stitches with large threads, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the patient has opened their mouth, if they place it on the two lips,
then place another finger afterwards in the same way as before, so that the wound is completely closed;
and cut the wound. If the head gets stuck in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
in this manner: Take the head of this gut thread so it is well unravelled, and then attach it to the head of this thread, namely a subtly twisted flax thread, then put the thread on the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper position;
and this manner of stitching up the intestines is not forced except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, if there is no ingenious remedy, except for subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula". and especially when it is split and torn apart.
And fistula is according to the true nodulation of hard and white, where one does not feel pain. and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it bursts out clear pus, and other times it thickens; sometimes a little, and other times enough;
and I have already spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not clean, and there is flesh, it is not outside except by one of the eight causes:
it is to know, through the small passage of blood or course; or because of its wickedness; where for this reason he has hard flesh within, and on the lips, that he does not let it grow. where he has too much of a bump; where the skin is porous, and the material is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; for this reason that the corruption is a kind of plague; because the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in sanitation, and is weakened by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
It is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by work of hands.
Know that fistula has in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, where the spine of the back, or where a joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not approach exactly to the place I have said, and you are confident of the cure, and you examine the view, if you take a straight tent of iron or steel, so the fistula is upright, so the quarter;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of lead, for the leads bend into the twistedness;
and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search well by tents, if he is treated with a clyster through one of the passages,
for the moisture flows from one passage to another, and it becomes cloudy;
then you should carefully examine your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is shaved away at the front,
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I told you, if the wound follows what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I told you, if the wound follows what I have told you, and remove the false growth and the rotten flesh that is within; and then treat it until it is healthy,
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right spot, then it is necessary that you cut around it, as much as you can. then I put threads moistened with medicine in a liquid state, and the ends just at the head of the fistula,
then I put threads moistened with medicine in a liquid state, and the ends just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess flesh which is remaining at the bottom;
and then I put ointments on the healthy skin, so that it may be healthy;
and if he is not healthy through that, then cauterize as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut around it. If a vein or nerve is injured in principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it so that the corruption is entirely removed, then the treatment of things which are inflamed so much that they become healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and returns to its natural state as before, know that you are not a liar just up to the fountain:
if it uncovers and searches as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the joint;
and if it is thus healed, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs. if the extraction is done with an instrument suited to that,
and if there are many bones, so remove them all, do not leave a single one;
and if the moisture makes you do the opposite, and there is no error or fear, Here is the translation:
And if you cannot open them for an hour, then apply to the wound something producing pus. and let it be until the abscess is ripe around the bones,
and then they will have less difficulty with the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, if you remove so much of the corruption as the blackness is all gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corrupted flesh, and it comes just to the marrow of the bone; if you want to heal and cover everything up to the corruption, and then cure it as much as it is swollen;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred to a man in his leg, if you take an example and help with your work.
He was a young man of around thirty years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came inside the body,
so that the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to remove the cause by opening;
but the mirror shows by their foolish pride as much as the abscesses open. and they corrupt many materials, and become fistula, and they come from many holes that all flow with moisture and humidity of the body;
and many mirrors show a cure within twenty years, and there is no wisdom in the art of hands,
so that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured, and that which corrodes through the openings to a large body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrus color.
I probed a tent in one of these openings, and then sought out all the openings,
and found that one vein came against another from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings as much as I discovered a part of the bone. and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went up to the bone within;
I seized upon that which appeared to me as corrupted bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen.
and I began to restore the wound with medicines applied in a long sequence, and could not solder.
and then I re-examine, and discover the bone as before,
and found the continued corruption in the bone, and the ulceration, and then I treated it, and thought to reset the joint;
but I could not do so much that I seized upon a part of the bone, and pulled it out with all its mass, then I restored it with medicines; and it was healthy and sound immediately,
and it does not allow to restart the work because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot suffer, and for the fear of death that I have of him. For the evacuation of blood is often excessive, but it was completely healthy,
For the evacuation of blood is often excessive, but it was completely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in anything, neither to the wing nor to come.
and stand upright, if you treat the corrupted flesh at the bottom, and uncover the flesh above the wound where you see swelling, so that the serum does not spread to the flesh; and apply a hot iron or a cupping glass below the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and thus it is necessary to swell as one can see and feel the corruption, and to swell again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear nice, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it discovers the flesh entirely; then put the fire underneath,
and then let one part be purified by the other, the corrupted area, and let the purification occur from the length of the corrupted area, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and purify the bone or where it touches another part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the injured joints, there is no other anguish than to cover twice;
and if the corruption is a prick in the hand or a prick of the foot, it is very strong that thing, but however it behooves you to inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you; and the mondification in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve does not make counter to you;
and it is known that the incisors and the wisdom teeth, which cover these bones, are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the mouth. and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and because of this it is necessary to prepare each similar aspect of the work with his instrument;
and it is known that the work will show you the instrument about which you will have mastery, according to the knowledge of this art; and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; if you prepare the instrument with which you will operate according to what is convenient for it.
with fire The heads burst out or because of inwardness, or because of fervor;
and when you have applied medicine to corrode through treatment with medicines, it does not benefit at all, if it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes, if the patient escapes death through this, or through evil, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
if the patient escapes death through this, or through evil, which is greater, from the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and prick afterwards at the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and take by all the body; if you hasten to cover,
and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar,
if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, then cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, if the cope reaches the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if the cope reaches the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and it does not matter less remedies that the quantity of its virtue;
and all thus done when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes to the first joint, then the cope reaches after another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, so treat all the foot; and if it goes up into the leg, so treat at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the way to treat or soothe the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one of the tendons downwards, and another minister the other tendon upwards, and you dissect the flesh that is between the two tendons at a spacious interval, so that the bone becomes uncovered;
then cover or sew, and apply a layer of linen cloth to each part, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy flesh, and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess to be treated.
And if the flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the limb hastily. where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you that he had a similar case in his own foot:
he had a blackness which seemed to be certain of fire,
and that corrosion went first into his finger by the toe, so much that it took over the whole toe;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to amputate the toe, and was healthy;
and long afterwards the corrosion returned in his hand, and it came to me,
and I put him on rebounding things after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosions;
and it seems that I touched his hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to rebound the matter; and I doubted also that if I cut his hand, he would not die; for the veins of the man were feeble; and he despaired all, and returned to his land, and he stopped his hand, and was healthy;
and I have not seen it happen otherwise except when one does another task, so one has need of it.
Never does an abscess come on a clear skin, and it stays for so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then they break and burst, and the pus jumps out, and the veins become empty, just like a vessel; and the skin which is above is also as subtle as the draped delicate. and does not touch near the bone, nor near the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy".
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone in the front, then it is called "fistula";
and you should cure it by cutting all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just like one dresses a wound; and do not hesitate because of its corruption.
And if you find that the wounds are growing worse, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the wound is deep in the flesh, so the treatment with a cluster should be like this:
Observe if the wounds are large, and the abscess which is in them is of foul odor. then theclysterization of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: Take aisil, and oil, and litharge, in equal measure, and put copper into the vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and thickens as much as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it into a thin stream and in honey and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus; and let the medicine sit for two hours, then extract it by expressing;
do this many times, until the wound is made whole, and the pus is removed;
and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on them,
then boil, and cleanse with it, until you know that the wounds are well purified;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, If they clysterize with water and honey or if they have a bit of liquid litharge broth; or you clysterize with honey and mild wine, which has the properties of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wounds are well cleansed, if one cauterizes what makes the flesh grow in them,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine; where you cauterize with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatise on ointments;
and if the pierced area of the sinew is small, and the canal of the cauterized area cannot enter, If you enlarge a wound with an iron, and put there a tent of Egyptian ointment. or ointment of balsam, so that it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then sew and let it heal thusly, or the cluster may enter afterwards.
and if the perforation that throws below is above, then cut around or lower than where it is. For when the bowel is in a state of fullness, do not let it burst forth suddenly; and if you cannot conceal the shame that is beneath, as you wish, it appears in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is,
and if you cannot cover the wound beneath thus as you saw, it appears in such a manner: that the bowel falls lightly downwards, and leaves nothing of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound,
and stretch over it a drapery of linen that covers the whole wound; then apply force directly to the hole of the breast, which is a little larger at first, then they are joined softly upon it, another dressing according to the quantity of the hole, and place it on the hole of the breast to adjust the swelling, and do not remove the large dressing until after many days once;
and he who is above the hole of the breast, removes it frequently to reduce the swelling, and know what runs from the bowel, whether it's venom or a little or enough, or digestive, or not digestive;
and take heed of the patients who feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a way and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender part of the breast, if you know that the breasts are hurt, and approach the health;
and then he dislocates it in the morning, or the third day, and when you delay the wound, if you change to another dressing, and renew the bandage.
And if the wounds gape open indented after many days, know that the wounds have not closed yet. And if you come to subtle shortness of breath after long tension, do not despair of health,
because the saints approach. Because there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and it is a sign of indigestion if the belly swells above the umbilical area after many days, which means that the guts are not functioning properly;
and if the guts take time to digest, and it is sluggish, then you should add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue; as if it were a dialectical remedy, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last resort medicine;
Here is the translation:
then apply the confection and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked thick. when we do not find any presence,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue it to the dressing, and it stands on the wound, and no one administers it according to the rules of a long Aristologist; and roots of the celestial body, which is also like a ferryman of voices and hundred.
and roots of the celestial body, which is also like a ferryman of voices and hundred. and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use; and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail of the hand, or at the foot, or which happens to grow in other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if it becomes a festering abscess. and they run and pour pus as far as the root of the nail, and by chance they corrupt the whole;
and there come the ulcers up to the bone, so that they bring foul pain, and it is the head of two long fingers, and the color is dark brown.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, if it is necessary to cut for you the entire superfluity which remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterizers are of great aid if the bone is sound, and the finger is healthy;
and if the finger presses on the flesh inside, and it begins to point, and becomes white, it is necessary that you put the right treatment under the ankle which does not touch the flesh, and the swelling above, and touch the subtle and light flesh, and apply to the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, so scrape, and draw forth fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted it is, if it cannot be healed;
and if you see the finger corrupting, so scrape in the same way as I have said before, then heal it until it is healthy;
and if it is festering, and swollen, and it feels great pain, so it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut the corner of the thumb, which is excessively thick when cutting across.
and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh which is beneath the thumb, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then apply something to soothe.
The two joints that grow in the hands of some men by chance are entirely numb, and by chance they have a part where there is a bone, and sometimes they have a fingernail,
and none of them grows in the root of the joint, where the birth is in some of our fingers. Those that grow on some node of the finger do not move, and those who are born with a thick finger, by chance it moves;
the size of the one who is lean is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold two fingers.
In one who is born or ought to have a new nail, it is necessary that you first shape the round flesh up to the bone, then shape the bone to a suitable joint for that, then heal it until it is healthy.
The sudden pains that come together in two ways arise from birth, or from the suddenness of a wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you shape that joint, so that the finger restores itself according to its natural forms; Then place between two tender tents or soft drapery moistened with rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you put between two subtle pieces of thin lead, as long as the joint is swollen, as it is necessary.
Stick them to one of these two with the palm, if you find that joint suitable as it is necessary.
Of veins
You have thick veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come from many parts of the body;
and they are more abundant in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil plant.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that they are taken by cupping, and then the black blood is drawn out; and another manner is that you lift the vein, and pull it out completely.
The incision should be made in this manner: first raise the leg high with a hot compress very strongly, so that the large vein is subtitled. then stretch the leg of the patient downwards from the hip to the part below the knee; then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision.
Then release and draw the black blood from one vein to another, from one head to the other, as much as the patient's strength allows, like the virtue of the patient can suffer.
and then the vein, and command that it be tied with black thread in a circular manner;
and restart the evacuation and the blood-letting when the veins are full, and do not annoy the patient.
The elevations of the limb are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, Then put him in a bath, and the thigh of warm water rises as it turns red, and inflates the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it with fire, and then cover the area of the vein from the top of the thigh to the knee, or in the part below the joint;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears when one feels it;
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
then apply the treatment beneath, as long as it is elevated above the skin, and then place it on the slightly concave area
then cover it in another way, with two bandages; then strip the skin above the vein as much as it appears, then lift it to the bone, as you have done, and place it on another concave area, as you had done previously;
then cover with another bandage, or more if you have mastery of it, then lift it, and cover the toes of the foot
then burn with fire up to the second joint; then extract at the joint, as long as it is entirely bare, then the scab.
and if you cannot burn and lift, if you thrust a strong double-threaded needle everywhere. and burn and cauterize, and you thrust underneath, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as it is sufficient; and beware that it does not form a scab, for if it forms a scab, you cannot burn or lift, and it brings harm to the patient;
and when you have treated it all, place on the spot of the painful wound a moist linen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healthy.
And if the veins are constricted and twisted and entwined together, and it is not straight, as we have said, so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have previously said.
so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have previously said. The shape of the iron tool with which one cuts the veins is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so that it does not cut into the vein.
and it is of large curvature, for if it was subtle, if it seized the vein, but so large as we have said, and this is the form.
Of the civil vein
This vein is engendered in legs, in warm parts where there grows no herbs nor tree, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance grows another part than in legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin,
as it comes within the body of snakes and worms, you should distinguish between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are if it comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then the veins change, and the vein begins to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth about one and a half inches to the joint, and the nail.
and let the splint remain on the leg, and every time it is not on the fracture, if the swelling envelops around the splint, and the tumor; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely removed; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with five incisions of a hand's length, or ten. and a man came to me, at whose hand it issued for ten inches in length, and when you cut it, if you prick or pierce, and penetrate just to the bottom,
if all of it issues out; and let the material that is inside be emptied, and mix in the medicine that is given in a poultice to produce no pus for a day, then cure it as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein runs into the marrow of the foot, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and there comes much of perforations, and where it jumps veins; heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
From worms that grow between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending, and feel well along the length of the limb from limb to limb, as long as they straighten the skin or it heals, and bursts forth;
and it is engendered by putridity of certain humors, if they come forth as worms and snakes and lice and roundworms or belly;
and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye; perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
When you see a patient who is wounded and troubled, if one cannot cure him quickly when he goes:
it is necessary then that you bind the limb above and below with a strong well-stretched bandage,
then cut above and the arm falls, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that he causes, if it is that he corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or growing near the eye, hold the eyelid firmly in place, then cut above, and extract it completely;
and it is necessary to use the patient's purification of bodily medications with dissolving medicines for the bad humidors,
and beware of rotten foods that cause putridity.
Of the pain which comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and then it moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a swollen arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and afterwards, he raises his eyes as if a worm is at his shoulder, more stiff than anything, as if alive silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and fixes itself in the shoulder,
and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
Then I instruct him to turn it back again within the body, as I see it.
I was very surprised how it moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it myself, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because it appears that the wind constrains it;
and I do not appear to follow this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
And when you want to cure this illness, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said, If you place it above and below quickly, and then apply pressure so that this wind constrains the blood to flow there; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat those who expel wind, as if they were filthy pills, and pills of serpent's grease, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they settle.
Their diversity is that there are some with large heads, and small ones, and notched, and hollowed. and of those which have jagged edges, and of those which have lengths, and of those where there are fragments; and that which settles in no member settles according to various methods: whether in a principal member it notches,
if head, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it falls into none of these places, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear: you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways; and when you see bad signs and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the head when the arrowhead is in it and pierces the bone, and suddenly the swelling falls which is on the brain, it is when there is scoptoma and numbness and reversal and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perplexity of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without strength in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and suddenly there is a white moist scar like a pustule, and suddenly also as if bruised flesh;
and if this is a visible sign, you will take care of it, and treat the arrow wound so it does not get infected.
The signs of the arrow wound when it falls on the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and by chance the arrow wound changes like the pulse, and in a short time there is black blood, and it becomes cold and sweating cold, and fainting occurs. then you will know without doubt that death is approaching.
And the sign of the arrow wound that does not heal is that without pus from the abscess, it bursts out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe deeply and seek fresh air.
And if the arrow head remains in the covering of the bladder, it is beneath the small ribs; and it causes great anguish and great pain and breathing difficulty; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow head falls into the stomach, perhaps it bursts out of the wound with some undigested food matter.
And if the arrow head falls into the belly, and it bursts out of the intestine through a rupture, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because I did something else.
It happened to a certain man whose arrowhead fell or was removed from the root of his nose: I touch it, and I pull from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and it was without sensation.
And I pull at a game a shaft that falls into the fat of the eye beneath the parchment beneath, and the shaft was replaced, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the hollow, and it was the large shaft of a Turkish bow, all that is to say, light iron without ears; the game was without sensation, and no evil accidents came to me.
And pull a arrowhead from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrowhead at the ears:
I softened the barbs, and subtly worked on it until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And pulled an arrowhead from a man's body, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after it had passed thirty days, it did not change its position; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and treated the wound with fire, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell or dropped, and the wound was sewn up on;
and delays the arrow within him, and does not change his natural disposition, nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
And it is seen with another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was swollen;
and he suffered great pain; and many other similar things.
And an arrow was extracted from the man of the king's prince, which had been shot into his nose, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
I was called to the treatment after it had fallen for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and he felt a sharp pain and soreness beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I put on the loathsome place a digestive attrahent plaster, because the loins do not swell. and it appears to me that the loins are wounded.
and it appears to me that the loins are wounded. I put on the plaster morning and evening, and resolve the wound itself, and thus the patient remains long times,
until he feels the wound; that is to say, a day within his nest; and it tells me. I put on the wounded place medicine as a corrosive by gentle touches, so long as it was uncovered,
and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck to the bone; then I adjusted in the opening of the wound by that corrosive medicine, so much that the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it passed well beyond the deadline within three months,
and then I will reset if the wound that I have touched with the tongs, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
then I did not cease from subtleying and ingeniously contriving devices, until I grasped it with the well-made tongs. according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, so that I may transport it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything in.
but wise masters compare well very difficult things, and on what is present and failing. Here is the translation:
I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed, but according to seven modes. or through the soil where they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumps forth there where it enters, it is an arrow entering the flesh, and it does not jump forth at all now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be so that the flesh is pierced inward, and the issue is alleviated.
and if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot issue, if you let it be for some days, and it will move a little each day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, if you pierce everywhere around it with a subtle iron, as much as the bone around is enlarged, and then pull it through.
And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, if it seeks to have the whole tension; and if you feel it, if it draws to no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot for the narrowness of the wound, and for the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve, if it forms as much as the wound is large; and draw back the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow that hold it,
and draw back the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow that hold it, if the flesh which is stuck to the arrow is pierced through by the muscles that you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can draw it back;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can draw it back; and be careful not to break the arrow, but rather draw it back more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, if you let it until the joints are fully relaxed, then pull, for the extraction is easier. And if the flow of blood makes you do the opposite, if you remember what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the tender nerve and of the vein, and put ingenuity into how you can safely extract the arrow without danger.
whether it is straight or crooked, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell on him. because it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then set according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens into something of it, or the skin is inflamed in that place if one sees or feels apparently.
Cut then so that the tongs can take hold, and then extract it: if it does not come out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
And if she cannot issue, let her rest again, and then resume the extraction until it issues forth.
and if it is the remainder of the arrow that is there, remove all of the shaft.
and if the shaft is broken, and you want to administer a remedy, if it is administered with an instrument that cuts. if the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then remove forth.
and if the vein is shaved, he should thrust the instrument to a point entering in, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the vein is touched, it is necessary that you take hold of all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can. then heal the wound as it closes.
And if the vein is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is nearby, and you can take hold of it above, then he takes hold.
and you beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then it stops, and then sews up the wound, if it is necessary; and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps with which one extracts arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Here is the translation:
It is to know: it is about the nodes that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech". and the nodes arteries that are in the temples appearing; and the veins that are in the eyebrows of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the injured joints which are in the neck; and the veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is the left side of the head, and people commonly call it "vein of the head"; and the vein called "faste" is composed of the cephalic and basilic; and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side; and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is located on the pubic area; and it is that one which one bleeds, which appears clearly on the skin.
And the little vein is the one that is between the thumb and the ring finger, and if it rains on them;
and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left thigh, and the second sophipne which is at the ankle of the right thigh; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and on the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catheters and migraines; and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are rough with a cloth; then the patient tightens his neck to a view, as long as the veins appear behind the ears, in the place depending on the head: where the ducts reach to your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above all the vein in length, and cut and open the skin and the vein properly, you must traverse two ducts, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish;
Then hold steady and bind, until it is healthy;
and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an old one, and swelling, and accustomed optometry, and at the course of the bitter tears as the eyes;
and the quality of the healer is such as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then sign of an inch;
then raise the heart towards the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below, and elevate the vein high up, and the cupping, just as you have done with other veins, and correct the flow of blood according to your need;
then lay the patient down, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
and then form a scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the book begins.
The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic, for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness;
and it is of such quality that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again swollen from a large flame.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck twisting some ligament, as before;
then the health, and let the healthy part of the traversal be a little long, a little wide, for there is no spot of flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
The health of the vein in the nose is worth an ague, and a strong fever, and diseases of the face, As it is a migraine and redness that comes to the face, and mainly when it is old;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches out his nose to your left hand, and take a subtle flame long, and insert it into the labial fold in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well here, and the blood will now start to flow;
and do not remove too much skin in depth, and make a correction of the blood according to necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is almost completely restored;
The health of the two gums helps in the stretching of the wing, and at the beginning of messiness, and many diseases, and to impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the health is that the patient's neck is stretched from one side to the other, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
then cleanse the vein of the loin a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as the master is.
then redo another part in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold the veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the liver. The health of the veins above the liver helps with pain in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and toothaches and indigestion.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at its veins, of which one is on the right liver and the other on the left; and they recognize them by that which makes them black, and by that which surrounds them small black veins: examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
examine one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if you examine the largest of each part, and thus you make the .ij. veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
From the sanity below the tongue The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the veins is such that if the patient holds them between their hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks beneath at each side for a black vein;
examine then one and the other, and do not go too deep in the font, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly examined are healthy according to three methods:
where I prick all over, I flame the mirror large, or subtle olive oil as if cutting trenches, and it is called "anesil". and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
And it has mastery over opening the veins, which are full of gross blood appearing, and which contain gross blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame olive oil:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the vein to be carefully treated, and that it should be wary of the artery that is beneath. And if he touches the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be touching the flame, but rather cutting similarly as one cuts a nail.
And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, or you sensibly open the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and apply the flame to the anvil, as we have said.
And if you want to understand the joint of the injury, it is necessary also that you stretch the arm, so that you touch the joint as much as you understand the pulse; then mark the joint of the wound, and then stretch the arm, and apply the flame to the anvil quietly;
and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the joint inflamed, for it is of the artery: avoid that then.
And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it's without an artery: Hasten thou then, and set thy finger on it for a long time, then lift thy finger if the blood is staunched, which often happens;
Thus let the arm be, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be on guard against fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the blood is not staunched, and it fails thee, and thy medicine is not present, then cut the artery so that it opens, for the head of the veins; and staunch the blood.
And take a fistula of a fist, and make it, and take one of the emunctories and place it well just next to the other;
if the wound is stagnant, that's good; if not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood;
and the stauching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small abscess of the wound, and the possession of the ease of the arm.
The healthiness of the vein in a thousand ways helps that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that is underneath, and if he does not press too much in front, and he finds the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the joints become swollen, and by chance he cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any houses due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you anoint the instrument with oil; and avoid touching the nerve with your power.
And if he has a vein between the muscles, then make it two fingers long.
The bloodletting of the head helps, which draws blood from the chief, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bloodlet in the flame of olive or in the flame of myrtle, for it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to choose the lightest vein, and not to grieve anything if one fails the first time, and one recommences; and by chance he inflames the eyes of some men, as it fails at first, but it does not harm. The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing, is that health is not diminished unless it is preserved by maintaining good health.
and to avoid future illnesses; and let the vein section be made on one of the three veins that are at the wrist: namely, the cephalic, basic, and basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after 2 or 3 hours or a day and a half;
The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather when need arises by day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
and it is not advisable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months up to the seventh month. Nor should one cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines of a gentle cluster. if he has much retained filth, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful putridities from the intestines to the principal members.
One does not heal quickly, he who eats too much meat, or is drunk, as long as it is furious, nor dropsy.
and becomes worse on the part of the healer after colic passion, and vomiting, and decay of the belly, and multiplication of the habit in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and all this virtue, or through a thing of the arm or of the body.
then thin out the humors, if the blood is thick, through meat and through drinks and through medicines, if you have a weak liver.
then enter into a bath, so that nothing can resist it, to thin out the blood.
and you will know of the vein where it is between the third rib, as we have said;
and you will beware that day of work, and of point, and of luxury, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the surgeons be higher than those whose veins are opened, and rub the arm three or four times;
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
and then rub the limb with the hands until the veins swell, and feel it;
then soften the sinews with a little warm oil, then place his right hand on the vein beneath the limb a little where he wants to soothe; so that the vein does not flee and fails to be touched. For there are veins that flee as if they were cords on the sinew, and if there are those that are full of windiness; If when one puts on the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these.
and if he opens the vein, it is because the wound is too constricted, for which reason it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the surface, so the vein does not get inflamed.
And if the vein gets inflamed, and the patient's condition worsens, leave it alone for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: by chance he will come to abscesses ulcers; do not enter or bathe, then recommences the health as it pleases him;
and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then close up that perforation immediately to stop all bleeding;
and open it a little hastily, so that the eyes may be inflamed; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the health, and put a little of the oil of olive, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is mixed in this oil the lie that the oil;
and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same makes a triangle and arch of veins, when one puts it on the limb; if the blood is subtle and separates when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which has often occurred, similarly when it is not healthy unless at that time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on the limb a sponge moistened with water and oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any black or green color, then it does not bother him. and if you see, put on some kind of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times an abscess and appearance occur at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance. Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it happens in short time without delay; but the master makes a plaster to harden the spot, then cures with another cure, until it is healthy.
And draw from each person blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large.
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little, and to cut across, not to prick.
and this manner of health is free from decay of blood and from failure of nerve, and is worth more than the health that gives long life or wide life.
And to him whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give soft bread porridge with juice of green apples; if he is exhausted, so draw out three or four times the blood.
And if he is of a cold complexion, so he eats before health soft bread porridge with musky syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicories, and well-odored syrup.
And if he falls into health, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of beef, and subtle, fragrant syrup.
and let them use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to clear his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bloodletting, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
And he who wants to clear his arm after the first bloodletting, and it has hardened strongly, should bleed seven hours after the first bloodletting, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, should bleed on the second day or the third.
Here is the translation: Then you examine all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come into the pulse of the patient. and this happens often, when the healer is negligent;
and it is not suitable when you loosen the arm, and make blood issue a second time, and the perforation is closed, that you press strongly on; nor if it is curved, that he extends the arm hastily, for this would be bad;
but let it be until it bleeds the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood that has congaled around the vein issues forth, and put it on the small piece of silk in water, and press on it lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to bleed the blood a second time, let it be in that same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the hand because it is composed.
And the manner of the healthiness is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the finger becomes red.
then be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthy part now of the crossing, not too wide nor too long;
and let the perforations be wide, and let them be healthy near the joint of the hand, and if they cannot issue forth, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not put your hand in warm water, for they place it more in winter than in summer;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
hold the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, if one wants to see it; and if you cross the vein, and if you cut it completely across, don't hurt anything;
and don't insert too much in the fontanel, for the nerves are very close to the bare skin,
and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot be opened.
And when you have drawn out as much blood as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and do this for each wound.
The health of the hand on the left side is worth it for the disease of the wrist, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
The health of the spleen is worth it for all the diseases that are below the body, as with diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain is relieved by warm water, and it pricks into the vein as much as it can bear. and lay upon the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many roads;
stricter than a larger canal, or at the ankle, which is worth more.
And if you lay the vein under the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the vein of traversing as in a joint; and let the flames be gentle.
And if the veins cannot issue forth, reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well purged.
And if the veins are faulty at first, then restart a second time from above a little, because the veins are salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make equal the wisdom of one foot with the other;
The veins of the sciatic vein are at the junction of the thigh, and their wisdom is worth the pain of the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its wisdom is that the patients either bathe or are stretched out above the thigh, and extract three fingers' width while twisting.
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then you should press on it in all ways that you can, and across. and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood is healthy, and it is much restored to many homes.
and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood is healthy, and it is much restored to many homes. And if you do not find it, then press around the area that opens or gives pain in the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard against the veins.
and make it flow as much blood as you see, and then release the bandage, and put on cotton and strap; it is now healthy.
The swooping of a cupping glass
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this cupping without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and others in the sides of the neck; and the abscesses beneath the chin; and the abscesses on the shoulders; and the abscesses on the hips; and the abscesses in the arms; and the abscesses in the legs; and the cupping glasses of the swollen veins; and the cupping does not draw blood, unless from small scattered veins that are spread throughout the flesh,
and because of this one does not become frightened, as one does when making a bloodletting from a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all in fire, nor in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is voided.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, if we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each and every tense;
because there are those who, when they have the task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
and if there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who find a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood; and if there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to wait three hours of the day.
The health of the nose helps with the grief of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it should be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this waiting is in the place of the health of the cephalic,
and it is not suitable for one who has a cold complexion in use, or who has a catharr, because that causes them great harm;
and because of this it does not seem to me that the veins are of use, nor those who have or had cold illnesses.
And he who often sins, becomes oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little further down due to the doubt of oblivion.
The cupping on the neck is in lieu of the healthy head and the basilica, and therefore it is suitable for the constriction of the foot. and to a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and to a swelling, and to repletion;
and it is necessary to poultice, for if it holds too firmly, then there will be obliqueness or stomach pain or heart pain.
The windings are like the ribs of the spine if they are worth the pains of the head, and optalmia and migraine, and in the straining, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth,
and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to express his hand in putting, so he does not touch the artery, and does not see the returning flow of blood.
The windings beneath the chin are worth a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
The ventosations of the scapulae are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventosations of the hips are worth as much as those of the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many incisions in the depth, for the flesh is nourished by blood, and knows of its inner veins and arteries.
The cupping that is on the back is suitable for hemorrhoids from the bottom, and for diseases of the anus, and it is necessary that the cup be large, and be of copper, so it has the power to treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The cuppings of the legs heal openly, for they attract blood from all over the body, and are suitable for old pains in the kidneys, and in the marrow, and in the bladder, and reset the fluxes; and they are in the place of .ij. sophenes, and of .ij. chevilles, and anyway they restore the body after long use, and bring forth pus in many dispositions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck moderately, and put it hastily, and remove evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the red and swollen place, and appear the roughness of the blood; then firm, and replace the cuppings, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tender flesh, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once softly, and necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike .ij. times: the first time to subtilize the way of the thick blood.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood drop by drop, then we suffice with a single application.
And if we want a lot of blood, then we recommend frequent applications; and if the wound is deep, then we cauterize deeply, and the treatment is such that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are obstructed, that you open the veins of oil-based aperture and dissolvent. if it is in this case, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil.
and if it is in a poultice, of oil of crescence, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on it.
but it is suitable to wash it after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from aisil, or from water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have excessive superfluities rise from old wine, or from water of brook, or from a decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar things.
and do not think it healthier to apply a cupping glass before bathing, but rather an hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep after the cupping.
and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped. And beware of those who are melancholic, and if their blood is too bitter and inflamed; it is necessary that they take cold things, such as apples, pomegranates, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and eat small peas, and meat from a castle, and moist game meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat small peas and little birds and pigeons;
and on the day when he will bleed himself, then he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men triple or muscat before bleeding, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The bloodletting cups that are not placed to harm are those that are placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and podagra, and on the stomach and the arm and the legs and the hips, for these limbs do not suffer from being harmed there.
and do not make them bleed from one member to another, as we apply them to the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply cupping glasses to the belly and to the bowel to thin out the member;
and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained viscosity,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty by sucking so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water.
if it is for painful swellings, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or water in which herbs of proven benefit have been cooked.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has or is surrounded by the middle of the millet, a small hole, as if to push an awl through.
And let it be of iron, soft in front so that it does not blister the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have a probe in the middle of an iron or iron bar, to put a bandage in place,
and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the old, and for the lean than for the fat.
And one must then apply this cupping glass to the limb:
take the candle of wax or oil, and place it in the cupping glass at the crossing of the vein which is in the cupping glass, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then apply it to the limb, and let it be on the perforation that we have mentioned, so that when one views it, the vapor goes out, and one removes the cupping glass;
and take hold of the limb as formerly, and restart it often, if you have mastery.
In the application of cupping, which is administered in disease of pleurisy, to all acute, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of acute, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible.
and that's the method:
Without them being administered unless in limbs where one cannot put cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as the lips and cheeks, and similar ones. and in the uncovering of flesh, as we do with bones, or nails, and similar things;
and the quality of the skin is that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without pus, if you take them;
and put a bandage on the tender skin, until they become familiar with it, and have nothing in their belly; and then be cleansed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the wounds;
and when they are flat, and cling, if it is the place or one can put a cupping glass, if he puts it, for it is of great value afterwards.
If this does not work, lift the place of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the healthy places are too far from the body of the sinews, thus muddy .i. wrap with a cold water cloth, and put on, so that the sinew is stretched;
and if the sinew is multiplied, put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galen, and similar things, so that it is stretched;
where you apply the hot poultice of heated peas, and let them stay on until they adhere to the skin, it will staunch now;
and if you have more material at hand, take other sanicles.
And if the sanicles do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sanicle issues forth. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
and when you see they settle, sprinkle a little of aloe and of silken thread, or of ash, if they will now cling.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this chapter, for they did not find anything in the old books, nor did they read a letter about it.
and for this reason is strange the practice in our land, because I have never found any good there;
and I know nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and they stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when breaking or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so nothing hinders you entirely, just as weakness of body, or infants, or old people.
where the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and moderate cold joints, it's to know frozen joints, and flesh of birds and of goats, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any green grassy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, so you do not doubt about hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government which they have used.
And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork of a cow, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things. For a suitable nourishment represents muscles and more quickly repairs the break.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken in hand or reunited according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but it is not a cure, to reset the broken bone, that is, the large tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as if it were before; and do not touch any part of his work, and for this reason one must nourish with thick soups, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: And if you break with a wound, and break at all a small notch.
And in each manner he has his engine, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the reminiscence comes into its place;
and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and open well by default, and sound to the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break;
but it can have twistedness, or crack, or small fracture. It does not matter if you move the limb, but apply the medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold it steady subtly now.
And know that the fracture which goes to the arvolt, and are the injured separated parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not form in this way.
and if abscesses form there, let it be for a day, until the abscesses are calmed down; then set it equal in the muscles so you can lift lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is of two parts, or hand, or foot, or if it is a small limb, or to two cords, or to a cord and to your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disjoined, reset them by all means in their places in the muscles where you can, and take care that through your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to their best forms.
And he feels well in his hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work on the aposteme abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is at rest, so scold the patient well that he does not move it, neither in vigilance nor in sleep, nor in turning, nor in another manner; and take care that the limb is so well-assured that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that he feels no pain; and you guard that it is set straight, so that tortuousness does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in shape.
For there are small limbs, thus arms and fingers and similar: so it is necessary to envelop with subtle and fine bandages;
And those that are large, such as thigh and leg: it is necessary to envelop with a large and hard bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire limb, and hold everything in place equally, so there is no unevenness.
then the internal swelling decreases, 3 or 4 times, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little above the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and hold less, so the fracture then separates a little from the break.
and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you grasp a great part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn back again above the broken limb.
then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above.
Here is the translation:
And if there is inflammation or abscess, put on it a soothing hot application that reduces the abscess, and removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
then hold it with these straps, and let them be of a moderately large cane's thickness, or of a stick that one makes into a splint, or of palm branches, and arrange them according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the strap which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it needs to be according to the size of the limb, whether small or large;
then hold steady on the stiles just as you did at the first treatment, then place a thread above it, just as at the first treatment on the fracture;
the more constricted it is, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too large nor too small, and be of a linen thread;
for if the threads are large, just as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that it has less than two fingers' width between each staple.
And if the patients are wounded by the staples of the stiles after the constriction in their healthy places, then put under them swabs of linen or a piece of parchment, so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
And beware that it does not suit to strain these broken members on the first day. For when the member is large, it does not suit to put these forces before five or six days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that suddenly occurs;
and see here the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that holds as a wall of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg whites, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common manner of the plasterer restoring breakage to many dispositions, and similarly for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way to restore bruising and dislocation and twisting: take absinthe and ladanium and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, an ounce; myrrh and aloe, an ounce; alechil, eight ounces; and make into powder, and mix with egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Another way of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugwort and vismalve, an ounce; myrrh and aloe, eight ounces; acacia, six ounces; Armenian bole, an ounce, and crush well, and mix with water or egg white, and apply the remedy.
Another way of plaster for joints and bones that are dislocated from their places, and alleviates sudden pain, and reduces the size of the bone, and bruising: take new flax, and soft millet in oil cooked over low heat, and apply to the affected area. This plaster does not restore fully, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly soothes pains.
Another way of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig tree leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make into a plaster.
Another way to restore the breakage of the bone and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of veces, one part of each; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with water of coriander moist, or of water, and use it.
Another way to apply it more forcefully than the first, when a stubborn abscess comes to restoring a limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balusta, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and camomile, taking one part from all; and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Hypocras states in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems according to Galien that one should put on a broken limb, to restore it, warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to apply that is good for a wound and pain: take mugwort and leaves of decapitated omes, or feathers of a bird, and vismalve, and make it equal, and pound, and make an application on the wound.
And then you disarticulate a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has his bone moved out of its place; if you do not disarticulate it by hand for several days.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten it, and disarticulate, and remove the splint now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip into water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on a dry linen cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess.
And reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle treatment, and a little of the splint, and do not restrain it so strongly as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that abscesses, swelling, and pain and inflammation are all gathered there, and you have the task of cleaning and binding, then restart, just as you did first equal treatment.
And if it does not come to the limb from what we have said, do not delay further than three or four or five or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is felt, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh beneath.
Then restrain it more than at first, and the swelling absorbs its moisture, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is drier than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it. Apply the warm water treatment then, every time you reset it, and let it be each third day, and ease the bandage a little.
Here is the translation:
of various ways of breaking Many ways of breakings are, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished;
for there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way to the shoulder blade which is beneath the bone, just like a hedge or a post; and for this reason this type of breaking is called "hedge-breaking".
Where the sword cuts the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of breaking is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two breakings, great or small.
And if there is an embedded fracture, or crack, or break of stone, or fall from stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is a wound or large or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small crack, and because of this it is called this fracture "capillary".
And if the wound is made or caused by a stone falling, or by a fall, or by similar things, and it makes the piece of bone enter downwards, and it is like when the blacksmiths make them when they strike on the anvils; thus between the bone within.
And it happens more to those who have damp heads or bones, as with the head of an infant;
and it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are dislodged, as with these; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of fractures by the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into their nature, and by the corrupt flesh that is on them.
The similarity of the fracture is known by this: when one discovers the bone, and one feels it with the finger, then the black fracture appears.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and stretching, and palpitations, and fever with chills, and eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in more dispositions, if it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see a disastrous accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the numbness comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should open the vein before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the vein before the seventh day, lest the vein under the vein be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
And if the break of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the fractured part thus: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the ailing head, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more subtle than you can.
and if the flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess falls, it is aided by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with soft, clean cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess that falls is appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut around the bone to remove, and it is done according to several ways of work: one way is that you cut with a tight, straight cut in front, and this is the form:
And then I make another cut, a larger one than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of diverse surgical instruments, some being straight and others large, and are pointed, and are made of iron indeed; and work lightly, so you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, thus you must minister instruments with caution, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the entire body, and should have a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, so you have instruments for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of instruments.
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you put an instrument on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then reposition the instrument a little further away, and do so all around, then make incisions in the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you hold, such as pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you restore the apertured bone to its entire former state with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors.
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no nails, if they break lightly at the joints; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And the other method of work is what Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it greatly, and that's his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the fracture appears, so that when you have discovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this lens-shaped incisor, whose shape is this:
And do not cut on one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the web that is beneath.
If it is rough at the bone, then set the bone lightly, for one sets the bone well without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce up to the membrane, and the bone is broken so subtly above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape off the scales with a subtle rasp which you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you rasp before with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other delicate hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its adjustment; and this is a thing that is not easily responded to by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is deep, it is necessary to take a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and anoint it with rose oil, and apply it to the wound; then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and rose oil, and apply it to the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another thread, and do not constrict it further than until it holds the wound sufficiently;
and let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme heat is alleviated, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and farina of veal, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and apply it to the wound, and administer again medicines without sharpness or biting;
and beware that the wound is not too clean, so you do not leave it without ointment, nor do you leave it without assembling a poultice, for when a poultice assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to the wound, it becomes necrotic from above.
Here is the translation:
And if no better remedy comes from the medicine that one has applied, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue in the drapet, and put it on the wound. then heal with various kinds of treatments that are necessary, so that he may be healthy.
Know that no time are broken the three parts of the nail above, or one part by the swelling, for these are three bones; and the cartilage below is not broken, so it does not make a wound or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the three parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your little finger or instrument to the nail, and put the breakage inside your finger index, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape. and do this gently, and beware lest the patient feels pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be straightened to its place, then it is necessary that you set it even at the head of a slightly thick vein.
And if the break is in two parts, then make another one alike, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has cooled down, then apply to the head of the nail a bandage of linen threads, for if the break is in one part.
Where you apply it on one side, the break is there; and let the bandages be as thick as they fill the holes of the nose.
And they say that one should soften the bandages in butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg white and powdered millstone; then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes apply egg whites to the nose instead of bandages, and if there is a swollen drapery within, and it holds the break, and soothes the patient within; or do as you have seen.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are observing, if you apply cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a little bag of dyacilion.
And if abscesses do not come out, apply an emplaster made with flour of sixament and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the veins too tightly.
And if the break in the veins is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the congealed blood with suitable instruments, then sew up the fissure, and cure the festering wounds with charcoal, and suddenly, as emplasters and ointments suitable for that.
And if there is no depth in the veins of any wound, then heal the tendons, and I put canes of lead, so that it may be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jaw is broken apart, and there is no wound in the forehead, and the break is apart so gently, and it is not broken in two, except for the little fragments within, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and gently adjust the break within, and hold it with the other hand from above, and make it even.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two, then it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
And if the teeth are moved out of place, or broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put it on the broken jaw, and put on a double layer; and put on the layer a large, well-made staple, or a piece of even, long and broad leather according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, then dislocate it on the third day, and then reset to the point where it changed; and apply a poultice made from powder of mill flour with an abundance of egg white or wheatmeal, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are effective, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight weeks.
And if abscesses or ulcers come, then manage them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the excess bone with suitable instruments for that.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a flame according to the necessity.
And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, put there suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it be healthy.
of the strength The strength breaks many times beforehand, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the strength broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put equal breaks on both sides, so that the form be as it should, and there is no appearance nor movement.
And if you have mastery of extending further, set beneath the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the force with effort, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you make equal the break, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot draw the head of the forceps at the defect, because it comes in profundity, so it is necessary that the patient girds around his shoulder, and sets beneath the shoulder a little pillow, and bends the ministers to the shoulder below, until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
And then adjust the break to your hands, and if you find the debris scattered, so it is necessary that you bend over; and draw forth the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess movement, so take one of the incisors that you have; but set beneath the forceps this instrument, to guard against excessive movement.
and it resembles a spoon, and is not a device, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you drew forth the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, then touch the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if the hot abscesses come, then soften with a dressing of rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and apply it.
The straightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without injury, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of mill powder and egg whites, and apply light staples, and put a splint underneath, so you have mastery over it; then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of dressing over the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended; and place the staple on the breakage, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy spine, and beneath the ailing spine; and rearrange each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the breakage firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move above the broken bone, if it is rewrapped every day, and when the ligaments are relaxed, if it is restrained;
and make the patient lie on his back, and you put when he sleeps a small pillow under his shoulder blade, to raise the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the force by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm at the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until twenty days.
then reapply the plaster, if you see that it needs repair, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored to the best in twenty-eight days, and less for some men.
of the break of the shoulder
Although it happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates its joint, and you do not know how to set it right except by touch; if you examine according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millstone with abundant water, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if underneath the splint there are no cavities in any part of the shoulder, so apply this dressing of linen threads, so that the splint is adjusted equally; and then hold it all together with a strong bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the ligature every day; and all the times that it becomes loose, tighten it, and adjust the splint if it is out of place, and soothe the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is accomplished, then remove the dressing, and be sure, for it is not a thing that can be set right lightly.
And if a part of the bone protrudes beforehand, and not beneath the heart, if they make it thus, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscessed swelling.
of the breaking of the fist
The fist is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alignment, and swelling, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and that feels very bad.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly arrange to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplasters and stoups of subtle salt, or another light plaster, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes loose, restrain it; and if you see it becoming dislocated, through corrosion or pruritus that comes from the blood, or pain or abscess, hasten, and loosen, and remove the emplaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the emplaster, and hold it as long as it is healthy.
of the fracture of the ribs
It is known that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in the large ones at the back, and inside the chest, and does not bend except because they are cartilaginous; and one feels it well by palpation with the fingers.
And the restoration is that you put equal to the fracture, as it is suitable. And then apply a plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain and piercing, just as if from a thorn, because the bone touches the membrane; and there is numbness, and all at once and vomiting of great abundance of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the stomach, in order to soothe the rupture at the weakest point.
We do not do this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not developed. And if it has developed, then it is healthy.
And they say that some of those who put ventouses on the limb, in order to suck out the putrid matter, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the superfluous humors from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
And they direct that one should cover the limb of a wounded thigh with hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the length within, then it should be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the opening which touches the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open into the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the blood; and then one must cut into the opening, and draw lightly, and then sew up the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplasters, until he is healthy. And if abscesses come, then put on dressed bandages soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb; and treat while the limb of those who need to form an abscess, and be guided by feeling underneath the rib where it should, until he is healthy.
of the breakage of the neck
Sometimes the breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and little by little it grows; and thus has the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that he is mortally ill in many dispositions, and if he moves and feels well when one holds the joint steady and firmly, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so apply a cure.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if take heed that the feet are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on the back there is swelling and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated onto their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated onto their back and they want to sit, then they cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain in its cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
And the cure is that you warm them if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of musk deer, so it may be appeased; then put on one of the comfortable and soothing plasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover on the heart; and remove the bone, then reassemble the .ij. levels of the wound, so it is large, with a bandage, then apply the ointment in January, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the kowe", take your pouchet with your left hand, and put it equally with your right hand on your poitrine, then put the plaster and stick it on, so you have mastery; then hold fast, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it so, and remove it, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Because the bone of the hip is fractured, and if it has, there is not a small amount of diminishment in the head; and it makes a dull sound, and declines towards the paralyzed parts, and brings pain to the patient's limb, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand on it, so that you are on the fracture; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is solely at the head, set it in an equal natural shape.
And if the fracture is dull and declines inward, make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture can be more apparent. And when you have set it even, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of cork, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the ligature is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is softened, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the break of the shoulder
The joints are those which are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full plain of moderate grip, according to this form:
And lay the joints thus, and bend them upwards, and settle the patient on his seat; then place his broken arm on the beam, until it reaches the joint, and has in the middle a curve of beam, then bend down to some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the fingers on the fracture equally with their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his stool, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold below all the joints, and each extends to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, then hold the joint below the fracture, and above the fracture, and each of the ministers extends to their part. And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put the joint moderately below the joint, and another towards the elbow, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to put the joint lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the limb, and on the elbow; then put the fracture in place, as it should be, and hold it steady, so that the abscess does not come.
And if abscesses come, do not hold back until seven days, and put a soft compress in a gentle oil and rose oil, so that the abscesses are pacified; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you put the dressing on the break, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and hold steady on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width of space between each splint, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the break twice; then hold steady on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less loose.
And if you see the alignment of the splints, and the holding steady, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each joint for nine days, so that no swelling comes to the place, or the nerves do not come to the limb because it is too constricted. If it is aligned, as we have said.
Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that joins the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and set it evenly.
And if it's the large foscile, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crosswise on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations as an arm at the bottom part towards his hand, or to the ligament, and another ministration at the top. And then put the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is a single disordered part that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then reset it with the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur suddenly, glue on a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the dressing subtly, so that the abscesses are alleviated. And then remove the wax, and put on the plaster made of mill powder with abundant egg whites, afterwards set the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be a little stronger and slightly larger than the others; and know that it should have five or six splints or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in the other; and hold more firmly on the fracture than on another part, and always less in adjusting, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, which is stretched from linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And rewrap the limb and the bandage afterwards for some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, as if a prick comes to the limb, it is necessary that you irrigate the limb with warm water, so that the pricks are alleviated; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then recommence the strapping, and if the bandages are weakened and the bones disordered, and similar things, adjust them properly.
And if you take a ward off the narrowing, it cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, so you must soften it a little, and let some days pass, until the narrowing corrects itself, and then hold it steady.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days or thereabouts; then he puts his hands on his neck, and his necks are even, and he is wary of movement and degeneration, and sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers that have had few fractures, and it does not come but that it often happens.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the patient be positioned crosswise, and stands straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extends the fingers to the broken bones, and puts them even with the mirrors, so they are well jointed; and apply the plaster and the poultices, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the limb; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the palm of the hand near the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken hand; and then wrap it with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as well as large as the palm of the hand, and wrap it, so it holds as necessary.
And if the break is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the linen between the two.
And if the break comes to one of the two bones, it is the pulsation, set it even, as necessary; and wrap it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to lift the break, and does not move; and if the break is in the other two, like in the index finger or one of the others, set it even, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie them together, holding firmly, or you put on a splint, as a poultice; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the abscess, and heal what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is thus done by reattaching it above the breakage, and another below. And the patient puts his face downwards, then each minister stretches out his limb equally; and it's when the breakage is within the bone.
And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the ligaments will be towards the finger, and the other ligaments below the breakage. And also if it's close to the knee, and then the ligaments will be beneath the knee, and then the extension will be downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the treatment is done in such a manner. It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with a double bandage .ij. or .iij., and remove the excess, then twist the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the nail, and put .i. thread long between the thigh and the leg, from beneath the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then place these bandages on the fracture, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to equalize the constriction, then start to bind firmly .ij. turns or .iij. on the fracture; and when you go further above the fracture, it constricts less; then take .ij. heads of thread that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and loosen .iij. sticks that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you reach beneath the foot; and the constriction, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or inflammation comes, nor any similar thing.
And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then you must extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then you must break the bone, and draw forth; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that it places itself thus, as in the joint and in the arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not close with the patient's illness.
And know that the pulse is restored on the same day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexes.
from the gutter of the knee
Know that in the gutter of the knee there is often little breaking, but it splits many times. And if it breaks, if it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and has a complete wound, and feels a wound, and it senses a good omen.
And the restoration is that one puts back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as one can; then put on the dressing, and you put a round steel, if you have mastery of it, and hold it steady as it should be, then rehearse all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; then apply to each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "non-muscle", and the other is called "fibula"; and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it appears clearly; and turn underneath. Then bring into extension, and make it even, and lay the splints evenly; but however, it is necessary that the breakage be gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of wood that enclose the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to underneath; then wrap two layers of bandages above and below, and lay them in the middle, so that at this point the leg does not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers two lengths of wood, and it is of wood, and they put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a splint for the breakage or where there is a wound; and remove each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so heal until it is healthy.
of the breakage of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and the two po [small bones] are not affected, and it does not happen that they are crushed in several positions.
And if it happens that the foot breaks, and you see the bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on his shin, where the bones are raised, then press them together until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and under the belly of the foot a small tablet at two inches from the heel, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped it with drapery, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are any broken fingers, set them right, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that tablet I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in linen drapery, and hold the tablet under the foot; and let it be situated on top of the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, which we have discussed; and attend to each accident as it requires.
from the breaking of the bone one should prick
When the bone of the womb is broken, if it makes her sit enlarged, then incline to the back part of the spine, and hold by behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put a large stalk in it; then pull out the woman, and lift up the back little by little, and thus jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the womb, and returns the bone with the stalk; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or eight: if the break will be restored, and you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a cord to the perineum, and blow into the bladder strongly, until the bladder is inflated within: the womb will thus return the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, restore it thus as we have said for the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into my book. For the break signifies more dispositions on the right way of restoration: therefore give heed to it.
On the rod, when it is broken, take a gorge of oil and put it on the rod; then wrap drapels around it, and leave it seven days or eight, and it will be healthy soon.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be stabilized now, so that the healthy parts we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol ointment, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, so that abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears uncovered on the skin of the chest, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, at small extension.
And if the extensions are not aligned to put in place with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary in the mirror that it takes 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so it does not bend under compression on the limb at your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards.
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head is placed on the top of the apparent bone; and the bolt is set in place once, so it holds firm, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you take hold of the top of the bone, so the instruments have a grip on it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take hold of it with an instrument suitable for that, whether incision or sewing, at your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone, including rough and minor scars.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so much that it is in its place, then apply a black stippled ointment, and properly if it is established; and do not put anything on the raw wound or anything else where oil has been used, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer this when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it completely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times foolish people have done this, and have caused death or corrosion to come to the patient.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents will not come to pass, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, strong bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards a day or two, an improvement in the wound, take away what you had put on everything, and apply gentle ointments to soothe the wounds, as we have said, like soothing tetrafarmation and similar things.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two or three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be soothed and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowel releases the flow gently.
And if many days pass, and it cannot be sutured but releases the bowel again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these deviated pieces that bring that pain.
And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and opens onto the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of the bruises that come onto the skin
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or from a multitude of arousals; or from too great movements, not in its hour; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the arousal is frequent with warm water, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural figure.
the member which is twisted after the healing
Here is the translation:
And often the node is removed by constantly and for a long time rubbing with moist hands. And let the limb be gently moved every hour.
And if the twisted part is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be cauterized with iron, so that it covers just up to the bone, in a subtle incision, making gentle touches; and put confidence and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if you must now reset sense targeting.
Because delay is involved, if one inflames the limbs, and by chance if one sets them back in their place; for this reason it does not suit to move them at the hour when they are inflamed: often it brings spasms and other pains.
Always, when it happens, if you make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the aposteme (abscess) is calmed down; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the cure comes into its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on the dislocations of the limbs from the head to the feet.
of the jawbones
Here is the translation:
When the dislocation is small, it returns through better arrangements.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his fingers as if from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be deft, to hold equal; and instruct the patient to open their jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the fingers set it equal, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, meanwhile it is the jaws together, if they are raised by warm water and oil, so that they reset lightly; do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming soft, if you put on a warm cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with many ligatures.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the jaws cannot be set back in place at one time, and are not converted to their joints, then fever and habitual pains come, and by chance a solution of belly, and by chance vomiting pure colic.
And when you see this, then know that it is perilous; and many times he who has it dies in eight days.
of the fracture
The fracture cannot be dislocated from the joint within the continuation of the bone and the skin, and is not dislocated at all in the faintness, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses firmly with his palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is towards the hip cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it does dislocate sometimes, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and thus the same way the joint of the spine is reset, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Here is the translation:
and do not dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not dislocate within the nerves; and often dislocate downwards towards the joint, especially in those who have little flesh, because for those who have little flesh, the joint hastens to close up; for those who have enough flesh, the joint closes at the points, and returns to the points.
And by chance it happens to some men that they get a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells up with a hot abscess, and one believes it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary therefore that you examine them, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocations occur when they move downwards towards the joint, and make a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the bone to touch the top of the shoulder, as if it were an ulcer; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the bone;
and this type of dislocation is not forced to reset, when it is new, or if the infant is ill.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then place their fingers below the bone, and lift the joint with force above to the bone; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it above, placing it below; if it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the master healer shall rise up mollifying and soothing, just like a decoction of alder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and shall be soothed.
then let the patient be placed on their back, and put a layer of linen cloth underneath, not too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror at his heel, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it in this manner.
and it is that you make a support present, namely a home which is larger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and put the shoulder underneath the linen cloth of the patient, and lift the linen cloth high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and other ministers treat the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick into the ground, so that the head should be just as steady as a pestle, and not too big nor too slender; then put it under the patient, but let it have soft drapery above, and the patient should be standing upright on a long stick; then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a stick of three feet long and four fingers wide, which has the head bent to enter into the patient's armpit in front, according to this form:
Here is the translation:
And when it is in, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that you put under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold it under the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And it is necessary that you massage little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more afterwards, five or six days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is swollen due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five or six days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are bruised or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the hands, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another treatment; and cures until they are healthy.
And if after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and tardiness in movement, if the patient is bathed many times, so that this stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation which commands
You know that the joint which commands is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and likewise before and behind, and the dislocation is not relocated, for one sees well and feels well; and dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the dislocated joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is crippled, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus, so that the abscesses which come to life, for if they come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset from all to all, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is such that when it is thus, so you can bring it back, you extend your hand to his two hands; and his arms are expanded, and the fingers of the mirror according to the count inwards, above and below, and bend the joint at his fingertips together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand on his hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, strongly administer extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they tighten two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the mirror reaches the joint to his hand, anoint it with no oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint firmly, until it returns.
and when it is in place, set a dry dressing with a little egg white, and hold the arm firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then disband.
And if the joint is closed in its place, disband the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the dressing and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then disband.
And if it feels gripped after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fatty membrane of a sheep, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath. and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the membrane back on, and then enter into a bath; and thus do it two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see, set on a warm, moist, heated poultice with butter, and hold it in place; if it returns to its natural disposition.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints Anyway, it must be quickly returned to its place, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess does not develop there.
And the remedies are that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and the doctor puts them even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns to its place.
Anyway, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place; then put the sick part of his hand on a table at extension and return. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the fingers put their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, then hold the swelling down with soft cloths, and let it settle thus without starting again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot stretch anything at all: then know that the nerves are affected, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to stretch by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
And when the hand is on the place, set it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it be still for a while, then disengage and leave it so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no grating, apply the warm water poultice, and rub until it be healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
They are sometimes dislocated at any part of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
Then they stop, and push the dislocation back into its sockets as far as it returns, then hold the top of the arm, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
and let it be for a few days, and then make it equal on that day; and do not touch the limb, as we have said, and release the dislocation of that day, and make it mobile, and reposition the limb; and do this frequently, until it is straightened.
and do the same thing, if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same thing, when it is dislocated from another part.
for the dislocation of the spine in the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly stop making sense, it cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes numb, or the two hips or the two arms.
And many times the spine changes in four places; the one that changes at the back is called "gilbositez".
The treatment is that you should recognize that the gilbositez originated in childhood: if there is no point of healing or sanitation from the whole body.
And that which comes from a fall or from percussion or from similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak grand words, where it is not much in all great profit;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the worst before, no one is healthy;
and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his equal bed, and have the support of a strap beneath him, so he does not slip.
then place a thick cloth on the ground firmly, and another on the feet, and tie a bandage beneath the sick person's buttocks, and another on the thighs, and on the knees, and on the ankles.
and two ministers adjust the bandages, one at the head and others at the feet, among the thick cloths.
and they should be well fastened, the cloth as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
And if it does not return through this treatment, take a tube of three inches long, and place it under the patient's skin, and the patient should be on their back, and insert the head of the tube under the patient's skin, then put the middle of the tube on the spine. and place the mirrors at their feet on the other end of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it so that it turns to the hand.
And it is that you fix three sticks at the head of the patient's arm, and three others at their feet, and have between each stick, above and below, a hand's width of space.
and have in each stick a hole, where the tube turns, and let the sticks be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three sticks have one turning stick, on which the tube turns, and have in two turnings two small sticks of a hand's width long, to turn the tube.
and then the ligament that is among the tendons turns towards the head, and the other tendon towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its own turning to the entire ligament, and the masters put the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is straightened, put on an emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the staple of a tablet of .iij. two inches long, which grips the limb of the gibosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, until they are healthy;
and if nothing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the staple that we mentioned before; and never administer on a piece of lead,
and never does the appearance come to the back of the spine behind the ribs, and believe that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have any presumption: by chance it may bring death.
of the dislocations of the hip
You know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come to dislocations suddenly, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, forward and backward; and more inward it slips, and a little dislocates forward and backward.
And the recognition of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the affected knee than the healthy one, and the affected one cannot bend their knee at the fire. and it is the limb that is swollen from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of the one who comes to the doctor, if it is that this accident is contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one who comes beforehand, if it is that they support their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, then it cannot go forward, and it retains its urine, and inflates the groin, and when it goes, then it passes above the heel.
And the signs of the one who comes behind, if it is that they cannot stretch their knee, nor double, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and it is the head of the thigh at the place beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this similarity of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that it has a presumption.
And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and strengthen it within and without, and move it straight and crooked; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one minister strongly, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with one bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand in such a way that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another holds the top of the bandage;
and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's good.
If that's not so, it's necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, it's necessary that you place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the joint which is below the angle, then extend the bandage above the angle, and above the strength.
Then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip of the affected limb, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, it's necessary that you bind the four feet of the affected limb together with a strong bandage under the four heels, and under the four knees, so that the affected leg is extended four fingers more than the others.
Here is the translation:
And when the dislocation is in the furrow, the patient feels it, as we have said about one who has gout, and stretches the ligament properly on the affected leg, and also on the foot.
then put two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then place a splint between the hips of the patient in the form. and has planted moist cloths around, so that it does not bother the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the doctor puts his hand evenly on the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the case of gout, and the patient feels it on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and place the mirrors of pain on the angle of the sick leg, then press with the other hand, and extend below towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the sick leg downwards, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip was dislocated at the back, just as we have said about lying on the hips. and it should be on its face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
and it will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and place the plaster, and tighten with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and rest .iij. hours or .iiij., then dislocate, and put the poultice on top; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let them be for .iij. hours; then dislocate, and make the patient walk slowly, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, forward, and backward; and do not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and stretch his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your two, then bend the two joints of the knee together; and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has well aligned his leg with his hip lightly;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg align with the hip, and bind them together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then unbind it; and do not trouble the patient anymore, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not in its place, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes entirely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the sinew is inflamed, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated:
The resetting is easier, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
And when it is dislocated from the entire joint, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him firmly by the leg above the ankle.
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left, two or three times, then hold it high up, and gently pull the foot high up.
and do it two or three times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it stays in place, that's good; if not, start the work again, for it will stay.
and if it cannot stay in place like that, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strap firmly in the earth between his thighs, and wrap cloths around it, so that it does not dislocate the limb.
then they will stretch out the thigh, and another minister will extend the foot to his hands or to the knee, so that he lies on the column of the foot; then each minister will stretch out evenly, and the straps will be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches them;
then they will put the mirrors evenly on the dislocation with their hands, and another minister will pull the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, they will put the plaster and bandages on top, and strongly bind them, and tie the foot to the leg, and beware of the veins that are behind the knee, so that the ligaments are not too strained.
then let it be still for three days or four, and hold the bandages tight, then loosen them on the third day or the fourth, and delay informing the patient for three days; and if he walks ahead of this deadline, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come to the spot, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of two
When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the upper or lower back, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until they return.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put the sole of your foot on a table at the head, then hold firmly, and let it be for two hours, then disengage; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, be wise in the art and do not use it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, not too harsh.
and use at the beginning of things appeasing hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses will not come to life.
and when the limb is in its place, then administer things appeasing hot abscesses, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of dried herbs.
and it is with dislocation to fracture, and you will not be able to reset, if the bones, and do what we have said about simple illnesses;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen
