Here is the translation: And it has come to me in vision that I will complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is strange to everything altogether, so the knowledge is perished and broken off, and nothing remains of it except for a few descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is alienated the knowledge.
Or it seems to me that I will revitalize it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cautery and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And for that reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for him who intervenes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms, and conjunctions, and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of vertebrae, and the arrangement and moving and resting muscles, and the origin of their issue.
And therefore Hippocrates says that a name with no action is much, and with work is little; and likewise in the art of hand.
We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, let him beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been summoned to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it was not removed he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who took in charge a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break was wounded; and the ignorant surgeon forced the break over the wound, tied it very tightly, and did not leave any room for poultice, and left him thus to the end; and he ordered that it should not be undone, and remained thus until the leg was entirely inflamed and came to destruction.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the same, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who burst an abscess that had become gangrenous, and then inflamed it by the wickedness of his authority.
For a gangrenous sore, when it is purged of melancholic humor, does not agree that one touches it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you take care to protect yourself, so that the foolish surgeon cannot speak ill of you.
So take your instruments in hand, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the dreadful diseases of great suffering; and put away your doubts about what makes you hesitate, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is the chapter ordered from head to foot; and about the forms of instruments, and of cauterizing, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized and with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to foot, and with the forms of instruments.
Furthermore, so that we may remember the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and detriment of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and detriment are the longest and most subtle words and secrets of science, and about these many wise men have spoken and agreed, and I do not sufficiently suffice their words, for I dread the length.
I say that cauterizing aids universally to all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion with moist matter, and dry complexion with moist matter.
In hot and dry complexion with moist matter, some have divided and said that cauterizing is great aid; and others have said the opposite: that cauterizing is of no use in disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat, nor by dryness; and says he who said the opposite that cauterizing makes great aid in hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men. For when you consider the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be so on some occasions through experience.
And besides, don't meddle in it unless you are one who has experimented with it and knows by long usage the chapter on cauterizing, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the surprises and chance of time; as for other complexions, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is among the secrets of cures, and of greater good than burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth to another member unless it touches the one that is cauterized, and does no harm to any other member if it is not called upon.
Burning medicines come from one member to another and bring grievous diseases of great harm to the patient; and by chance, they kill the patient.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm unless there is excess.
And I have found this by experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is repaid in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harm that follows is removed by the aid of cauterization; and similarly if the cauterizations are for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait for a greater evil to come to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste and value, and for the virtue of its work and lordship.
And it is a power that the disease comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the site of the disease and its virtue; and excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered at the right time or place where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterization for dens for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cauterization, and it is effective. Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold instrument is more effective than with iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the site of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but it is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and gold instrument cauterization is more effective than iron, as they said.
And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it soon cools down; and if you heat it too much, it makes a fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
And therefore we use fire cauterization that we have made apparent to our work.
And I have arranged this chapter from the beginning up to here, so that the way may be easier to find.
of olive cauterization
This cauterization is worth for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pains of teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by soluble medicine, moistening the head three times or four times, according to what the virtues, age, and habit of the patient can tolerate; and then restore the patient's head.
And then make him sit with his hands crossed between yours, and put your hands on his shoulder; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let your middle fingers be there where they will bleed afterwards, and then heat the cauterization called "olivare", which is the form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it descend and spread your hand slowly and gradually as you rotate it; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone one small spear length; and if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take a small piece of silk, and put a soft and moist cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply a warm poultice in butter; and leave it on until the eschar is removed; after that cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancient ones said that when the wound stays open longer, the more it purges; and therefore it is a great help.
And some of them said that one should heat the cauterization until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
And the others say that one should heat the cauterization so much above, and pound it so hard that it takes away from the bone as wide as a thread that women put in their purses for the reason that the humors will be purged out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that one should cure and soothe.
And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every respect, except for some people where it is a matter of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it so; because the bones are weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and similarly when the patient's bone is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salve and purging for me, and from this use I work together with a healthy outcome.
of ancient pain of the head
When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives of the head, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the cauterization that we have previously mentioned, it will not help.
Take heed if the head of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cauterization as we have said above.
After, make a cauterization above each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cauterization at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where one puts poultices; and hold your hand so that you don't see right up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the mid-part of the head, and this is the form:
of the head's cauterization When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends the disease up to the eye, and the head is cleansed by common medicines, and one has made all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and none of this helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two manners, namely by medicinal fire and fire.
The medicinal fire cauterization is that you take an almond, remove the skin and fill one part of it with a small amount as much as two horns, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can put the almond filling under the skin; and when it has been put there, tie and strain it well and leave it so for twelve hours; then release it and treat the wound by rubbing with garlic, and let the sore be thus two or three days; then put a poultice on top in butter until pus forms.
After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see that one has done these things with some burning medicines that I have written or in the treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cauterization is according to this manner. Heat the cauterizing tool to the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a clo or having one part of curvature, and in middle to a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly until half of the key's ash is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and pour out abundance of blood.
After, put cotton on top of the seal, and place it on the spot for three days; then put damp cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cauterizing tool called "cultellare", all at once, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
of a headache
When you treat a headache as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously mentioned from medicine and fire do not benefit, then it is necessary that you heat the cauterizing tool called "cultellare" until it is white; and then apply it to the painful spot a line of half a duodecim long, and lift your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and do not come right up to the bone; and beware of the jaw muscle that moves when one eats, and the nerves have no regard except for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or the cutting has great fear and even for him who does not know, and is not learned or experienced; and leave the work in my way; but I will tell you how to stop blood flow when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizing tool that has two knives; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear due to coldness, and one has tried medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizing tool called "poins" to the form:
After, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain holds in both, and move slightly away from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot to be cauterized; and make 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
of the torment of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cauterization on similar cases that come from sechors and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this similar case of torture that moves from phlegm and idres, and purging of the head and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cauterizing tool in the part that appears to be healthy, and make the cauterization near the top of the head above the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb's width; and leave the cauterization until half of the key is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
And this is the same as the cultellare that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little thicker; after, treat the wound in the way I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said before, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make 4 cauterizations: 2 on the two horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 at the spot called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
From lethargy
For this illness, give the patient great and pillowy remedies for the brain; after, rinse the head of the patient thoroughly, and place on the occuput a poultice of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and that is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is cleansed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauterizations around the head from top to bottom as far as the neck, with a gap of two inches between each one, and cure him as with others; and if there are ulcers, add another in the middle; and if necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is healed; and the cautery called "olivare", as I said before.
from chill of the head It is necessary that the head be cleansed with years and what we said before; after, rinse the head of the patient, then do a cautery in the head and on each horn, and two behind and three on the backbone of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, do four cauterizations on the backbone of the back; and let it burn as much as the worst part of the scar will be burned, and lift up your hand; after, cure him until he is healed, and it is the cautery called "olivare" that we said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a cautery except in the case of those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from prolonged treatment.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, do gargarism and mastication cleansing the brain often with good meats; after, rinse the head in the middle, and do one cautery as we said before, and one on the vault, and on each horn; and if the patient's disease is spreading and suffering, do cauterizations as I said to someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the backbone of the back and neck, and it will be the olivary cautery according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, do one subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thick phlegm accumulates, then do those cauterizations of threads as we said for someone with paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is before in the division.
After rinse the head of the patient; after, make one strip of fine linen well made, like a circle, and place it on the head; and the patient's hair should be crossed over and held securely from all sides; after, apply the liniment, and smear with old burr butter; and heat it temperately in the fire, so that the patient can bear to have the poultice placed on his head; after, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for good government, until he is healed.
Or if you wish to cauterize the head with many punctures throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then place on cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
of the disease of the eyes When the disease comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and guard against all moistures, and make him sweat or take a bath several times on an empty stomach.
After, command him to rinse his head, and do a cautery on the head, and do two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of the disease is to both eyes together, or in one eye; and strip all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and take care of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision how to stop it; and never make a cautery or cut under the two bones behind.
of the body of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the surface of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then do the cautery that I said at the beginning of the disease descending to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations under the hatterel behind the two bones; and if there is more need, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow at each small cautery.
of the body of tears within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give the patient three cooked nuts; after, rinse the head, and do a cautery on the middle of the olivary cautery; and do two cauterizations of the "clavilis" type on each eyebrow, one a little below the hairs; and take care not to cover the artery. And that is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this "olivare" cautery. Here is its form:
And if you wish to do two cauterizations on each eyebrow as long as the eyebrow is; and leave your hand off only until the third part of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I said.
of the hair that points to the eye Never happens that the hair of the eyes is converted to the backside and points to the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: it is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
Or the cautery by fire commands the patient to leave the hairs as long and equal as they are; and if they point at their birth, then bind the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your care; afterwards, sign on a piece of paper the shape of the eyes, just like the leaf of myrtle, and the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put a moist cotton cloth in egg white and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery to form...
After cauterizing on the figure you have signed, little by little, until the burns are gone from that place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burning is removed; afterwards, treat with ointment until they are healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then start the cautery again on the same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural height, and be even, and do not prick the eyes.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made, just like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the patient holds only in one eye, then you should work on both, and put a moist cotton cloth in egg yolk under the eye; and the patient's pain is in your care, and put your hand showing above the medicine, and press little by little each time the patient feels the pricking of the medicine, for it feels like pricking as if from fire. When you have done all this, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the pricking has passed, then lift the eye of awe, and look if you see the paper lifted just as if it were lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the place or the medicine has no work, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set in order; then put a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burned skin is gone, afterwards treat the eye with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work by great vigilance that the medicine does not damage the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start the medicine again on that place which is softened properly, just as you did before; afterwards treat until it is healed; and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constructions; and do not provide the right way for him who does not study this art.
I think I've reached the end of the text! The last line is simply "de la cure de fistule par cautere", which translates to "of the treatment of fistula by cauterization". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterize according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your care; and hold the minister's head between your hands in this manner that it does not move, nor leave their head; afterwards, put a moist cotton cloth in egg yolk or persimmon juice on the eye; afterwards, heat the cautery which is thus: and shape it like the tip of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, then it should be pointed from one head to another, and if you see, then it should be just like a tent; but however, this one that is shaped is worth more for your work.
Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and drain far from the bowels; afterwards, put hot cautery on top, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hands do not go mad; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then start the cautery again once more, and another time if necessary, and leave it for three days; afterwards, put a moist cotton cloth in butter, and the treatment of desiccating ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without being healed, then put corrosive medicine on top until the bone is exposed; and the cure according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand about the fistula, and make the place open; afterwards, put in the opening one subtle thread, which has this form: and make it to the quantity of one third of a flaxen thread; and hold your hand firmly on the thread, and do not let the patient move until the wax has melted and reached their eye; and it is necessary that you put a moist cotton cloth in egg yolks or awe on top of the patient's eye: the wax thus seals the fistula, and heals by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. But if not, then it is necessary to make a perforation in the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to what is needed in its own place.
I think I've reached the end of the text! The last section is titled "des crevaices en levres", which translates to "about cracks in lips". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section. Often there occur cracks in lips that are called "hairs", and likewise in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing knife according to this form:
And put it quickly in those cracks until it comes forth; afterwards, treat the place with cerote until it is healed.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The last section is titled "de l'aposteme de la goule", which translates to "about the abscess of the throat". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;
due to movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then place the patient's head in your hands; afterwards, apply the cautery whose form will come after in this manner as if you were putting a cord on a tooth; and put hot hastiness inside the cautery, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards, lift up your hand and reapply the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay an hour and a rich purging.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums made soft restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When the pain of teeth comes from coldness, or there is coldness or indeed, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in two manners: and cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip of it in a iron or earthen spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and soak it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth hastily and hold until it cools down; and do so often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cloth and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put one hot iron there until the fire comes to the crown of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is such that you take a cord of iron or earthen, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; afterwards, heat the cauterizer until its form comes after this manner, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in the pressing of that cauterizer, and then rich purging; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
When the scrofulas are of pus and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterizer as it comes after this form, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the cauterizer on the other side; and put the hot cauterizer once or twice, as necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on wet cloth soaked in butter until the swelling is removed; afterwards, cure the limb with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture prevails on the channels of the body and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards, apply a cauterization to the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, but rather burn just slightly. Afterwards, apply another cauterization at the jointure of the neck to the top of the spine, and it is the cauterizer that is called "clavile", which we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
of the throat When all and every disease of the body are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauterizers on the flank in the same manner; and another cauterizer between the breasts, one that is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make a cauterization in piercing to all the cauterizer that is called "points" of which the form is as before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to thirty or around. Afterwards, cure the limb according to what has been said before, and it is the cauterizers on three rains according to this form:
And because of this are the cauterizers lighter, because you do three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, instruct the patient to lean on their back and on their side; afterwards, lift up the cord that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then heat the cauterizer which has two handles of the same kind as this form:
and cauterize the cord until it is pierced just to the side, and comes out with three cauterizers; and because of this, make a cauterization with the cauterizer that has three handles, for which the figure of cauterization is six cauterizers; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cauterizer that has three handles:
And at no time is added to this one nerve for which there are eight cauterizers.
Afterwards, put on the cauterizer a poure broie with oil; afterwards, make the patient rest, and let the limbs be motionless for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then make a cauterization on the thick part of the "clavile" cauterizer, or many cauterizers in piercing. For the jointure has been refilled, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient is healed.
of the cauterization for pleurisy
The ancients say that one must make cauterizations with the roots of aristolochia for pleurisy, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize one cauterizer between the flank and the neck, and two small cauterizers a little way down in the part that is below the beard; and two cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly; and one cauterizer in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two as two ribs behind the cauterizer that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but rather hold it openly as if smelling.
And they say that some old person uses a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and the pain stops, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse.
When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have said with divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three manners of cautery that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauterizations in the direction of the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver's cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand all along the cautery, and let the patient be mindful on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two horns, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the bone which is near the mouse, or where the patient's breast comes towards the left side, and be the elevations when you lift up the bone according to the bone, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Afterwards, heat the two horns so that the bone is perceived from the other side, and then draw forth the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the way to the end of the cautery in three horns. After the cure, when it has gained power through long time, and this is more effective than the others among the cures previously said.
of dropsy
Cautery is not good for dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the chest; and the cauteries should be well near the bone of the keur.
Afterwards, let the cautery stay open for a long time to get power, and do not neglect the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and there would be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the key that we have shown before; and those for the back are olive-like, according to what is placed here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery so as not to turn. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellowish fluid burst forth, and be the cauterizations according to this form:
Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg, one at the tip of the little finger and the other below the knee in front and behind the leg; and let the cauterizations be long, one under the kneecap in front and the other behind it, between the legs; and leave the cauterizations open for a long time until the yellowish fluid issues forth; afterwards, perform the other cures that we have said.
of menstruation
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are debilitated, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering and having great virtue, then make one great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the circulatory cautery; and three subtle cauterizations around the belly, each one as fine as a key, and two cauterizations on the haunches.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the navel, and one on each vertebra, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or one or more, and are ancient and are made up of cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind below almecdate, and gradually tapering, and one cautery under the belly. Two are necessary;
And if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then make one great cautery on the stomach, as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse, all the way to the end of the cautery; and let the cautery stay open for a long time. After that, cure the patient until he is healed.
of the charnosity which is called "Thelul"
When you cope with Thelul, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then place it all ablaze on that coped Thelul; and I leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the birth of the vein, so that the blood does not flow. Do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, make each one as we have said; after which perform cures that are beneficial for a long time until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the Alchatim, it will have greater aid.
of an uncured wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When to someone comes a fistula, and it is inflamed and discharges corrupt matter and moisture, you should prove the entire tent subtlety, and take care that you know exactly how deep the tent has entered. After that, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity of the tent that has entered, and continue the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned away, once, twice, or thrice, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, take care to avoid those places, and do not make a fire except in a charred place, and think that it is not perilous; after which cure the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is seared, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is torn, and corrupts the bone at its root; and thus as one of those who we will tell about in their place.
From the disease of the kidneys When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and great windy-ness, and it does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other at the cauterizing key that we have mentioned before; and if we were to cauterize in medium, there would be .iii. cauteries in line, and they will make more great help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery on the part outside of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow at the point of the finger, and one on the right and one on the left, each being as long as a nose's width; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizing key be according to the form mentioned before.
Of the uterus When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms late; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that three cauterizations be made around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizing key be, as we have said.
Of the groin
When the viscous moisture descends to the groin of the haunch, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the hip is longer than the other when measured together; and one finds the signs of departure visible, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the groin of the haunch at one cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the line around the groin as it turns, so that the groin is inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those for which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three large cauterizations of the olive-like ones, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the keys; and heal until it is sound.
Of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the groin of the haunch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, but the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills similar.
Then you make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together medicines burning and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is: that you cauterize on the groin of the haunch three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make good profundity and great, and have between each cauterization a space as wide as an egg, and let the cauterizations be olive-like; sometimes one makes a cautery in medium on the head of the haunch, because of which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize at the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the haunch; but make it in this manner so that the circles contain all the haunch, and all the spikes of the key are burned.
And this is the manner in which one operates in sciatica, when the pain stays in the haunch and does not reach as far as the hip or leg. And if it comes to the hip and leg, then make two cauterizations there where the patient says that the pain lies, and one cauterization above the ankle four finger-breadths on the left side; and let the cauterizations be cutellate, and let the spikes of the key be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two fingers of the foot or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three or four points at the cautery which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, make more; and if it seems that the pain is under the knee towards the hip, then make a cautery at the cutellate or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted all over the feet. After a purging of the belly which led to his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And let it be scalded until it is completely red and gives off an odor; then place it on the withered flesh of the afflicted person, and turn it around to the healthy side; and cauterize once a fire cauterization, and leave it three days; then make an embalming with butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment cure until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cauterization for the fear of his gaze, and if we see none who uses it; and yet it is good cauterizations, which can endure it, and where it applies.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or striking or excessive evacuation or similar signs of cold matter spreading, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be voided of fetid pills or similar things, and then one makes marks on the back, where the pain holds, three lines marked in ink, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization is done according to the "point" cauterization; and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the cauterized middle point according to this form:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a thin line when they arise, and fear; and you find in the last vertebra of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you see it cured, then cauterize it with the "celcle" cauterization according to this form.
And so the cauterization should prick each part of the vertebra equally. And if you see, then cauterize around the vertebra with the piercing cauterization two lines or three, and let the points be near one another. After the cure is complete until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cauterization in gibbosity which is in spasms of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is from moistors that are spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which the doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner: make a great number of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-like according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cauterization for all the "point" cauterization. And if the pains come up to the knees and at other joints, and this often happens, then make a cauterization on each knee three or four times, with all the olive-like cauterization; and if you need more, then make more, but do not keep your hand there longer than until the sparks of the fire are burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are at the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains some pain at the shoulders, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the ribs or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance with the patient and take medicines. For if you make good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed by the aid of God.
of the running of the itch
When itch running comes to the armpits, and the boils descend to the groin and this is new, it is necessary that when you see it cured, it does not annoy him on that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the worms descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm straight until the boils are repaired, and then reattach them to your fingers, and sign with ink below the itch running on the bone of the pointing finger, and make a sign like the half of a circle above the body; then scald the cauterization in this form:
until it is white and gives off an odor. Then reattach the boils to their place; and let the minister hold his hand on so that they do not return backward; and work well on the patient's hips, and put under him one cushion and one servant on the hips, and another on the chest which holds his hands; then put the cauterization on the sign with your entire hand, and hold it straight and hold until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it at first, start again once more until you reach the bone; and take care subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cauterization; that you do not burn him; and that through this the patient does not die or suffer another evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also as great according to their measure; after three days, cure the wound of butter until the scabbing is removed; after use other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be given long enough so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, give him a bandage well made, and wear it for 40 other days; and have good rest, so that he does not trouble himself much and beware of too great excess in drinking and eating, and too high shouting; and when he has learned this lesson, then is healed entirely. And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in its chapter. of the running of the belly
When runs come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one cauterization of the same quantity as before, and let the third spark of fire be burned; after cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
but sign the first one on the joint and make two lines above and below the running, and place your hand in the middle of all the cauterization to clamp it tight. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts long times, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary to be cauterized with the fire that is called "points", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its thinness, weakness, virtue, and location of twists and pain. If one is healed from the first cautery, it is good; if not, begin another cautery on top of that one, because such a case is that it must change in the member that is nearest, so you should do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of menstruation
The menstruations are helped sometimes by cautery with great aid, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 inside the head by the nose, and another towards the forehead to the end of the eyebrows; and 2 on the 2 horns, and 1 behind on the forehead; and leave your hand there until the cautery comes up to the bone, and so that the scabs come out if the vapors of thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
And if the menstruations are everywhere scattered and manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize on the head with those cauteries we have said, and 1 on the neck, and 2 on the spine of the back, and 6 on the spine of the back, and 1 great one on the scapula and another below, and 2 on the shoulders; and 2 on the sides, and 2 on the tendons of the chest, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back part of the scalp, lest you burn them. And sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I make of cautery, the more it brings aid and moves the profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because the body is already quite corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in manners of iron. After the cure, let the place be covered with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then one does cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauteries be a little bit entering into the space of the joint. Then treat with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes make a cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; but nevertheless no one should meddle in this unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease that is called "ulcers" is advanced, and the skill of medicine is worth nothing, then one cauterizes with a cautery a little bit deep, according to the quantity of the space of the joint, until the pus is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colander and of alder, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
the treatment of chance by cauterization
When chance comes at the beginning and you see it stopping, then cauterize around the chancre with a circle-shaped cautery, all around the edge of the chancre. And although wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and although this does not seem to me good, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once or twice; and more rightly is that it be cauterized around, with the circle-shaped cautery, as we have said in many cases.
of the swelling that cannot be killed
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it will not die or because of the superfluity it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries that are painful; afterwards leave it so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with what is called "the form":
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the joint, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this way that the flow of pus is blocked. Afterwards treat until it is healed perfectly.
the treatment by fire with iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a consumption of member, for it consumes members just like fire dries up dry leaves. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer both cautery and fire, then heat the cauteries with a small and large hammer, according to what is needed at the place where the disease is; afterwards cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, and nothing remains except what is corrupted. And then leave it for 3 days, and put on top of the burned areas soothing ointment with oil until the scorched areas are removed, and all corruption gone. Afterwards treat with ointments engendering flesh. And if after 3 days you see no healthy flesh growing, that's good; but if not, then start again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. And this consumption has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of cauterization with fire; but nonetheless, cauterization with fire is of greater help, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in division: take it when you need it.
of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defeurs naist une maladie qui est apelee "clos" selonc nostre entencion, and est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.
Et s'il sont convertit par défauts lo cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d'eau chaude;
The cure of the trembling
When some people tremble from cold or numbness, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the hip, and one on the stomach at the olive-cauterization; if the trembling ceases, and the patient's health will hasten from the cold disease.
of foul pustules
Sometimes boils or foul pustules appear on the bathed body, coming from gross corrupted matters. If it is necessary when they appear to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: one subtle cauterization made of myrtle wood, so that the point be seized by fire, or of long aristologe root, or at the lenticular cauterization. And sometimes we cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but are broken up the superfluitous matter from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut off Many times there is great bleeding of blood from the artery that is cut off at the wound that comes before, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to stanch.
And whenever this happens to someone, if you hurry and put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them very tightly until the blood is calmed below your fingers, and no more drips out; then put some small and large olive cauterizations in the fire, so that they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is severed, and place it on the vein or on what you are holding with your fingers, and hold the cauterization until the blood is staunched.
And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauterizations that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is staunched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, nor let any other evil come upon the patient; and know that when blood pours from an artery, it cannot be well staunched unless by one of the three manners we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong bandaging with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and restrained accordingly.
Whoever thinks to stanch blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, will not profit unless the cauterization is not good.
And if this happens to someone and he has no mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and press tightly until it is staunched above the wound and the vein; and do not move unless he moistens with cold water frequently when it is very cold so that the blood may congeal and thicken and be staunched; and make a note ahead of time of what cauterizations and medicines will be needed.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the causes and the forms of the cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning up to here, and I will proceed with this chapter by the same way so that what one wants to find may be found more easily.
And therefore as I begin this, dear friend, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take greater caution.
See previous translation.
And I warn you not to embark on folly. For many kinds of people come to cures. Some come with such a grave illness that they will die quickly because of the severity of their disease and the great evil of their malady; and one should have fear of these. And of these there are some who give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can grasp; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to be filled with the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauterizations, which I have divided from the beginning up to here, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
from the full head with water
Know that this disease often afflicts children during childbirth, and when the midwife holds too tightly the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen it affect soon died; and therefore it seems to me that it is not worth my while to continue working on such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the skull was swelling every day until it could no longer be supported; and believed so much moisture that he would die, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the spine, between the brain and the bone; and the operation is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut open a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two measures, until the moisture runs; and behold here the form of the skull:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that each part's corners of the head are opened, and the liquid jumps far when you press it with your hand from inside, and this is not responding to you: then you must cut into the head three cuts in this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After that, bind up the cuts with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in, and leave it like this until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound with tents and anointings, and let the head be drained equally, and then feed the patient dried meat without moisture as long as the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the aposteme opens up and the liquid assembles; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes to the right, and sometimes to the left.
Cut then where the aposteme opens up and the liquid assembles, and cut according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you don't hit the artery; and if there is a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the lack of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of the joint
When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is fire cauterization, by cutting off the two arteries.
Then it is necessary that when you see the arteries cut, the patient makes their head go back; after that, they rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck back as far as one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the paths of one and the other are afterward the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the paths with an incision, then cut both with a sharp instrument that is two fingers wide, until the knife comes to the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting just like two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, blood will spring forth continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open up to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the width of the space with three fingers, then mark an incision and cut to the bone; and what needs to be done about the blood is to let it flow out for six cells, and by chance a little more or less, according to how much the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there is still a point of syphac on the bone, cut off that which prevents apostemes from coming, then drain the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
of migration
When ancient migration comes, and acute catarre, due to excessive moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old-fashioned foreskin and similar things, and all medical treatments by various methods of medicine do not help him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have counted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes their temple hairs stand back, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is not responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then extract the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and rise the liquid of hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which has this shape:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with forceps, and separate well from the threads that are below each part; and if the artery is fine, then turn it to the point of the needle, then cut off that part according to the width of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow out entirely.
And extract the blood from six cells to three; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two strong silk threads in two places, so that no bleeding comes before the wound is closed and bleeding ceases; then cut off the superfluous part that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the cautery knife to the bone until the fingers are cut; and this is the chief work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
For fire cauterization is a help to finish off excess moisture; that's why it is of greater aid against excess moisture. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the area with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when they are loosened, be careful with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until he is healed; and if without delay from the artery as much as you work, hasten to cauterize by fire, or fill the area with vitriol and strain it in your hand until the blood is stanched; and if you don't have what's needed, put your finger on the area so that the blood congeals, and rise the area with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as much as necessary; and what is more important and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this fire knife cutting into two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to ward off their heat for a longer time. For when the cuts are too dense, they retain less heat. And it should have between the two knives one finger's width of space, and then when you have marked with an incision the two places, and take the burning iron on top until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be separated by a distance equal to the width of two fingers because it is not sewn with this cautery from end to end; and that's the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead bone, and medical treatment done there does not help, and you see the patient's face redden, and feel the front heat and tremble as if in a fever; and the oil is abundant and moist so that the hairs on the paper are fallen, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l'apelerent li ancien "cure contuse"; and it is that you do for the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead; then make three incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of his forehead; and one of the incisions be as two lines right down the middle of the forehead, going just up to the nose, and the other two be two lines on either side of the papery skin, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are on either side of the papery skin; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbone, and let each wound be the size of three fingers across the joints.
from the incision that is below the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape out all the keratin that is between the two incisions as far as the suture that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision just up to the other second one, and then extract this spittle.
and insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape. And place the sharp side towards the fatty tissue and the dull side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous down to where the keratin appears; then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other edge; and then extract the blood evenly, and press the place where the blood has been taken; then put a poultice of old cotton in each incision, and wrap it with wet cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, and take care that abscesses do not form; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great abundance of lukewarm water, then apply the basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until they are healed.
of the eyes.
When someone comes to you with a cataract that is accustomed to be, and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening the sight, and the papery skin burned; and the hair falls out, and the head in front has great pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and the cataract do not come from just one vein, but from many veins, and the true cure that is here is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to lift his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another one of equal size. Start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be until the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, then pour out all the blood onto a sponge, and then extract between the two lips of the incision and put in old cotton and linen; then wrap it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to form an abscess; when it is healed, then it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then apply ointments that make flesh grow.
In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to promote flesh growth throughout.
of the earplugs.
Everything that falls into the ears is one of three things: or grains, or beasts, or pieces of flint or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as oats, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and vinegar and similar things.
When something like flint or another thing that doesn't belong in the ear falls into the ear and doesn't grow there, place the ear in the sun. If you see the flint, then distill a small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make the person sneeze with condiments, and stop their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear above. Many times it has come out through this treatment; and if it doesn't come out, then administer extraction using fine tweezers, as follows:
If it doesn't come out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer extraction using a fine thread of small double loop; and if it doesn't come out through this, then make a wire chain and insert the head of the chain or the ear canal strongly, and stop what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then take it out forcibly, for many times it has come out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, then takes glue from which birds take their feathers, and puts into some instrument that is pointed to do this, and puts a small amount of cotton around; then press the glue on the flint or whatever it is, and take it out. And if it doesn't come out through all these things that we have said, then you must hasten to cut the ear so that an abscess does not form and cause spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fat or dependent part; and let the incision be like a moon, as long as you come to the flint, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and care for it until it is healed. And if it's grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a thin, subtle spittle according to this form:
and administer an incision on that grain. But don't do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have cut many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is smooth.
In the water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with condiments first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be placed on top of that same ear where the water is. If it comes out through this, that's good. If not, then take many pieces according to the length of your fingers, thin and light, and heat them slightly over the fire; and have the patient put one or a small hole in their ear, and pull from the other side with another piece, and strike another piece on top of the piece that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this until all the water comes out, and thus it will come out altogether. And if you see, then take one reed, and insert one end into the ear, and the other end burn over fire until the middle part of the reed is burned; then make another part with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said earlier.
En the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a puce and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, thus make an extraction with tweezers; and it is the thing more easily removed that is in the ear.
In the extraction of earwigs from the ears, when you have cured as we have said in the division and the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if there are no worms visible, then treat them with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take the thread that is the shape thereof.
And make it narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed well to the end of the thread; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop around the thread with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not emerge forth as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the removal of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, according to the form that you see:
And make it of silver or lead narrow below and a little small openings, and above over to distill; and to press inside the distillation with one instrument of well-made lead for this purpose, and if you see take a scraper and envelop it around the point pleasantly with cotton; then throw your oil or juice into it, and all that you see of your medicines in the thread, and the thread be in the ear; then put it into the scraper to the end of the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels inside, and the distillations are one pot heated over the fire so that one can distill in the ear; and take care that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping up of the ears
No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stopping up a wound, or a piece of wax growing inside the ear, and these stoppings come sometimes deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there occurs a small pot to block the perforation, and one can see well.
That which comes deep into the ear, if one cannot see it, is of grievous inflammation in many dispositions, and in that which one can see, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the whitening apparent, then work with all this spatula according to the form.
And be gentle and cutting in front and behind all at once, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the whitening is of wax or flesh of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and cut it lightly, until all that wax is entirely removed.
And if the whitening is deep in the ear, then take a subtle and light scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you feel the whitening that the patient feels grief at hearing, cut lightly, and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian mummy.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol boil; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moist tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healthy.
And if the discharges of blood come forth, then dip a sponge and wring it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the discharge of blood which are found in the treatment of distillations.
Of the flesh of paperwax
This kind of wax that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you stretch them with tenacula and tweezers, and cut them with a spatula from their roots; then put on the ear vitriol boil.
And if the wax is scraped away, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and after the incision is made, it swells; and many times it repairs itself, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
Of the Hellebore
Many times come forth from the eyes of the patient certain things that resemble hellebore in its shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the work is such: take heed if the grandine moves to one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the incision of the width, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and cut. If you cannot cut without piercing the paper slightly, do not hurt the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble it with a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing strong, for the ointment will restore it soon and extract the flesh.
And if the grandine is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and extract the grandine with tweezers, and cut and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the grandine is cut away, lift out the oil of salted water, and cure the place where flesh is extracted until the patient is healed.
Of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is extracted from the papery membranes above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts a lot to their eyes; and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces, and sleep on top, and their papery membranes below are moistened by the swelling and appearance that cover the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinach inside.
And the manner of work is that the patient puts his head on thy side; and then takes one linen cloth, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained within each part, then places it upon him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then cuts in the middle of the moisture at the spatula trenching a notch of small size, not more than the wound one makes on the vein; and cuts the skin deeply until you come to the exirnach; and in many dispositions comes out from the notch according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then take out the whole piece of cloth wrapped between your hands to the outside, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and be sure not to push into the notch, lest you bruise all the spatula just to the edge, lest you bleed.
And if the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the notch, then widen the notch slightly until it opens; then pull it out as we have said, then soak cloth in oil and water, and place it on the skin, and tie with bandages.
And if there are such men who burst and put on poultice to corrupt the moisture that remains; then cure it until he is healed. And if the abscess comes hot to the boil, then treat it with emplasters soothing until he is healed.
of hairs of paper
When hairs of paper grow, they become grafted onto something other than the natural one, and are inflamed, so they harm the eyes, and bring on manners of diseases such as accustomed tears and softenings of the papers and albugine, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to three manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medicine water according to what is written in this chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according as I shall say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head on thy side; then turn the paper of oil in thine left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then take an awl and pierce all one thread above; and let this be below the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow, and lead one thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the grafted hairs, up to the great tear just to the small; then pull out one thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then sign on the paper a figure of anointing, such as the balm of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that thou seest increase the paper which is divided to all.
And if there is one who needs to cut off a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make up to all the spatula above two lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear just to the small; and let it be one of the notches near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the onyx into one of the two corners of the key, then skin it entirely; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of an awl and all one thread of fine wool, and stop the blood, and make the excess threads adhere to the two crescents for any things sticking, if you see this done; and if not, then do not care, and leave the stitches and threads just for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching or constraining things, for the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitch is corrupting (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the balm of myrtle, as we have recounted, with three onyx stones separated according to the form that is here:
then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and things are not equal, then take an awl with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread below the great tear, and the second thread below the small, and assemble between your hands the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to thy incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary to use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and cut it within according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the breadth of the spatula are; and cut at the two heads of the two parts or where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations from the two parts formally; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and necrotize and fall off, until it falls by itself.
If it takes too long, then cut off the remaining forces, and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn, and the paper is lifted, and they will no longer hold the hairs; and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine awl, and insert one thread of silk soft and subtle; then assemble the threads and bind one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width long; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and bind the head of the thread; then put the patient's head on your shoulder; and let it be beneath the sun so that the work is disclosed, for this is a subtle and delicate work; then insert the awl into the entire chase at the root of the hair joined, and make it pierce in the paper hastenly as long as you lead it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and bind that hair in the chase if there is one, two, three, or more; then pull out your hand until the hairs come forth from all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hare is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hare down below to all the thread that you have ordered, until the hare comes forth from above the pertus and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hare and the thread, and close the eye and let it be two or three days, so that the hairs grow in their place and the flesh subsides; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair with the natural ones of the hives, and be raised with that which you leave it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
Of the dimness of the eye.
When this illness called "aleacrati" comes to the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a burning, and from similar things.
And the manner of treatment for it is that you cut open the wound, and separate the lips of it, and put a linen cloth inside, and bind it until it is healed; and it does not need to use in its care things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first one; but work with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and rose of water or althea and flaxseed cooked, and dayaquilon ointment melted in some oil, and envelop it in a cloth, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it does not harden again in the same form as before; and these works that we have said are nothing other than remedies for this illness, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
Of the flesh that comes to the eye.
This illness that is beneath and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from a wound, or a cut, or a burning, and similar things; and the way of treatment for it is that you take a needle, which has one double thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce all the way to the right eyebrow, so that the threads come out in two places on the flesh; then lift the flesh up over the entire needle, and cut at one spatula wide.
And if the figure of the paper comes back according to what is needed, that's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or on the side inside the paper; and be the holes of the two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, so that when they are assembled, the figure will be like the figure of a letter which has the name "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges is worn away below, from what follows the paper; then join the two separated parts and sew them with a wool thread; then do the treatment as we have said with soothing medicines, and cloths, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from an incision or a cut or a burning, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two lips of a cloth, as I have said; and one must do the treatment according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine of all their power so that it may return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is needed for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
from the sudden movement of the paper.
When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is swollen with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and let it be as pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the subtle spatula, which is not too worn down nor too cut, so that the patient cannot endure having the spatula too worn down or blinding the eye; and make your incision, from which you scrape away the assembled flesh, slightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let all that assembly be healed, and sometimes in the eye a salty water forms, and lifts up with sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a cloth of linen, and put woolen cloth soaked in egg white on top of the eye; and after three days use cologne and soothing things until it is healed.
of the ulcers of the eye.
Know that the ulcer is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard scab, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be moved; and one and the other resemblance begins towards the great eyebrow, and grows little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, then opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coils the ulcer with pincers of small double thread, and lifts it up; then takes a needle, and puts one hair of horse, or ox, or cow, and a strong thread on it; and doubles the point of the needle a little and inserts it into the ulcer, and pierces all the way to the end of the needle, and binds the ulcer with one thread and lifts it up, and scrapes away all the hair from the side of the ulcer that follows the prune and silk to the hair just to the head; then cuts off what remains in the root of the eyebrow at all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leaves the natural skin or eyebrow so that by incision the body does not bring forth tears as usual; and sometimes sets the ulcer on a cotton cloth, and on thread, as we have said; then scrapes away everything soft from what is here the form.
And take care that the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pours a little bit of silk broth into the eye, and makes a cologne from litargire, and leaves it until the next day; then treats with what is needed so that it may be healed.
And if the ulcer is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in, and the compresses cannot enter, many times this resemblance of ulcer is treated with medicines; and it arises as I have told in the division, and if you see it copulating, then do the oil treatment for the patient, and take a spatula slightly worn out according to this form:
And gently remove the pus above, and if you see it does not decrease and reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a potion made of lettuce and red hot chili pepper to stop the eye just until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same work, until all is removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as it is inflamed with apostema, then apply a poultice and cure the hot abscess until it is healed; then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye with great harm, then suspend it from the eyebrow and cut off a part but not all, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red hot chili pepper potion made of lettuce.
of the flesh that grows on the conjunctiva
There are some men whose skin grows red, and covers the conjunctiva, and restrains above the papillae and turns to the outside, and seems like a rose of baluster; and the work is such that the patient puts their head in your hand, then you open the eyes, and coil all that flesh around suitable strings, and sustain it with force; then cut off the first skin, and go all cutting to the scraper just until the end, and take care not to stain the eye during the work; and be the incision of the spatulum as we have said in the incision of the pus and small forces, by which one removes the shell, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil with red chili pepper or similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and place a cotton cloth with egg yolk on top of the eye so that it is assuredly free from hot abscess; and if there is nothing left, and the blood flows forth, and you suspect hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the hot abscess with soothing things; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make all the flesh that has been removed in the eye by this similar method.
But it is also necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye in the natural way and in the accidental way with iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that these members are suffering from this treatment.
of the veins of the eyes
The sebel are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate its work and weaken the eye forever. It is necessary then to first examine whether the eye, in which this sebel is, is sound, and there is no other disease except for the sebel; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head in your hand, then suspend those veins on all the eyebrow according to your wisdom, and be the eyebrow subtle double according to this form:
And be two eyebrows by degree in one flesh according to this form:
Then coil those veins with gentle forces, and inspect the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care that you do not stain the eye with the points of spatula, and make this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut away more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red chili pepper potion to corrupt what is remaining of the sebel.
And if you have no power to coil all that in one hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are eased and be assured of hot abscess; then resume according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the pus of the eye
The doctor is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cauterization and hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in him that you cut into the abscess where it should heal, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take it away with all the instrument of which this form is; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron indented to one point, and be pointed like a razor as it is in the present form:
And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some time, then restore the surface with caustic medicines.
If the bone is sound, and flesh grows, and the bowels of the body are sound, and remain so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemated, and bad things do not happen, you know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other reason than to return the fistula to its original shape according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take one force according to this form, and be the iron key at three angles, and the wire be thinned down to the head as you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and remove your hand from the eye for a little while, then turn the whole force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand on his navel; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the surface, the matter will go to the navel; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the discharge of the eye
When the eyes open completely and there is no obstruction or decrease in the navel, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply poultices or haters made to bleed with iron to suck out; then place on the eye a lien made of aloe, acacia, and incense, and then strain the eye, and apply a poultice on top of a bandage; and the manner of the bandages is that you take soft cloths, double each one four times, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain it with a strong bandage for a long time, and reapply the poultices to bleed without hurting; then remove the poultices and let the eye be strained day and night, and if the lien becomes worn out, you should bind it tightly; then remove the lien after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, that is good; if not, then reapply the poultice and bandages and lien and poultices until it is healed.
the bursting of the eye's skin
When a discharge comes into the eye's skin, then it opens, and there come forth papers like grains of resin, and it is unbelievable to see; then if you cover it, the works are such that you bore an awl into the root of the part below up to the point above, then bore another awl where there is a double thread from the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut off the end of the double thread and tie one part of the eye around, and hold it tightly, then extract the awl and put on the oil linseed moist in abundance of yolk; and let it stay until the child's skin is stuck with the eye, then cure the eye with things that give comfort until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the eye each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from within the eye, and correct the moisture of the albuginea and descend the eyes, and enter inside shortly afterwards; then extract it until they are healthy.
of the bottom of the eye
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the bottom part that is gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not actually water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the bottom part come up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and do not descend and discombobulate the light, and let the patient see things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is actual water, and if the descent of the bottom part is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and put it on the corneal tissue one drop at a time by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the bottom part comes out; and when it is out, let it distill into the eye hot honey mixed with water or fenugreek boiled with honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye
We have the likenesses of the waters in the division, and what is needed to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and have the healthy eye sutured tightly; then place the paper on the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a finger in that blepharitis of the eye at the part of the lesser eyelid, then bore the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand so that it pierces into the blepharitis of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda's path be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the night; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone on that paper by the brightness of the corneal tissue, and place the instrument just above or where the water is; then express it below one way after another. If the water descends now, then the patient will see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little pause, and if the water rises again on the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, gently extract almagda by turning your hand slowly; then put in the eye a drop of gemstone oil, and leave what's inside the eye. Then place on top of the eye estropes or linseed moist in rose oil and an abundance of yolk, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on a common broth with an abundance of yolk.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce the conjunctiva alone, and do not go too far in, but make a fine point, and then insert almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient an attendant who is skilled, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark room; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move your head to the right or left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then release him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put the tie back on up to the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten this, because the water rises quickly.
If an abscess forms and comes, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and direct it to what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then release the sight and put on its face a small ointment to cover for some days, and be still in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and turn back to his case; and know that no disciples should interfere with this case.
And one came to us from the land of Irach, who told us that in his country almagda was pierced, through which water flowed, but I never saw anyone do this in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and by chance it's a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see it; and let them be properly of silver.
And let their heads be of the same subtlety, and their ends in three angled aqueducts.
of the flesh on the skin
There are some times when flesh on the skin is born or grows different, of which there are some that seem like scorpions with many points; and if there are such that it has flesh enchanted with a mixed color, and if it has soft flesh of bone color. In one of these flesh types which is soft, and not enchanted, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work on his nostrils, and pour the oil onto those flesh parts, and treat them with force; then do what you can to support at the fine subtle edge of a part, until you know that that flesh is entirely loosened.
Et s'il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne pued coper, si l'ovrez à tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu'il n'i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c'est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.
Se the nail does not work, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so the instruments do not come to cut: then you must put .i. thread of linen a little thick, and moisten with hands now, and have between each night .i. dot or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in his sleep at some power, and pull it slowly as he comes by the thread down through the mouth; and many times do thus the children in schools, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the chief that comes by the thread with one hand, and the other chief that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as we are on the thread. Do this until you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the filament, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nail as before; do this .iii. days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nail a cord of cloth after some days until he is healed, and if he needs medicines such as these, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the chief, to which one distills oils and medicines in the nail:
And let it be of silver or of brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cord, and lead it thus; and if you see, make a closed cord, and the instruments be full to purge the chief; and have one handle on the chief to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh from the nail
Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nail, and grows and becomes great in size, so that it is visible to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the tip at first, and remove all roughness, then put the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting it until it is great, beware if it turns hard, of a foul color, of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted aposteme, for when you cut it once, great evil comes to the patient; and if the aposteme is of soft touching, not of foul color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then empty the patient and the coping of fear, and care for the head with things soothing and restraining.
when the nail is cut off and cleansed
Know that when solutions of continuation come to one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, more than in some men. It is necessary then to do as with anyone, if you look and see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then attach the two lips together with a seam, and care for it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their flesh until they are clean, then attach the two lips together with a seam, and bind it tight, and powder on top powder of dragon's blood, and incense broiled; and put on top of the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster fitting, and let it be until it heals by itself, then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the seam is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of the apostemes of the lips
Many men have within their lips an aposteme hard, resembling grains of peas, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips inside out, and cut each night, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the wound after the vitriol incision, until the blood is stopped; and then leave the wound open, and care for the wound with dry things until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times there arises on the gums flesh congealed, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the flow of blood or pus; then put on the wound vitriol broiled, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times occurs, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
of the abscesses
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, ulcers which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth become black and yellow and green, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit in your hands, and his face be in thy sight, and remove the teeth or ulcers that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and the yellowness, and the jaundice and other spots, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at first reason, it is good; but if not, then continue to repeat the second day and the third, until you have all removed; and know that the teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, because the scraper which one uses to clean the teeth between them has other forms than the one used to scrape away at the teeth; and these forms and others be with thee prepared.
It is necessary when you care for the tooth's pain that you wait until you can pull it out as much as possible, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance so that one has no excuse to regret. Then when the patient is constrained to pull out, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth's vitality. Many times the pain was the patient's guide, and believed that the tooth was sacred, and had the good tooth pulled out; and yet the pain did not depart because of this, until the bad tooth was extracted, for we have already intended to do so with these saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth's vitality, it is necessary that you scrape all around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your hands or as fine forceps at first pace and pace, until it is well extracted, then firmly secure the forceps; and be the patient's hand in thy sight between thy knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump away, take one of these instruments and insert it on each side slightly, and then move it as you did first. And if the teeth are pierced and mangled, it is necessary that you fill them with drapels, where the perforations are; and if you extract subtilly with forceps, so that it does not break when extracted; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Here is the translation:
The shapes of the instruments, to which one should mold the teeth first, are long-pointed and thick-gripped, so they do not double back when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be of thick handles so they do not bend when pulled, and be well made of iron, and have teeth to hold in place.
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains while pulling, it is necessary that you put a moistened cotton ball or butter on the joint for one or two days until the joint becomes soft, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the head seems to be like a fine comb; and are made inside as a file, and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a scraper, by which this is the shape:
And be strong and thick so it does not break, and if the root jumps through this, that is good; if not, then help with all instruments, by which these shapes come next:
And if one uses this instrument having two handles, by which this is the shape:
and other instruments that are before in proportion to the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles great forceps, by which this is the shape:
And be these instruments such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments for teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are some diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases; or if it breaks a bone or another bone, or wherever, so it searches for instruments that it needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, by which this is the shape: And be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then restore the joint with medicines fitting for this, and if there is in the bone some decay, and it is small, then repair all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural place in the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly grown after the gum, and is not in its right place, and cannot be filed or sharpened: then scrape; and if it is stuck with the gum, take this instrument which has this shape, and is similar to a small beak, and be made of iron very sharp on top:
And the file files and files a little by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and for that you do not move the others, and if it appears to be able to be filed, then file with a similar file which has this shape:
and is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth a little by day gradually, so that it does not move until it is even; then smooth out the end to all roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then file off the sharpness so that it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the teeth in front loosen by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press down on what they are eating without spitting it out, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, and this does not work; then one must restrain them with a golden thread, for silver threads become green and decay, but gold never changes; and be the thread neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are directed, take the thread and push it double between two healthy teeth, then put the ligaments between the other teeth, if there is one or more, so that they come up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and smoothly, until it does not move anymore; and be your finger at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the ligaments with forceps, and assemble them, and re-point between the healthy tooth and the other tooth, and put it in such a way that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it comes loose or the thread breaks, then restrain it with another thread; so it will remain and serve thus for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the direction of the two healthy teeth, and the two others, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said; and do not meddle with it if one is not wise and careful, and sometimes make the shape of a whalebone tooth, and put it in the place where the deficiency is, and restrain it as we have said, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
of removing the ligament from the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue by nature, or as one is born with it; or by accident of a wound that has healed; and the operation is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your healthy hand, and lift up the tongue; then remove the nervous ligament from its width, until the tongue is dislodged from its dwelling, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is due to a sudden wound, then insert an unguent and file that ligament; and be careful that the cut is not too deep, lest the artery below be injured; and when you have done this, then lift up the wet poultice of rose water and vinegar, or cold water, and put it under the tongue; and let the patient rest each night, so that the wound does not sicken. And if bleeding comes forth, then place a piece of vitriol broth on the wound; and if the blood flows, then cauterize with the slow fire cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another treatment until it is sound.
and if you see that it is dull-colored or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards a blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour on the unguent, and make a subtle poultice with spatumile, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the blood flows at your operation, then apply vitriol broth until it is stopped, then return to your operation until you have completed all your work; then lift up the wet poultice of vinegar and oil, and cure it with other treatments until it is sound.
Abscesses of the throat
Abscesses of the throat which are called "godath" and properly named ".ij. amandres", and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take heed: if it is a hard abscess with little sense and dull color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of bleeding; but leave it until it dies, and then you will part it, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is white-colored and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover it, but look first if the abscess is calm and appeased. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with his head in your hand, and have him open his mouth and take the servants between his hands, and press the tongue underneath all the instrument, which is the form; and it should be of silver or refined lead, just like small knives:
Can't you press the tongue all over this instrument, and then see the abscess, take a needle and stick it into the abscess, and let it go on top as much as you can; and do not touch anything with cloth, then cut at the instrument, which is the form, that seems like a force; and yet the head are curved, one side to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, which is the form:
And be cutting on one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the abscesses, then cut the other in the same manner, and after incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and easy, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water, or cooked apple skins, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat than the two amandres, so cut them then like the two amandres similarly.
And I healed a woman from an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of little sense; and I had well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was so high that it had pushed out two streams through two openings of the birth canal. I hastened then, and stuck in one place a needle, then drew forth blood; and drew out a large portion of pus; then refilled the other opening with the birth canal, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after which I inserted the needle into this abscess, and cut part of it away, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the conduit of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recrossed again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I tied it off and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained growing; and I left those parts, and only God did what happened after me.
of the vein
When the swelling goes down to the vein, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is under a thick and rounded one, it is called "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cut it; and the one that is rounded and not long; and it is sanguine or dull-colored or black, then it is necessary to avoid the incision. For there is great peril on the patient. It is necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have made a remembrance of herebefore; then stick the needle into the vein, and pull it down, and cut at one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two amandres. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluity that is outside the natural term; for if you cut more, it will harm the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two amandres, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use a trick at the cauterization so that there is no more fear. The manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument which we have said or chapter of cautery, and confesses with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the handle of this instrument, which is the form:
And have the patient put their head in a hairnet or on a comb, just like the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument all over the medicine on the vein; and the patient should be lying on their side with their chest against your hand, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, but do not go down to the throat and wound. Then hold your hand on the medicine and press it on the vein for half an hour, until you see it numb and the medicine's irritation be appeased; and if you see anything, take a cotton cloth and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, then insert the instrument into all the cotton wrapped around it on top of the cane, so that the cotton gets on the vein; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, then start again, and after the cautery, apply a poultice around the vein, wrapped in cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse everything that is around the medicine; and be treated with gargling until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add a little water, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument shaped like this: Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, and let it be of silver or lead, and whichever one you insert into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; afterwards it often starts again, until the eye dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's heat, for many things happen then; and don't do this at all unless at the decline of the abscess's heat. And if this instrument isn't present, then take a tube and put a quill inside it so that the patient's mouth doesn't get too hot; because the quill doesn't allow the vapor to weigh down the mouth, and it is good care for both health and salvation.
Many times it is applied to the throat or spine of a fish, or to nothing; therefore you should try what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not appear and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps then the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of nautilus shell, or a lettuce root, or one small piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to a thread, and then make it pass through; and when it comes out, it will stay, and then you can pull further; and if it does not come out as we have said, then take an instrument of pumice according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest all come together, nor insert the bone inside; and make sure that the patient puts the instrument in, because it may move or the thing is expelled; then put it down, or pull it out slowly with the instrument equally, until it is out.
of the discharge from the throat
No time is medicine for the discharge, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun, since you press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the discharge, pull it out slowly with a small hook or fine forceps suitable for this purpose. And if this is not effective, take a hair-like tube and insert it into the patient's throat, then put the hot iron on the end of the tube and do this often. And if the patient is troubled by water all day, then take a full view of cold water, open their mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the discharge feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asafoetida at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without effort. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot with hot coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth, and in the hole put the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the tube into their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the discharge; and the discharge will now fall, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then there will be need for it to come out through this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which you treat the discharge is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for moving into the throat; and it has a resemblance to a doctor's beak, and it has roughness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and see this form:
the chapters on abscesses
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is similar to the other, and that it holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are on the bone or at the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the bone that char is different from those that come together with joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the swelling is gone according to its accomplishment; and some are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, as abscesses that are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them so long that they become gangrenous around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is a cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is on the principal member, and you delay perforation until it is gone, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, then one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a ripe abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is near the foundation, lest it become a fistula and be prolonged inside, and come to be a great affliction.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departures of fever have ceased, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the cessation of throbbing and the soothing of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears to be moving; and the perforation should be from the long part of the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pleurisy.
In those that are pleuritic, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in the charnut location, it is best to wait until they are confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before then, the body of the venom will be prolonged and full of many impurities; and by chance, the lips and deeper parts will become hardened. And there are some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And it is necessary that you make small incisions for small abscesses, and large incisions for large abscesses, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and there are some such that need to have the wound closed, and covered when it has become as a piece of cloth, and is no longer inflamed, then one must do as with infants: and there are some such that are cut in three angles, and some that are cut like the foliage of myrtle, like abscesses of the groin; and some such that require a round incision, and other incisions and shapes of covering.
Cil who have not a chief, such as a superficial aposteme, it is necessary that you make a incision quickly; and it is necessary when the apostemes are great, and they have gathered a large amount of pus, and you make an incision, so do not draw out all the pus at once, but only a part; then stop the aposteme just until the next day, then take nothing further; do this gradually over time, until all the pus is gone; likewise if the patient has weak vitality, or women bearing children, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the hopes sometimes tremble with the issue of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware. Therefore, use this chapter with great caution, and when you have incised your aposteme, if the wound is plain, then try to stitch it together with linen or old cotton; and if it is a large aposteme, and there are many pustules, then it is necessary that you make a tent in each one so that they come together against each other; and if you have cut out from the aposteme a part of leather, and you have sewn it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or flax cloth without moisture, and tie it just until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if hemorrhaging occurs at your work, then apply cold and easy water, and wet cloth, and place it on the bleeding site repeatedly. And if the hemorrhaging persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said to use in this book, and if it is winter, and the site or aposteme is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put up tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the site is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put up wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the aposteme and treat it, so that it may be healed.
And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of apostemes: now I have said how one should proceed before treating apostemes, and see this chapter.
of blisters
Where blisters on the head come small apostemes, and they are ways for us that are in toils, like the weaver of a spider's web, and there are many similarities. There are some which are fat and similar to those that have moisture as pustules; and there are others which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make it contrary. And the work of cutting is such that you test each one by a tool called "entromissoire", from which the form comes after, whatever thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, then wash it above the long; and when the moisture is empty, then scrape off without leaving any of the peel which contains that moisture, for it returns again if you leave anything; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound, and let it be just until the next day; and this will cure those who remain from the night. And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain from the night; then treat the wound with ointment as necessary, until it is healed. And if the aposteme holds a fat night, then cut it according to this form, above the long; and throw away your needles, and scrape off all around, and put all your care in drawing out of the coat where it lies; and if the artery makes it contrary, do what I told you after. And similarly do with the aposteme if it is stony, and cut and cure as I told you.
And the cutting above the stony and moist aposteme is easier, because they are full of blood. And if there are some of these apostemes on the head where there is no moisture, and one of these apostemes that I cut off from a old woman's head; and I found the aposteme to be like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if anyone had done anything with it, they would have made a wound as if from a stone. In other apostemes coming on the head, more than those that come on children's heads and at the roots of ears, the opening should always be to the most dependent place, in order for the pus to issue; and treat them as necessary.
of scrofulas
Many times these apostemes occur at the neck, and below the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and are intertwined one with another. And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, as the night and the aposteme of the head, as we have said; and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and will not obey health. Therefore, when you see a good disposition to touch, and it resembles the color of the body, and is mute on each side, and is not harsh against the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not swollen; then it is necessary that you cut it above, and scrape off each part, and are careful that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that the hands escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vitriol broth or some powders that remain blood in the wound, and hold the wound; and leave it until the aposteme is pacified, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood is stanchied, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look at your indication if there are any small scrofulas left, cut them off and scrape them clean. And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then do not need to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall down without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton steeped in Egyptian ointment, and cure it.
And if you cut the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, so that there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root and draw out the excess, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, burst forth where it is most abundant; and burst forth in this way as the one previously mentioned, depending on, then administer tentatives with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment flowing with flesh, until it is healed.
From shrinking
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
To those who have shrinking, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglote" be removed; and one does not help by doing so, because all the veins and the body parts of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both sides. When the disease is in the channel of the body, it is necessary to cut off the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision of the siphac, not in the cartilage.
and that one is suitable for the cutting of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its length, then cuts the leather so that it comes to the channel; and stop the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the siphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the channel which leaps forth through the torn place and by the failure of the voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour is passed about which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the leather, and sew it all alone without the cartilage; then administer medications that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Abacus says one does not do this just yet until the throat is entirely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the default leads to failure. Then cut off the epiglote because the patient cannot breathe, and he is breathing through the wound, and thus is preserved from death.
and for this the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one knife and stick it in her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the body;
and I was called to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor led forth but the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was whole.
and nothing happened to the maiden except that she was restored to her voice, and returned afterwards to her condition.
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglote there should be no fear.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of greenish-yellow, and it is very common in women.
and it occurs according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no fault.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which resembles fat, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from an artery. and there is fear, and one should not dare to do anything but in that which is small, and prove and search everywhere. if you find it like one fat lump, and it cannot be brought to any vein, then cut it off, just as one cuts fat, and treat the rest of the body, if there is any. and search well throughout, and heal it as needed, until it is perfectly healed.
of fat
Many kinds of fat are, which I will tell all the likenesses;
and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between fat and issue.
I say that issue is heat and fever sustained, until the ebullition has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the fat there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one siphac, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a greenish-yellow color, and becomes big.
and they are according to two likenesses, either greasy or moist, and much of color are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of fat, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form comes or chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of fat is that you take or the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instruments have pierced the leather, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the entromissoire, and take care in that which jumps forth.
If moist corruption runs clear, no matter what its color may be, then do as I have said with other abscesses.
and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes, know that it is fat, so then cut it in crosswise, and take it up with pincers, and scrape off lightly from each part and ward off the coat where it lies that you may lead out the fat.
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the fat will return many times.
and if a little bit remains, and the wound troubles you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and close the wound, and put on soothing things for hot abscesses, and heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
and if the fat is large, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and heal it with those things that cause flesh to grow.
and if the vein is opposed to you or another such thing that hinders and employs the leech of vitriol, let it stay for two or three days, until the wound purrs, and rest the ebullition of the blood; then return to cutting what remains of the fat.
Here is the translation of the first sentence:
and they are like the needles used to sew sorceries, and they are made of citrine earth, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are more tried for black pitch to surround the sores of fistula;
and they are of three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the holes.
The shapes of the warts are of many likenesses, as you see here: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are also warts that have two sores of three kinds.
and there are also warts that have three sores and are of three kinds; and there are also warts that have two sores, and single warts with one sore, and they are all necessary in their place.
The heads of these ones are cutting, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, from which we strip the nerves, because that's why we don't cut the vein or the nerve.
and these introgressors are the leeches wrapped in cloth, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
and one does not use them at all except in a warm place, such as thighs, and arms, and armpits, and in similar places.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scorpion's stinger, according to this form, with which one stops blood.
and one puts it sometimes in the place that bleeds at the puncture of veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Sometimes the armpits of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like a woman's armpits.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to be made according to this form of the line b up to 7. then strip the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal ointment wrapping it in cloth, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing them shut, and care for it until it is healed.
and if the armpit bends downward, and is moistened by its size as it is in women, then make a cut above it in two folds, through two similar openings; so that one is joined to the other at the end of each and makes a single line, where the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b up to line g. then strip the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the care, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not rest or due to the corruption of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive oil. and leave it like that until it dissolves the remaining and fat, then care for it until it is healed.
of abscesses in the buttocks
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are types of hard scrofulas or boils, and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture then need to be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for it with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then make it as we have said in scrofulous cuts, and if the wound bleeds pus, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn up, then abscesses often occur, and also it happens that the vein swells and becomes an abscess.
and if one knows how to do so when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it in your sides, you feel one strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, then it appears as if it were going away from you.
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the buttocks and armpits and at the neck and in many other places, and is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment of fire, and the one who is at the head should also avoid it, and in the one who has swelling from an artery make a cut above the skin long.
It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment of fire, and the one who is at the head should also avoid it, and in the one who has swelling from an artery make a cut above the skin long. then work the incision on warts and part the artery from its sheath so that it is uncovered.
then insert a needle underneath one and make it pierce through to the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then prick the place that is between the two ligatures with an introgressor until the blood comes out which is there, and loosen the abscess.
then apply the treatment that brings pus, until the ligature falls. then care for it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you daub with your hand whatever you can of the abscess onto all the skin. then insert the needle underneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one doubled thread, so that you pull it from the other side. then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or tie one end of the doubled thread to the two jaws of the other end.
and if you doubt that the thread will not come out too far, then rebend another needle along all of the thread underneath all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in three places.
then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of skin and leave what is bound.
then put a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
Abscesses of the nerves
Just like abscesses come in an artery and a vein, abscesses of the nerves come when they are wounded or from excessive hard work, and similar things.
And these things happen more often at the shoulders and elbows, and in all places where there are joints, and it is a great abscess, and its color seems like the color of flesh, and it is accompanied by many dispositions without pain.
and when one is strained strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the deepest part of the body, but just below the skin.
and it can be felt on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor above or below, and the one who is in joints should not be struck by iron: by chance there may be contraction.
and he who is in the head or forehead, feels the skin on the forehead. If the abscess is small, one should hold it with forceps and cut its root;
and if it is great, one should suspend it with a ligature, and scrape it, then cut it out and close the wound by sewing, and care for it until it is healed.
of large hanging boils Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere on the body, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to those things, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are some small and very great ones.
and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and were rotting with moisture.
I cut them and found in one 18 ounces, and in the other 6, and the works of incision are such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artemisia is white and moist and of subtle root;
so cut at the forehead, and have fire cauterization present with you; for when cutting, there often comes a great abundance of blood, and if it overflows, then hasten with the cauterizer.
and if you see the patient panting and fearful of the incision with iron, take one well-made linen thread, and tie the artemisia as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the linen thread until it cuts the artemisia, and choose by it the least labor; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut yourself with the same knife for the belly, but you can well cut half of it.
then cauterize it so that it does not relapse; then care for the wound, and take care that you do not cut the artemisia which is of bad color, poor sense, and little regard.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the care of ulcers later.
when the bread is burned
If the appearance of bread comes from a cautery of wound or opening of syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, just as it happens in other wounds, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness;
and if it is from the wound of syphilis and from the opening of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears with various openings. And if it is because of the opening of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses it at its sides it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance to the bath and from excessive labor.
And if it is because of moisture, it is a light thing, and appears clearly when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrain; and if it is because of blood, then it appears by these signs as a large and hard abscess, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is because of windiness, then it is tender to the toucher, and the works are such that you look to see if the appearance is from blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the cure alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is from the intestine or the bowels, it is necessary that you command the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then sign by pointing all around the bread. then command him to sit quietly between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed at all the forehead. then lift half of the abscess above to the great ligature;
then work on the half of the abscess that is extended above the ligature, and thrust your finger index into it, and probe the intestine. if you find it caught by the ligature, then loosen it, and thrust the intestine to the back of the belly.
and if you find the bowels, then take hold of them with a ligature, and cut off the superfluity.
and if the artery or vein gives you resistance, go around it well, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads on them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it purrs, and choose the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and purrs, then care for what needs to be done, and heal the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and purrs, then care for what needs to be done, and heal the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then care for the place as it needs to be done, and bind the place.
of the ulcer
We have said in the division the signs of ulcers, and how one should work by medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron. And we say that an ulcer is born in the marrow, and great caution must be taken in its care. The ancients said that when ulcers are on a place or can be removed like those on the breasts, and in the armpits, and in similar places, and it should be entirely removed at the beginning; and when they are old and large, one must not approach them, for I never saw anyone heal from it; nor did anyone before me.
Et the operations, when they are in place or can be removed, as we said, is that you purge the patient with black bile at times; then make him healthy if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient a good location to perform the operation; then throw out your needles or chancre, and remove the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood run freely and press well on the area with your hand or something, and if the bleeding is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops; then cure another cure until he is healed.
De ydropisie. We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is all said; and one should not touch iron on these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "ecclites" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as indigestion and similar things; do not touch iron then, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is neither too old nor too young, then you should work thus: Hold the patient straight upon your hands, and the attendants press the belly out to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spine needle according to this form: And let it be cut off at two parts, to a point; and yet not so far that it can come just to the intestine when you put it in, and do not let it hurt.
Then look if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if so, it is necessary that you cut into the stomach three fingers' breadth below the nipple; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the stomach three fingers' breadth; and if it is due to wind, then make it on the right side, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow towards that weak place.
Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and plug it, and lift your hand to all the spine between the skin and the sac as when shearing to the length of a fingernail or thereabout; then pierce the sac until the spine comes to the seventh rib, and that is the place of water; then treat the instrument thus, and plug this instrument which is the form: And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of iron or light archaic metal, and has in the lower part one small perforation; and on one side three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the handles are cut like a feather, and that is the form of the incision from which the writers shape the feather.
At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to water, it then pours down on the instrument; empty it therefore by half or a third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary in this hour, perchance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he will faint, or he approaches death.
But empty it according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the reason that blocks the perforation which is on the sac, as I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner; then recommence the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do this day by day, and take care not to pour out too much water at once. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then the cure of sepulture or sand will heat up, and through excessive sweating or bathing and sunlight, and if it becomes black; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
of the stopping of the flow Never are children born who do not have holes in the penis, or the holes are small, or it is not in its place. If this is so, then it is necessary that each spout is pierced very subtly according to this form: then put a subtle plug of cloth into the hole, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four; and when he wants to urinate, then take out the plug, and let him urinate, and then put it back; and perchance there will be no need, for the urine that comes forth does not leave the plug closed. Those whose holes are small need the medicine of cloth plugs, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their hole in its place are hurt, for no one is born with a hole at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot flow because the matter cannot come to the opening, and that is a bad disease.
And the way of working is that the patient lies on his back, and then place the head of the penis and cut it off like the shape of a feather, so that the hole opens in the middle, as it should; and take care not to let blood come out which comes many times, and if it does, then stop it with what stops bleeding, and cure the wound until he is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Many times these pustules come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you take them to a subtle poultice, and cut and clean all of them, then put a wet cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until he is healed. And if the pustule is malignant, with a bad color and smell, it is necessary that you apply fire cautery. When you have cut it open, and if the pustule is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pustule that is inside first; and when it is closed, then cure what is outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will come into its place and on the scrotum; so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then smear with an ointment made from the rind of pomegranates and vetches, and then cure with other cures until he is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery is helpful for two dispositions together: that is to say, for the bleeding of blood and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you tie or guide the penis with a cloth cord, and make the patient urinate through it; and when the skin is worn out at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or if there is a wound or aposteme, then it is necessary to cut off with a sharp instrument, as much as the ligaments are loosened, and free the head of the penis from all sides.
et se c'est grief chose de deviser ceu, if it is a grievous thing to discuss this;
of the circumcision
Circumcision is not the cutting off of continuity like other wounds; however when we do this work of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcising their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision around one inch, with force, and with all a new novaculum; thus it was done because there are two skins, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Then it recovers, and the pain is doubled, and the point of the member at the circumcision is not assured; and the purification of the wound by chance escapes the iron, and hinders the work, and many times so that they do not need purification and I have seen this.
Of the purification which is done with force to all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in one stroke through the entire thickness of the skin; but let the thread be well stretched around the leather; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything to him except tying the thread around the penis just so, and then you will leave it in all ways that you can. then make it stand between your hands straight and point the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then cleanse it well from the dirt that is gathered there, then tie a double thread to the signet and tie below one piece to another string; and hold it with two thumbs by the second ligature at the pouch and the right index, and cut between the two strings, then lift the edge above hastily and pull the head of the penis.
then make it stand between your hands straight and point the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then cleanse it well from the dirt that is gathered there, then tie a double thread to the signet and tie below one piece to another string; and hold it with two thumbs by the second ligature at the pouch and the right index, and cut between the two strings, then lift the edge above hastily and pull the head of the penis. then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and top, one layer glued with a yolk of egg cooked without water, mixed with rose oil, good and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
The shape of the forces for purification is this: both heads should be held and cut off, and they should be equal in size like the fingers.
the error of purification is when the knife bleeds within the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the ligaments make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it lasts three days and the part below the penis is swollen, then leave it so that the abscess becomes appeased, and lightly scrape off; then cut as you can move, and take care not to harm the part of the penis, for nothing will be hurt by this.
Then cure the ligament with sudden wound powder that we have said to treat about powders, and if you cut with the knife beyond measure and it goes above, then it will not harm; cure it then as we have said, until it is healed.
of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is in front or at the back of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and have his feet placed on the back, and stretch out his belly from the part above the back, and strain the patient's abdomen as much as he can; and then constrains the necks of the bladder to express itself into the kidney above, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which is this form: and be made of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and have a cane of one palm and a half long, and be subtle at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the top to a piece of wool or cotton, and put the top of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess thread and put it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and dry water.
then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the belly; then put the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel that it is coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done in accordance with this order unless the guide or conductor is twisted; then pull out the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow.
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is alleviated.
of the diseases of the bladder
When bleeding or blood comes into the bladder, or corruption is gathered there, and you see it distilling waters and medicines, then make all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
She is closed and has three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads are shaped so that the medicine can be poured in such a way that it stops up well the penis without addition, and then one can draw out the moisture, and pour when needed.
and when you see pouring your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out what is inside; then pull back strongly on the syringe; then the moisture will enter and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus:
And it is of silver or archaic, and the head is higher; and below one side or the head lies; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see to be able to close the bladder, then tie between two breasts with a good double thread, and warm one part of that moisture over the fire; then pour the head of the closed container into the vein, then strain your hand on the bladder all the moisture having come, until the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Of stone.
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and also extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone that is pierced by rain, and all the signs, and which stone one must operate on in size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is pierced in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that water bursts forth from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hairy, and grates the patient's vein, and makes many sounds, and then renews itself; and many of these pierce the foundations; and is lighter the recovery of children until they are three years old, and is very grievous in old men, and is to those who are between young and old; and is the cure more light for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purge the patient with a clyster, in order to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking out the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift and move him downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his buttocks, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall when touched all over, then wet your thumb and index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle fingers, if the patient is young and complete; and put it into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your thumb, then bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press on top of your thumb, and push it forward where you see cutting.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch his right hand upwards towards the kidneys, and with his left hand, remove the skin that is below the kidneys in the part where you are making the incision; then push the spatula copiously, so as it forms.
And make it between what is between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but beside the left flank; and be straight on top of the stone, and your thumbs be at the foundation, and make the incision so that it is wide behind and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By chance, the pressure may be so great that the stone jumps far away from your work; and know that there are some stones that have angles and margins: it is hard to get out; and there are others that are soft, like a gnat, and rounded, through which the issue is light.
To that stone which has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump, then it is necessary to strain on the pincers that are like a file at the head, in order to grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below one part of the instrument with a subtle curved point; and if you cannot manage it thus, then enlarge one part of the hole, and if the stone decorticates, then grip it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, then extract the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it out, and the small ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, then it must be split, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out soon on one side where the flesh cannot heal; but nevertheless you strive to extract, or to break off with pincers, until you draw it out in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, then anoint the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and apply it, and put on top one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then revive the patient over his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, then arise the flesh with oil and water very well; then care for him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if apostemes, boils, and congealments of blood in the bladder occur, and it is retained by that urine, which flows in such a way that it does not jump with the urine: then put your thumb into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and ruin it.
Then lift the wound with water and ice and silk, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works you do to cure him, that you bind his two buttocks together, and assemble the medicines on the flesh.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra of the penis, and stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; then cure him as I say before, by cutting into the stone many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Take one iron rod in the shape and form, with three angled tips fitted into one socket:
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come out into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod back and forth in the stone, bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side. And soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. It is then broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
et if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take one thread under the stone and another above, then make the rod next to the stone between the two strings, then pull it tight and untie the string and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
of the stone of women
Often it happens that the stone is lodged in women, and if it does happen, then the cure is grievous, and it is defended against three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will reveal herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply seated than that of man, which is why it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this of you, then it is necessary that you take a well-informed midwife, and find one who knows the truth, and if you cannot find one, then take one chaste and subtle midwife; and present to her a wise old woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
and look very closely to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she push her uterus or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it under her uterus, and command her to push her uterus or the patient's uterus, and grasp her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the womb, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her uterus above or below the stone, and make the incision at the first small one.
then push the right in the incision, if you feel the stone so far back in the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and great and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; and know their likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the blood overflows, then put vitriol broth at the place, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to aid you in your work.
and if the blood overflows, and it is from the artery that has been cut, then put powder on the place and the strain of tents and bandages, and do not start again with these things, and leave the stone alone and do not pull it out except by chance the patient would die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling subsides, then return to your work until the stone is out.
of fleshly hernia
The white sac is nothing else than an accumulation of moisture or whitish fluid, which is located under the key of the womb, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it properly belongs to the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the womb between the white sac that we have said; and this does not happen unless there is no way.
And the generation of this ramification is from weakness that comes to the womb, and it spreads out that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the womb, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or whitish water, and it happens more often;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is the white sac that we have said, then there is an abscess near, a long one like the figure of an egg, and does not open the womb, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it is an abscess near with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the womb and the white sac, then one can sense it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test all the surrounding quadrants, so that the shape appears as before. Accordingly, what comes after the quadrants, judge what is inside.
Accordingly, what comes after the quadrants, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with fire, then it is necessary that the patient be healed according to our power and the replenishment of their body; then apply oil on their back, on something a little high, and place many cloths underneath.
then sit on their left side, and command the attendant to sit at the right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the womb.
then take the spatula left, and cut through the skin of the womb from one end to the other, and be your incision straight and level with the white sac, and scrape it subtly according to our power.
then pierce the white sac with water to a small opening, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers and stretch the white sac upwards; and do not touch the womb, but only the white sac itself; cut it into pieces or as needed, in a subtle manner, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
and if the egg bursts forth from your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the white sac; then assemble the two leaves of the womb to a seam, and then cure it as with other wounds, until he is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie off the vessels that are suspended, doubting the dislodging of blood; then cut the womb at all the suspensory parts, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two stones; then cut the other part equally as you did the first one, and dry out the blood, and put a moist linen cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound.
and put another moist linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and place it on the two wombs, and place double cloths above them, and tie it with all the thread that is according to this form.
Then take two cloths and use them to wrap around the woolly yarn in this shape and have them sewn together at the waistband of the braies, and one of the straps will lie on the foundation up to the back, and the other on the part of the finger; and another strap will be placed on top of the two armpits, and all assembled with the restraint in the loop of the braier.
And sometimes medicine is made with this wick of a fire cauterization in place of iron surgery, and it is that you take one subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white gallstone that contains water becomes uncovered.
Take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce that gallstone with fine needles, and scrape it off with a hot subtle cauterization.
And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be sure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and beware of disfiguring blood, and take care as much with the works of surgery.
And if nothing contradicts you, or abscess forms or disfigurement of blood or anything else, then care for what contradicts you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horribleness, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and know that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said, the wick is burnt out.
So seat the patient on a light stool; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the spatula-like space, and put the perforation through the length of the body; and make the holes wide so that all the water can flow freely.
Then put cotton on the place and tie it, and let the remaining water run off, then care for it until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not let the water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a pin or an instrument with which one treats the water of those suffering from dropsy, as described before; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the cutting of this wick there are many dispositions to fear, therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you the work and the likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and this is by many cases.
It is known by excessive bitterness and ague, which spreads to the testicles, or from striking;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain found, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance some grievous abscesses are fearful and piteous, of a foul color, and sometimes come from a rupture or an inflammation of the vein.
When it is by a rupture of an artery, then it is known by the hot abscesses when you press them with your fingers. and it does not seem good to touch it.
He who is afflicted with an inflammation of the vein is known by his appearance when touched by the fingers.
and can do well to make a cut on this shape, and on other joints. and it is that you cut the skin of the testicles, then lift the egg upwards and pull out the white gallstone, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already softened with these joints, then it is necessary to pull out the egg and the skin.
and if it is hard in the gallstone or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary to deliver all that tension and cut again afterwards.
And if the birth of the joint is at the back, then it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bunch, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient groans grievously when he walks.
and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as that which has been said before.
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a light stool, then tie the suspensory ligament of the testicles down to your fingers. to all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them tightly, and stretch them forth.
then cut in the spatula-like space, cutting wide across the traverse place between the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come forth, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them in a straight direction, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupted moisture.
then care for the wound as with others that are opened up, so that no vessel may bleed which nourishes one of the testicles.
for if it does not come from evil, and all the vessels come forth with blood, then it is necessary to pull out the testicles from all the vessels. so that the testicles do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
of the rupture of the gallstone The outcome of this wick is by the section that comes out of the gallstone, or the extension above the belly in the part of the armpits, therefore the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles.
and this rupture is either from the gallstone or from its extension, and comes in two ways due to many causes: either by striking, or by jumping, or by roaring, or by lifting a heavy burden, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is of the extension of syphilis, so it has a little and a little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal down to the deepest part, because the syphilis presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of syphilis, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing underneath the skin close by, and this is because of the issue from the intestine and the body being drained of the syphilis.
And sometimes the abscesses burst with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which one must take heed.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to insert his hand into the wound as far as possible and into the intestine. then press down on his throat between your hands, and lift up the ribs;
then straighten the back above, and cut away all the skin of the long intestines. then thrust your fingers into the intestines of the wound, according to what you need to open it up, and make them such that the pus can come out.
then scrape away the syphilis that is underneath the skin of the intestines, until the white syphilitic discharge is uncovered on all sides.
then press your two fingers into the intestine in the place where the white syphilis is underneath the skin of the egg, and between the second syphilitic discharge.
and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second syphilitic discharge; then move your right hand into the intestine of the intestines, and straighten the white syphilis up to your left hand, and lift the egg away from all the syphilitic discharge towards the navel. and instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen what is above behind the bond.
and search with your hands if there is any part of the intestine or white syphilitic discharge that has been covered, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly underneath.
then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the back part of the syphilitic discharge, which is after the skin of the intestines; after the navel, then cut the knots that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syphilitic discharge, which we said is underneath the skin of the intestines, with a strong bond from two parts. then envelop the knots of the threads and tie them together from two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter in there, lest the abscess grow again. and place the bond above according to the first long band of two fingers of that one, and after these two bonds leave the syphilitic discharge which is underneath the skin of the intestines a quarter of an inch.
and after all the rest according to the rounded shape that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is underneath the skin of the intestines, as long as the healthy flesh appears, and the bowel comes out, as we have said before.
then apply moistened wool in oil to the wounds, and put it on the abscess, and apply the bond that we have said. And sometimes the white syphilitic discharge that we have said is cauterized after incision, out of fear of blood dismemberment.
For this often happens, and leave the bond until it falls of its own accord; and if it tarries in falling, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshly hernia
In this recipe I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment by fire.
And the ancients say that it is done in such a way as the recipe which is together with life, in this manner that you tie the vessels, after the navel above lightly underneath.
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the intestines, as we have said, and opens up the loops; and none of the intestines come out to the intestines, and if any do come out, it is small, and repair all hours.
and even though it stays too long in this position, the wound or syphilitic discharge grows, until the intestines come out.
and this happens because of the extension of the syphilis that is at the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and inflated the loops and opens up.
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and never is cured by fire in this way:
and it is that the patient lies sovining on his back between your hands, then cut the loop of the rupture inflated from wide according to the quantity of three fingers.
and then extract the syphilitic discharge that is underneath the skin which ensues, and take the cloth and place it on the loop appearing above the syphilitic discharge.
and press it to the depth of the belly, then cut the two loops appearing above the syphilitic discharge on top of the cloth, and cut one and the other.
then take out the head of the cloth, and do not cut the syphilitic discharge nor extend the egg or any other thing, as I have made known to you in the treatment of the recipe for the intestines.
then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, make sure to dress and treat the wound, until it is healed.
The syphilitic discharge is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more useful in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Many times the skin of the intestines becomes soft in some people because the contents inside are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts the soft skin on top of the natural skin. Then assemble the two lips with a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the soft skin at three or four seams. Then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed, and the thread bleeds.
The punishment
The punishment. It is ordained in our law that it should be done thus, and I would rather not speak of it in this book at all; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is that the apothecary will respond to questions and provide a cure when asked; and the other is because we often have need of punishing certain beasts to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts. I say then that punishment is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by division. In the way that we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and pliable; then we take them in our hand until they are restored and no longer felt. On the subject of castration: one must first skin the beast, and press the hide of the testicles into your left hand; then tie a suspender and hit each ball with one blow, when you have well skinned it; and leave some of the soft and subtle sac which is above the vessels; and this manner of punishment is more severe than that which is done by attraction, because in the attraction something may remain of the testicles, for which the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are in two ways like men: one is when between the two testicles it appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair and at times urinates in court. And the other way is in women, who have on the finger as much as a penis and two testicles. And the cure for men and women is that you cut out the lumped-up parts and cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
of the tenting
Tenting is a lumped-up part on the natural part, as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or with forceps, and cut it lightly; and do not go too far in, lest blood does not come forth, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and there is another lump that is born at the mouth of the womb, and fills, and by chance jumps forward, and it is according to the likeness of a cow, and for that reason they called it the "cow disease" in ancient times. It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the tenting, and treat it until it is healed.
of the erratic one
Erratic is when the natural part of a woman is not perceived, or if the opening is small; and it is caused by birth, or by accident due to disease that has occurred; or it is caused by a lumped-up part, or subtle or thick syphac, and it is made in front, back, or side, or wherever; and it hinders conception, childbirth, and perhaps the flowering of breasts; and knowledge of this is gained through the examination of the belly. If the swelling appears nearby, go to your knees or on your rump. If it is due to subtle syphac, and it is close to the two kidneys, hasten and do thus: put your two hands together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then the two kidneys will form, until the subtle syphac is drained, and the swelling will be gone. Then take flax, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the skin, and have the woman lie down each day, so that she cannot coagulate. And if the syphac is hard and thick, you must cut it off at the spatula-like shape of myrtle leaves. If the swelling is from a born part, suspend it with forceps and cut it; and use medicines that stop blood flow, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, together with many eggs; then administer a wide belt of cloth, so that the wound cannot coagulate; and thus it will be long-lasting. Then apply a linen tent; and cure it with other treatments until it is healed. And when a born part comes in the womb, you must cut it according to this method, unless it is enchanted apostemes. For at an enchanted aposteme that is in the womb, one should not touch it with fire.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that are not accustomed to being cut, and when they become old they become thickened; and we have said in the division what their likenesses and signs are, and I will say here those that receive a cure. I say that hemorrhoids and thickened flesh, when they are made in the womb, and do not appear to be felt, there is no cure by fire. Those that are at the mouth of the womb can be felt, are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then set the altar-thickened flesh with pincers, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood flow, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes forth, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomace skin and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply .i. plaster to her back. And if it stays, that is good. If not, have her wear air-filled bladders on her back and at her breasts so as not to feel fire; then take flax, moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the skin. And when the aposteme subsides, cure the skin of ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough head, so it must be cut as I said for thickened flesh; and then cure it until it is healed.
of the womb apostemes
Various types of apostemes come into the womb, such as chancre and piercing aposteme, and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot aposteme, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is necessary then that I say about the hot aposteme that comes into the womb, which is not one of the apostemes that wraps around the bowels; and if you want to know how to work with fire, look first if the aposteme is inflamed at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then do not hasten to cut, but let the pain subside until the discomfort is alleviated; and then make the patient sit on a stool, with two small stools or cushions that they lean on, and have them support their back and bring their legs together in front of the other leg; and spread their thighs apart, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a good cord; then apply the bellows to the right side, and there place the instrument used to work on the mouth of the womb, from which the form will come forth; and it is necessary that when you apply this instrument, you place the first ring to know the depth of the womb, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient. And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the womb with drapes, so that the instrument does not cause discomfort; and it is necessary to place the bellows' horn above and hold the instrument.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs that are when you see the woman hastening downward, and desiring to give birth; then the child hastens to come forth; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is below its head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the child may come out soon; for when it descends above its head, the secondine comes with it, and the afterbirth of superfluities is purged by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or comes forth from the body or from the shoulders, or comes below the navel, and is converted by chance onto the neck, and by other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
If the child comes forth above its head in natural birth, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool or hold her up by women; and have her nature bathed in oil or fenugreek cooked, and then give the midwife a small spatula-like instrument whose shape is as follows: and cut the afterbirth, and scrape at its angle until the moisture that is inside it flows out; and take hold of the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek with sesame oil; then make her press down and stretch with condiment, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child has come out. And if both hands come forth, then it is necessary that you gently guide them in and out; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift up her feet high; then put the stool back down on the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not stumble; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child has died, then cut off the hands at the joint that is before mentioned, and extract the child, and guide it equally.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push it up. and then turn it slowly and carefully until it is even.
then take one of its feet and stretch it slowly and carefully.
Until it reaches the crotch, then instruct her to press down and stretch with condiment. If it jumps forth, may God will it.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it slowly and carefully until it is according to the natural figure. For then it will be easy.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take fenugreek juice, and sesame oil, and boiled gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put this unguent on the woman's nature within and without. then make her sit in lukewarm water down to below the ribcage;
and when she is moistened underneath, then make a mirror-colored clyster and put it underneath, and let her be for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her stretch and hold her mouth and nose, and press lightly on her belly, for the child is now jumping. of the issue of the child from its knees When the child comes out in this form, then put the midwife's hands slowly and carefully.
of the issue of the child which comes out with one hand holding onto something. It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand. if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk.
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and gently lift up her legs.
then administer the fenugreek juice that I have told about.
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand. and gently lift out the child according to its natural shape, and make her stretch, and instruct her to take hold of it until the child comes out fully.
of the issue of the child from its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife holds onto its hand, then gently turns it slowly and carefully, and lifts it lightly.
and when it is even, then put on the fenugreek juice and oil, as we have said, and instruct her to move slowly and carefully.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and instruct her to take hold of it; and make her stretch. of the same manner for all the afterbirth.
of the same manner for all the afterbirth. When it comes forth in this way to all the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth at its joint until the moisture is emptied.
and if the child falls on its face and neck, then cut it from below so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
then put the child inside as you have placed it, and instruct the woman to take hold of it sometimes:
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not an unusual thing, and it happens often. Two [twins] are a strange thing, and do not live if they are not named.
I know that they are multiplied, and are devoured by the yolk which divides them, which is connected to the mouth.
and sometimes come out naturally like one under, as we have said.
And if they should heal, then follow the cure as we have said, and be subtle in the application, and do quickly and lightly all that it does; and do so as it is of value for salvation. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb i.e. one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all shaped in the form of an infant by the measurement of wise and glorious providence,
and it is fitting that the healer knows all this, for similar things may happen by chance; so do according to what is necessary.
of a dead child
When you are treating the woman with a dead child or in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are compelled to operate by hand; so it is necessary that you know whether the woman has a healthy temperament and does not have an accident or fear of death;
so it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and have her hips inclined downwards, and her legs lifted;
and the attendant holds a cloth of two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she will not be moved in the delivery of the child;
then wipe the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with alum, and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and these poultices; then pour them into the womb lightly, then take one or two of those poultices that are suitable for this purpose,
and take care to see if the child is prepared to descend onto its head; if you place the poultices in his ears or on his neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
and if the descent is onto the feet, then place or pinch and make moeving at the sides;
and it is necessary that he holds the poultice in his right hand, and places the cord between his two hands of the left hand, and pours it all over his hand lightly, and places the poultice in one of those places which we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then place it against another poultice, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, in order for the poultices to emerge, and have the poultices toothed so as to hold them, as is the form;
And if there remains a part, then anoint the healer's fingers with oil, and pour it into that part, and treat the other part;
and if there remains nothing, then place this poultice or one higher up, and do so until it all comes out forthrightly.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return because of the constriction; so it is necessary that you envelop it on a cloth until it all emerges;
then cut at the joint of the toe or at the cuticle, and thus it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the exit, or it has an assembled aquiline nose; so it is necessary that you place the spatula-like spine between your fingers, and shape the head and extract the aquiline nose; or you use the instrument called "almidach", by which the form comes with instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus make it so if the child has a large natural head; and then treat the bones with forceps;
and if the head jumps forward and it is strained at the forehead, then be split, so that the moisture which is in the back part comes forth;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
and if he is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture flows;
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is light.
And if he is narrow in the belly or back, then it is necessary that you extract him onto a cloth wrapped around your hand; and shape the belly or back until the moisture that is there flows;
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, so anoint your hand with oil to the very bottom of the womb, and treat it up to the mouth of the womb; then place one or two poultices on it, and treat it forthrightly;
and if the mouth of the womb is constricted due to a hot abscess that has come forth, then it is not necessary to trouble oneself; instead it is fitting to administer moist and greasy things; and the administrator applies ointments, and uses them in softening and moistening liquid substances.
And if the child is on its side, and you can place it evenly, then administer to the living child as we have said.
and if one cannot do so, then treat it forthrightly in pieces, and leave nothing of the second stage.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said for hot abscesses that come forth in the womb;
and if hemorrhaging comes from blood, then it should be stopped with water restraining, and the administrator should administer other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose womb had contained a dead child, then she consulted with another about that one, and rejected the dead one. After a long time, an abscess came forth in her mouth, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to cause great turmoil.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the wound.
I applied a plaster with strong traction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I was very surprised, because the womb has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I cleaned the wound and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman lived long thus, and at times a little bit of bowel came from there.
and I have not remembered this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to help it.
of returning the marrow to its place
Then comes the form of pressure, for which one reads books; and at two turns to two joints of two ligaments. However, the corners should be more subtle than the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the wood be one and a half fingers wide, and the border of the trees one finger, and as long as half a palm. and between the two ligaments should be two joinings of this same wood, which are tight in one and the other, as long as half a palm or a little more.
and these two joinings are fitted in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two corners.
Another form, more subtle and light in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the appearance of forceps; and have two joints, two joinings, just as you see, one palm long and one finger wide;
and when you see the marrow open with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one chair, her feet pendant and her legs outstretched; then fit the two joinings joined together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand on all the instrument, just as you have done with forceps evenly, according to the size that you see open the mouth of the marrow, until the ball makes what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their forms are multiplied; and when the makers have prepared them, the work is then more hasty, and higher for men according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her urine, and then make her void with condiments, and hold your hands on her mouth and navel; and if she sweats because of this, well it is.
If not, take one pot, and make one perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as chamomile, rue, anise, and centaury.
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water above the fire; then place one end of the pot or perforation on the mouth of the marrow,
and keep it so that the vapors come into the marrow; then make her void, as we have said. If the secondine heats up quickly. And if she remains after this treatment and is not fully cured, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or mugwort oil of hawthorn, and then insert it into the natural opening.
and takes hold of the secondine; and when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it out little by little straightly, so that the marrow does not resist the extraction. but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; so it will come out and become dislodged.
And if the mouth of the marrow is congested, we have said the cure for voiding and for fumigating herbs;
and if she is not helped by all that we have said, then beware that you do not force it.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow you tie to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with ointment of fourfold medicine.
so it will be poured and replaced, and come forth; but nonetheless, when she has purged in this way a foul odor comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
So it is necessary to make suitable fumigations in this case: none of the ancients have proved that fumigation with cress and dried figs is not good.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the secondine is this:
And it resembles seeing a cord, and one places the head of the instrument in the natural opening, and the wide ends above the fire;
and let the fumigation be above the coals, and keep it until it is exhausted, and then start another one.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle membrane. So it is necessary for the nurse to pierce that subtle membrane at its tip, and not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and guard the location so she does not touch it.
then put on a moist linen cloth with wine and oil, then apply the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, put a cord of flax into the wound and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to chambers.
And whenever this stoppage comes from a sudden wound or abscess; it is necessary to close that stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said with the cord of flax.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger as they come from below the foundation or in the space between the two parts.
and if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, it will work, and in the meantime put more moisture on white or subtle bread.
and sometimes these fistulas are purged; and they are known by that which comes out or is voided through the mouth or windiness when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance one jumps forward.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to no point of the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula is purging at the foundation, and not purging. and is that you insert your two fingers or foundation, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has tortuosity, then put in a thin tent of cloth or one hair of a horse, until you feel the tent or hair at your own discretion.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of pus, windiness, or fever, as we have said: know that it does not break through; therefore hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is pierced all the way to the bladder or the urethral canal, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced all the way to the crotch joint, then the tent comes up to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the cause of pain around it, then it is that he goes away, and there is no remedy by medication nor by soothing with oil.
and in these pierced fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
In that which is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts his legs up to his crotch, and has his crotch inclined towards his belly. then put in a tent of iron or cloth if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes to.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then it is necessary that you put in two fingers.
then sense that the tent has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your skin or flesh, then know that it is pierced. if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One says that one can indeed heal some, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that is done there is to cauterize the subtlety of the fire according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and put it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that these burned flesh scraps are like a bird's feather.
and then cure with moist tents in butter, until those flesh scraps are gone; and then cure with ointment anointing the wound and binding.
If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, there is no other way to heal;
and if the tent goes in and does not pierce all the way to the skin which is at the fundament, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that point where the covering of fat ends. so cut from the beginning of the fistula, and put in advance of the tent, and then apply the cauter after, until it comes to the head of the tent.
and the tent will be delivered and fall away; then remove those burned flesh scraps that resemble a bird's feather, and none of it will remain.
And if the blood increases, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
For the cauteries of fire bring together two good things: namely, the burning away of these adhered flesh scraps, and the stopping of blood and the drying up of moisture.
then cure with moist tents in butter or in crushed cheese, until the wound flows away, and the burned flesh scraps are gone from the flow.
then cure the wound with binding ointments anointing hard flesh, and use dry medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
And if the fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then insert your finger into the fundament and feel around.
If you feel the tent and between two is the thread or skin or flesh, where it is near to piercing, then there are no remedies except by way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
and do not go too far down into the fundament, lest you cut the tent that holds the foundation, and come to an evacuation without intention. then cure it as we have said;
then cure it as we have said; by chance if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the mud when it is cut away from the fundament, by tent or by another instrument appointed. then remove the burned flesh scrap that is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the fundament near the skin above. so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form: And I put one twisted thread into two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced on the edge of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, thus putting your finger or fundament.
and pull the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and hold one to the other, and let it be for one day or two.
and restrain it sometimes, until the thread cuts through those flesh scraps that are between two, and they fall away.
then cure the wound until it is bound up and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, except if it is too deep.
For it is not necessary to cut too far down and then cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like instrument used to make the fistula is quite rough and uneven, one side and the other. and the other side not, because of which you do not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in short time blood flows. and if there is one or more, and they are farther away from the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are farther away have little moisture,
and then again or a little bit of yellow water or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
and the cure for those who have it inside the foundation is that you instruct the patient to stretch forth and move towards a room, until the foundations come forth, and then the sons appear; so hurry, and hold it with pincers, or you hold it to your finger, then cut into its roots;
and if the ligament cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them by a cloth, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of camlet; and extract them to your hands, then cut, and powder on some hot powders that are in place of cauterization; or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot come out, then purge the patient with a bitter and sharp laxative to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly;
when the patients are pierced, and if the sons are gone from the foundation, then the cure is easy; and it is that you pierce them with your finger or pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron.
and it is necessary that you bring the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw out the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and if it is of the length; and hold the thread tightly, then knot the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave one for closing the excess blood;
then put on the foundation a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave him until he is purged, and when they are purged, then cure with ointment and other cures, until he is healed.
of the dryness of the fiend or foundation Many times it happens that dryness of the intestines occurs, and due to constriction of nature, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help.
So it is necessary that you remove at the tip of a spatula or with your finger the outer layer above which does not allow it to be moistened; then cure it until it is soothed as necessary;
and if it cannot be soothed, then begin again the scraping more strongly than before, until it is healed and purged. then cure it until it is healed.
of the shivering Fomentation is a small appearance of boil on the body, and goes very deep;
and sometimes it bursts open in cold weather, and one feels it just like death from shivering, and comes all over the body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a goose quill or a strong turkey feather, and put that quill on the shivering, until the circles become purple all around. then turn your hand to the whole quill until you cut all around the shivering, and put it deep in, and extract the shivering from its roots.
And if you see, then do this with a file of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and drawing above.
but not pierce, to keep it at the joint, and press it And if you see, then cauterize the shivering, as written before or in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of a purgative Sometimes one makes a purge of silver or of archroot, or of melted iron or cloth; and sometimes one makes these instruments small and great, according to how they are brought together.
Those then which are used in the care of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
The form of a purgative small and great is thus broad or the belly is bound in this manner:
and it has an indentation or the belly is bound, as you see, and the edges are pierced inside; and has two holes on one side, and one on the other.
and it is the belly or where one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
and has between each hole one thread of esparto, then put in those holes one strong thread of twisted linen in ten or eleven turns around, and bind the belly as a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument beforehand, then purge; and that is the form of the circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the top of the purgative with oil or egg white or similar thing, then put it on lightly.
then instruct the attendants to lift it together with their two hands until it is completely visible, then extract the purgative, and raise the patient's legs to the parapet.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then tighten it as much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night through, that is more great help.
And if you purge in a disease of windiness of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healed.
And if hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then the purgative should be as subtle as for a child.
and that is the form of the subtle purgative when the skin is strained on this account.
of wounds
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; and now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by cutting with a stone, or by the edge of a sword and knife, or by a spear or fist or seat, or similar things.
where are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, because the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from a blow of stone or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you lightly doubt of aposteme hot: so do it soon to heal from the head itself if it comes forth with blood from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
and instruct the patient to take in wine and big meats.
And if he does not want to heal, so let his meat be weakened, and let him drink no wine, nor eat no flesh;
and put on the wound if hot apostemes come, a moistened cotton cloth in rose oil alone, or in stiptic wine;
and if there is no hot aposteme, so put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later;
and if the fire has moved it, so put on some ointments until he is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, so bring them together by suturing, as I will say about belly wounds, with suturing.
If the wound is uncovered of bone and open, and does not hold but for a moment, then cut it; next, treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat big meats, such as cooked brains and wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
And if you find or skin rot, and it is not on the bone, then cut out all the rot and throw away what remains, then treat it.
and if he has an artery in the wound or vein, without a cover, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then bind the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: and that you put on this powder which sets in motion as soon as the fire has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and the powder subtly mixed, and apply the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it be without untying, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one does not do this with coal alone, except when one has no incense nor dragon's blood, but only when the fire has moved the wound.
And if the fire has moved the wound, even though it is set, do not put on this powder at all.
but put on some digestive ointments, or thrush made from wheat flour, water, and honey, until it flows forth. then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the breaking of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, so extract it with subtle pincers.
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound on the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or an artery are cut.
If it's the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to let the wound heal, and not put anything restrictive on it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and don't put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be gentle, like coal washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and washed again in sweet water. and other stones of mines according to this manner, and moistened ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind with bandages, then treat until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and have become hollow and full of pus, then puncture or lower down.
and if the artery is cut and blood comes flowing out, then stop it, tie it off, and cauterize it as needed.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is guarded, by which the meat goes, so cut the gullet above the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then bind him gently, and let him be for some days, then treat with drying ointments until he is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then cut it. and if there are pieces of bone, so treat them all as you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave until the wound becomes rotten. and be dried and closed the opening.
and if the wound is fresh, so powder with powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from a spear or dagger
If it's a cut from a spear or dagger, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of inflammation coming from the wound that the patient will lose their life: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't put on the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that doesn't penetrate deeply. and reverts to the heart, and kills the patient. but I put on an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have oil, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
and make the patient sleep on top of the wound three days, or four, or more. if no convulsion comes, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor any perturbation. and when you see good conditions, then know that the wound is saved. then cure it with tents and other treatments until he is healed.
and if it cannot heal or do well, then know that there is a fistula; and treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a cut of sword or knife and it is simple, or deeper or on the back, then treat the part that is in front.
if it is large, with sewing; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone and has broken pieces, then cleanse the wound and remove any detached flesh. and if they are not detached, then let the wound suppurate, so that it will facilitate extractions.
and for other wounds in other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small;
of the great wound sometimes an intestine or a part of the intestines is cut, by which there is no further passage for them;
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one,
because therefore one puts the intestines back in slowly, if not put them back together piece by piece; because the intestines swell at once when they feel cold, so they enter more slowly,
and for this reason the middle wound is worse, because one must reinsert the intestine to its place as with the other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common sewings occur in the sewing of the belly,
and the sewing of other wounds of the body and two other proper sewings are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more proper with the sewing of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small and nothing has come out of the intestine, and a little thing is required to put back, this is done by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this way: soak a sponge or one piece of cloth in lukewarm water only, or you boil it in water with squinat and cypress and spike, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed.
and sometimes make this wine restraining and is good to have alone to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or boil it with marjoram and melissa. for through this it is facilitated the entry of a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is better than the cut. that no one should cut without great necessity there be;
and that is the instrument for cutting:
so cut inside in the curvature and do not cut too much, and see to it that the form remains.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, so put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place. if you have the power, because this is a great thing.
When the wound is large and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back. and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts so make an effort to have the injured part higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say about great and middle wounds.
For small wounds, use what appears best to you,
and then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and that is the common manner of sewings,
and that is the common manner of sewings, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound. then leave from the head of the wound a good space, and insert a needle where there is a strong thread; and pierce the two joints of the skin with the two joints of the siphac.
then strain it with a double thread around the needle from both sides, and bring together the two edges of the wound in an even manner.
and then leave a good space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle. and do not stop doing this as long as you need to use needles. until all the wound is restrained.
and are the needles middle-sized, between fine and thick. because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be middle-sized.
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
so that they do not cut and open the wound before the suturing.
and then cut off the heads of the needles, so that they do not harm the patient while sleeping. and I put tents or cloths on the heads of the needles to hold them in place. and leave them there until the wound is sutured.
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it requires only one needle or two.
The second stitching is common, and it's that you assemble the two pieces of leather and the two pieces of silk together with a needle where there is one strong middle thread; and when you have pierced all these pieces threefold,
and when you have pierced all these pieces threefold, then push the needle through to the part where you started, in the manner one sews clothes.
and put a space between each stitching the thickness of a minor denier;
this stitching is suitable for men,
and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly,
who was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's breadth wide, and it had exposed the intestines two palms' breadth long,
and the wound was in the belly. I pulled back the intestine and then it had been out for twenty-four hours,
and the wound was healed just after fifteen days, and I cured him, and he was sound.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where we could not find any, nor any medicine; and I placed clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle and plunge it through from outside to inside.
when it has pierced the thickness in its right place, then put the tip of the silk or thread where you have inserted the needle.
and make it pierce from the other side of the inside to outside.
and the intention of this stitching is that you sew as the furriers do the furs, and leave the silk on one side and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is completely done.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly,
is like that of some who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the silk to the other end, in this manner:
insert a needle or close-fitting point nearby, and make it pierce only that place. and leave the two ends of the silk; then turn the needle and make it pierce from outside to inside. to the two ends of the silk;
then make it pierce one and the other from outside to inside, in two other notches of the mirror that are on the other side.
and this is the more common manner of stitching.
Galens says this word, and some bear witness to it,
one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
and knows that when the rupture is in the belly, it is the stitching more difficult than for other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it's that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, before the fire has changed it, then replace the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder enchanting charm,
then replace the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder enchanting charm, and if the fire has changed it, then apply some ointment that is available, until the wound closes. and tie up the thread, and sew together the silk and mirror; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed.
and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to close, clean cotton, and move it twice a day until he is healed.
For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound may cause community with principal members, so it is necessary that you anoint lightly with oil of temperate heat or oil of rose. and put it around the arms and below the shoulders;
and if he feels pain or burning in his bowels, and this often happens, then cleanse with black wine vinegar, and likewise if the burning comes just to the intestine;
and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the putrefaction of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and the approximation of its nature to that of the fish.
And if the membrane jumps out of the wound, then put it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has become yellow or black, then it is necessary that you cover the part that is black, so that no blood may come from there. for there are veins and arteries;
then bind what is between the ligament, and put the two ends hanging from the part below the wound up to outside to facilitate extraction when the membrane falls off and the wound closes.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen a man wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was evacuation and flatulence;
I applied the cure as best I could, and did not cease to subtletize until he was healed, and the parts were joined together.
And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient had not evil in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
and certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take fresh from great tests, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the fresh has opened the mouth, so put it on the two lips,
then put another fresh behind in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and close the wound. This treatment if done in the intestine, and does no harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread which is taken from the intestine of a beast,
in such a way: take the end of this thread of intestine that is well separated, and then tie to the end of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted, then pass the thread through the needle, and close the intestine, and tie it in the way;
and this manner of stitching with fresh is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines, then there is no remedy or health, except subtlety.
of fistula or whatever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula", and even when it is opened and discharges pus.
And fistula is according to the true nodation lacking a hard and white swelling, or where one does not feel pain, and it discharges pus like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes in clear and abundant pus, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times sufficient;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no flesh, is not other than through one of the eight causes:
namely, through the smallness of blood or flesh; or through its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the humors are corrupted, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region is late with digestion and health, and flows naturally; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
or it is necessary that I should make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the bladder, or intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous sanitation, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the point I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and if you see it, know it, take a tent of iron or earth, if the fistula is straight, then cut it;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of cloth, for cloth bends around the twistiness;
and if the fistula has many pores and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it by one of the pores,
for the moisture is so short from one pore to another, and cleanses;
then cut the bleeding at your ability, as you know whether there is bone or nerve, and it discharges abundantly;
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and where he feels it;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a jointure, or nerve, or artery, or vein; or in any of the places I have told you, then tie it according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places I have told you, then tie it according to what I have told you, and cut away the faulty and corrupted flesh that is inside; and then treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well opened from the right place, then it is necessary that you cut away abundantly as much as you can, then put wet tents in medicinal aloe and tie them just at the head of the fistula,
then put wet tents in medicinal aloe and tie them just at the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then put anointings on healthy flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. If veins or nerves do not trouble you or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the corruption as much as it is necessary. then treat with anointings on healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed and discharges pus as before, know that you are not yet at the end:
then uncover and cut away until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's well. if not, know that the corruption is too deep in front, that you cannot come to it; so there is no other remedy but to wait for nature.
and if there is a small bone corrupted and you can pull it out with forceps, then pull it out with a suitable instrument for this;
and if there are many of them, so treat all together, nor leave one.
and if moisture makes you contrary, and there is no mistake or fear, so cut and moisten and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something causing putridity. and let it stay until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and then if they will be more easily removed.
and if it is a great bone, such as one of the thigh or leg, so remove only the corruption until all the decay is removed. then restore the wound;
and if there is great part of the decay and comes just to the bone; so clean and cut all the way to the decay, and then treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body,
until the matter came to the leg, and was swollen with a great abscess, and there was no reason to stop from opening.
but the physician by their foolishness opened too high and the abscess burst open, and there flowed out a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came a great many pus-filled sores that all went down into the moist parts of the body.
and many physicians treated it for two years, and there was no gain in the art of healing,
so long that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated. and what flowed out through the sores was great in quantity. and the skin of the young man became red and had a yellowish color.
I placed a tent in one of those sores, and then searched all the sores.
and I found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the sores until I uncovered a part of the bone, and it was decayed and perforated, and the decay came right down to the bone inside.
I cleaned out what appeared from the decayed bone, and thought that there was no other decay, except for what I had removed.
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, and could not heal.
and then I recommenced, and uncovered the bone just as before,
and found the decay continued in the bone, and I cleaned it, and then removed it, and took care to heal the place.
but I couldn't until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and then cleaned it all the way to its entire base. then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and sound quickly.
and there was no longer need to restart the treatment except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For through the evacuation it often bled profusely, but he was healed entirely.
For through the evacuation it often bled profusely, but he was healed entirely. and instead of the bone, a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or contrariness from anything at all, neither going nor coming.
and stretch the top, so that you pull out the corrupt flesh below. and uncover the flesh above the place where you see it is to be cleaned, so that the cleaning does not cut into the flesh. and put a hot iron or a heated table under the bone to move and cover the corrupt flesh. and it is necessary to clean as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and then clean again another time.
And if the bone is decayed, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part. so uncover all the flesh; then put a hot iron underneath.
and then clean from one part to the other the corruption, and be sure of the length of the corruption by a foot, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the decayed joint and clean the bone where it contains from the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut.
and if the corruption is in the finger or in the toe, it is very strong indeed. but still it is necessary that you inquire about this corrosion, how it opens up; and purify it in all the ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
and know that the knife and the threads for cutting these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance outside. and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness. and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument according to the appearance of the work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so think about the instrument that you need according to what is necessary.
of fire The head of the shoulder may become dislocated due to a reason within, or due to a reason without.
and when you have tried medicine on this corruption through the treatment of medicines, and it does not help. so it is necessary to cut that member all the way down to the place where the corruption comes. so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil which is greater, namely, the deficiency of the member.
so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil which is greater, namely, the deficiency of the member. and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire. and afterwards the blackness appears, then goes on to corrode member by member, and takes hold of the entire body; if you hasten to cover.
and if it is due to the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones.
if the corrosion is at the head of the joint, then it will spread and not give space for coming as far as the hand.
And if it comes as far as the hand, then it will spread to the joint, so that the corruption does not come as far as the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then it will spread to the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death. and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
and so it goes when the corruption comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it will spread to the other joint.
and if it comes to the foot, then it will spread all over the foot; and if it goes up to the leg, then it will spread to the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except for the physician to let the patient die.
and the manner of binding or covering the member is that you bind it above and below. and stretch one minister down from one band, and another minister up from the other band. and you uncover the flesh that is between the two bands with one wide spatula, until the bone is exposed.
then bind or cover it, and put one cloth of linen on each side, so that the binding does not touch the healthy skin. and another lesion and abscess occur in the patient.
And if blood flows from the wound when you work, then cauterize the area at once. or you put some restraining powders on top; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man on his bare foot:
he had a blackness that seemed like burning coal,
and the corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it spread all over the foot.
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cover the foot and was healed.
and long afterwards the corruption came back to his hand, and he came to me.
and I put some counteractive things on him after purifying the body, but could not stop the corruption.
and he wanted me to amputate his hand, and I did not consent, because I had hope of counteracting the material; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die. for the man's virtue was weak; and he became desperate in all respects, and returned to his land. and he hastened to cover his hand, and was healed.
and I have told this tale only for this reason: that if one is in need of it.
Sometimes an abscess comes on the fatty part of the skin, and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus. and then bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the skin remains empty, just like a vessel. and the skin on top is also as delicate as a piece of fine silk. and does not spread as far as the bone, nor as far as the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain".
but if it is so long that it comes right to the bone in the middle, then it is called "fistula".
and the skin is such that you cover all around with skin, and similarly when it is delicate like a piece of silk. and does not harden because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will harden, and the corruption is not in the middle, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a poultice thus:
see if the breast is large, and the pus that issues from it has a foul smell, then treat it with Egyptian medicine made thus: take equal parts of asafoetida, oil, and lye, and put them to boil in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes equally thick as honey;
and then take from it according to your need, and mix it with water and honey. and use it to foment the breast, and stop the abscess. and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by pressing gently.
do this many times until the breast is made clean and the pus is removed.
and sometimes it is fomented with ash water, when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from grape vine, and pour water on top.
then let it flow, and foment with it, as long as you know the breast is well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then foment with water and honey, or add a little lye to it. or foment with honey and mead, since the honey has the property of cleansing and washing. and the wine makes the skin tender.
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well cleansed, then foment with what makes flesh grow in it.
and take defined emplastern, and mix it with rose oil and wine. or foment with various medicines and ointments, whose properties I have said or how to treat with ointments;
and if the abscess of the breast is small and the poultice of the fomentation cannot enter it. then enlarge it slightly with a needle, and put in a tent made from Egyptian ointment. or balsam ointment, until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, then sew it up and leave just enough room for one end or the poultice to enter.
and if the abscess that pours pus is above, then cut it lower than it is. Since And if you cannot cover the chest below as you see so arrange it in such a way that the bowstring runs at its lowest position.
And if you cannot cover the chest below as you see so arrange it in such a way that the bow runs slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bow. and take consolidative medicines to put on the chest
and place a linen cloth over one and a half feet of the chest; then cover the weakened area on the chest, about a pace larger than the first one, and place soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the weakened area, and put it on the weakened area of the chest to ease the bow, and do not remove the large cloth until after about a day or once.
and he who is on the weakened area of the chest, often removes it to remove the bow, and knows what comes from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough or undigested.
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in this way and you see the nature that bursts forth on the weakened area of the chest, so know that the chests are already set right, and approach the healthy state;
and then loosen it in the morning or third day, and when you loosen the wound, so change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the chest ejects undigested bowels after many days, know that the chest is not healed. And if subtle poisons come out after long time, do not despair of health at all.
for the healthy state approaches. For there are men who slowly putrefy in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested bowels burst forth from the chest after many days, know that the chest is not healed.
and if the chest takes a long time to heal, and is distant, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as defined ointment, for it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in substance.
then cook it and use it; and the same thing makes cooked honey grow. when defined ointment is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then wrap it in a cloth, and place it on the chest, and do not administer it again for a long time. and roots of celestial lily, which is also like fine wheat flour and centuary;
and roots of celestial lily, which is also like fine wheat flour and centuary; and use simple or compound medicines: grind them, make powder, and put it on the honey I said, and use. and if the wound is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is at its full extent, and makes an impression on the bone, or causes stiff limbs, or ligaments. so treat the wound of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the joint
Panniculus is an abscess that arises under the joint of the thumb. or of the foot, or perhaps occurs in other joints;
and when it is neglected and not taken care of, then a foul abscess comes forth, and runs and bursts forth with bowels until it reaches the root of the joint, and perhaps even beyond.
and comes to the corrosion just to the bone, until a foul pain comes forth, and is the joint of the toe wide open, and is the color flux.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, so it is necessary that you remove all the superfluous matter that remains in the joint, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint begins to rot the flesh, and pierces, and bleeds, so it is necessary that you put a spit under the joint that is piercing the flesh, and seal it above, and remove that subtle and delicate flesh. and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all;
And if the corruption is in the bone, then remove it, and treat it further, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the toe corrupting, then remove it in one of those ways as is said before, then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is fierce, and swells, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first. then cut the joint of the spatula in a diagonal direction above.
and take care that the cut does not come to the flesh which is beneath the joint, for the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The toes that are born in some people's hands by chance are all flesh. and perhaps there is a place where it has bones, and sometimes there is no joint.
and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in certain joints of the toes. Those who are born in any other part of the toe do not move. and those who are born at the joint of the toe, by chance, do move.
the shape of that which is fleshly is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
That which is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if it takes hold, don't bother trying to cut it.
In that which is born or attached to the back part of the toe, it is necessary that you cut the flesh all around just up to the bone. Then bind the bone with a suitable thread to it, then care for it until it is healed.
The kind of wound that comes together by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you bind that wound, so that it be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moist cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together. or you put between two thin pieces of linen, until the flesh is sewn, as it is necessary.
If a wound comes to any of its joints with the palm, then bind that wound as it is necessary.
Of wounds
Wounds are great and swollen, full of mournful superfluities, that come to many members of the body;
and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
It is necessary then that you minister to him sometimes purging of gall, and then salve from the basilica.
The cure of iron is according to two manners: one is when you bind and drag away the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
The cutting is according to this manner: first rise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned. then strain the patient's leg above the knee up to the part below the groin; then cut the vein in one place, or two places, or three places, with a broad incision,
then lift and drain away the black blood at your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood flows out as the patient's virtue can endure.
and then bind it, and command that he keep eating flesh purging black gall;
and recommence the evacuation and salve when the veins are full, and harm comes to the patient.
The healing of it is according to this manner: rise the patient's leg, if there are many hairs. then put it in a bath, and rise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins are swollen;
and if you don't have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then bind it in place at the vein of the long part above the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
then apply oil to the skin, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when one feels it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white cord.
then push the point down below, until it is raised from the skin, and then pat it with oil lightly.
then bind it in one place above two joints, and then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. then lift it up by the point, just as you did, and pat it with another oil, just as you did first.
then cut another incision, or more if you need them, then lift it and bind at the joint of the foot.
then drain and lift up to the second incision; then draw out from incision to incision until it flows completely, then bind.
and if you can't drain and lift it, then insert an awl into each strong thread doubled. and bind and drain it, and push down below one point, and turn your hand from side to side until it flows out; and be careful that it doesn't bind, for if it binds, then one cannot drain or lift it, and harm comes to the patient.
and when you have drained it all, then put a moist cloth made of wool, wine, and rose oil on the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the flesh is constricted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it twistedly, but do not bind it; and drain it as we have said before.
then it is necessary that you cut it twistedly, but do not bind it; and drain it as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which you cut the flesh is curved, and does not cut through, so that it cuts the vein.
and is of great curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is located in legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may be found elsewhere besides legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes from below the skin;
as if a serpent or worm were to come forth inside the body, and to be located between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the swelling changes and the vein begins to emerge, just like the root of a plant.
When the swelling opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of linen from one and a half to two and a half inches, and tie it off.
and leave the linen on the leg, and whenever it becomes undone at the back, wrap it around the linen and tie it off. and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining part around it, and do not bind it at its root until it has fully emerged. for if you cut it, it will retreat back into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary to treat it slowly and gradually up to the end, and leave none of it in the body.
and sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms. and one man came to me, whose it was as long as ten palms, and when you cut it, he pushed one point or perforation, and it pierced down to the bottom.
so that everything flows out; and be empty the matter which is inside, and administer to the place medicines purging putrefaction some day, then care for it as one would for abscesses.
And sometimes this vein has many branches, and indeed when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot. and then it comes forth with pus, and from which it springs forth; treat it thus as we have said before.
Of the veins that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "beef illness", because it often befalls oxen,
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and ascends and descends all over the body. and it can be felt as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it is going and bursts forth;
and is caused by an imbalance of certain humors, such as those that come from worms and serpents and lice and ascarids or the belly;
and one doubts of its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye; by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; and this often happens.
When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot flee except when it is going:
so then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong cord tightly.
then pull up and pull it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye on the forehead, then bind tightly below it, and then pull up and pull it out;
and it is necessary to use the patient in a cleansing of the body with soluble medicines to purge the bad humors.
and be wary of meats that cause an imbalance of humors.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vacirir", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and shortly after, I saw it rising also like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything else, just like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder,
and then shortly after it coursed through all the body, until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that it was turning around the body again and again, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner before. However, I had seen many cases where the pain had moved from place to place. but never like this, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered, and therefore this windiness appeared constrained;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are well-nourished, and who have moist bodies and veins that are well-covered.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then pull up until the constrained windiness issues forth from that place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
then treat it with medicines that counteract windiness, such as fetid pills and serpent's tooth pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
The diversity of their kinds is that there are some with large points, and small, and hairy, and sound; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those which have fragments; and that which strikes a member may strike in two ways: or it pierces the principal member,
such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it strikes then in any place of these members, and the sign of death that I shall tell you later appears: so it is necessary to beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the sacric fluid bursts forth which is above the brain, it is when there is a clouding and darkness and sleepiness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and commotion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without breath from the nostrils or ears; and by chance it affects speech and voice; and bursts forth from the moist white wound resembling pustules, and also bursts forth like a boil of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then take care and extract the arrow if it is not deeply embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the arrow moves just like pustules, and there is dark bloody discharge, and comes with cold sweat and chilliness, and syncope: know then without doubt that death is impending.
And the sign of the arrow that strikes the spleen is when without any foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient's color changes, and sighs deeply and searches for cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the cover of the chest, it is below the small ribs; and there is great pain and great suffering and sighing; and all the members of the shoulders are affected.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, by chance something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes the belly and bursts forth through the intestine route, there is no hope for recovery or in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine leaps out and comes forth, and the patient feels very great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and back of the neck and rib cage and hip and knees and legs, and a similar limb, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
It happened to one person that an arrow fell into the armpit at the root of the neck: I tried to pull it out and pulled it from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye below the paper-thin skin, and the arrow was lodged and I couldn't pull it out except for the tip towards the wood. and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all light iron without any ears; the joint was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I loosened the feathers and pulled it out slowly until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I pulled out an arrow from one person who had fallen into his belly, and I thought he was dying;
and then after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow and extracted it, and he was healed, and there was no bad accident.
And if you find one person who has an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrow remains inside him, and did not change his natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
And if you find another person who has an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many similar things.
And I pulled out an arrow from one of the king's princes who had fallen into his neck, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely lodged.
I was summoned to the treatment after it had fallen three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for it with all a subtle touch, and did not feel it; and he felt puncturing and pain below his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I applied a plaster with an attractive and digestive property to the wound, because the flesh did not swell; and I saw the tip of the arrow.
and I saw the tip of the arrow. I applied a plaster for many days, and the wound was healed above, and the patient remained thus for a long time,
until he felt the arrow one day inside his neck; and he told me so. I applied medicine with a corrosive quality to the wound for many days, until it was fully open,
and I tried to pull it out, and felt the tip of the arrow which was stuck at the root; then I inserted it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and passed well beyond the boundaries for three months,
and then I opened up the wound so that I inserted forceps on both sides, and it could not come out;
then I did not cease to search and extract with the use of instruments, until I grasped it one day with forceps well-made, according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the doctor judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care into what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything.
but wise masters may learn from a small thing, and about what is present and lacking, find true nine works, and nine instruments, at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not emerge from members where they are stuck except according to two ways: or by the way they enter, or by another part;
and that which leaps forth from a place where it enters, is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes jumps forth now.
And if it does not jump forth now, then leave it so that the flesh is cleared around, and the exit be freed.
and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it so for some days, and gently move it each day;
and then it jumps forth, and if it does not jump, then pierce around with a subtle instrument, until the flesh around is stretched out, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it with all diligence; and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, so one waits until the wound is great; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds.
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds. if you remove the flesh that is stuck in two parts to the wound as far as you can. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out.
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out. and be subtle that you do not break the arrow, so that you may pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the skin around it is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the hemorrhaging of blood makes you contraindicated, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and set your mind to how you can pull out the arrow without peril.
or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow hit him. for it is the greatest aid that there can be, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from the other side, or it shows anything of him, or the skin is swollen in that place as one sees or feels painfully.
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps forth now.
And if she is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
And if she cannot come out, then leave her still, and then begin the extraction again until she comes forth.
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it all the way through.
and if the head falls off, and you wish to administer poulticing, then apply one instrument with a beard. so that the point of the arrow enters the beard of the instrument; and then push it through.
and if the arrow is bearded, then apply one instrument with a pointed end inside, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is stuck, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as it seems right.
And if the arrow hits the hip or back or belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut above, then cut.
and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which one handles arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
And there are many kinds: great, small, and little, according to the size of the arrow.
of common veins of the body Of veins through which one heals 31, of which it has or 16 head.
that is to say: two batons that are behind the ears, which are called the "herbeches". and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing. and two veins that are in the two eyes of the two lids, which are called "aspirations". and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the crown of the head. and the two jugular veins which are in the neck. and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich". and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins through which one usually heals are five in each arm:
one is the cerebral vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and they call it "the vein of the head" among the common people. and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cerebral and basilic veins, and they call it "the vein of the heart" among the common people; and the basilic is on the right side. and they call it "the vein of the belly" among the common people, and it is above the scrotum. and it is that through which one usually heals, which appears manifestly above the pubic area.
And the saphena vein is the one that is between the ulnar and annular veins, and it has two branches.
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the crease of the right hip, and the second saphenous vein that is at the ankle of the left side, and the vein called "nesse" which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The treatment of the veins that are behind the ears helps ancient headache and migraines; and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head.
and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head. and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: which then comes to your hand, and where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, so take hold.
then take the lancet, and push it through the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards. and cut and open the skin and the vein well for two fingers' breadth of travel, and let out as much blood as you see fit.
then tighten it up and bind, until it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The treatment of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for ancient headaches and migraines. and also for obtalmia, accustomed to the eyes, and at the very core of old age's tears to the eyes.
and the qualities of a physician are such as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the hairs below your two fingers, and then signs in consent;
then lift the key on the vein above to your two-fingered index, and push the lancet below, and lift the vein above, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and make a hole in the blood according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it;
and then bind it tightly, and let it be until it is healed; and we have spoken of their cutting and extraction, as well as the beginning of this book.
The bloodletting from the frontal vein is worth as much as the cephalic bloodletting for old face diseases, and for migraine, and for fever;
and the quality is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
and place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never once make a wide incision.
However, it is not necessary that the incisions be too narrow; and the vein should not cross over, for the bone is near, and by chance the incision may break when it is subtle.
The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the armpits is helpful for those with fever, and with typhoid, and with fever in the eye, and for old face diseases;
and the quality of their bloodletting is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting without any binding, just as before;
then bleed, and let the vein be about an inch long, a little bit wide, because there is no fat.
And if the incision is subtle, by chance it may break; then make a hole in the blood, as much as you need, and then tie on cotton, and tie it well.
The bloodletting of the neck vein is worth as much for ague, and for sudden fever, and for old face diseases, just as migraine and fever that come to the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his neck to your left hand, and take the subtle incision long, and place it inside the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too far forward, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then tie it for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The bloodletting of the two inguinal veins is helpful for the constriction of the bladder, and for the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for epilepsy, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and hemorrhoids;
and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches his neck above one and the other, just as we have said; and let the master be standing on the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat,
then bleed the long vein a little bit widely, then let the blood flow temperately, or as much as is needed;
then do the other side in the other vein, then release the ligature, and bind the veins moderately; so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the bleeding of the liver The bloodletting of the veins above the lips is helpful for bleeding in the mouth, and for corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and around the neck.
And the quality of the bloodletting is to have the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and they can be recognized by their being black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins: cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest one from each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
Of the bloodletting under the tongue The bloodletting of the veins that are under the tongue is helpful after the cephalic bleeding, and it is for constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks down on each side to a black vein;
then bleed one and the other, and do not go too far forward, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two manners:
or by piercing with one sharp and wide incision, or by making a subtle cut like a trencher cutting, and is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The form of the mirtin incision is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are thick and full of gross blood, and contain much blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the olive incision:
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is helpful for diseases that are below the throat, and on the neck, and on the chest, and on the belly;
and it is necessary for the physician to bleed slowly, and beware of the artery that is underneath. And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding comes from it, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I said. and should not be pricking at the flame, but cutting like a scythe.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it and change to another one; or you want some air from it, or you open the vein instead of it in the arm: it opens manifestly; and cut into the flame like a scythe, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the pulse, then it is necessary also that you grasp the arm so that you touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place of the incision and then bind the arm, and cut into the vein like a scythe;
and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: then avoid it.
And if you see it flow up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your finger on top for a long time, then take away your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens;
and bind the arm, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the blood is not stopped, and he complains, and the medicine is not present to you, then cut into the artery if it opens, for the head of it recedes; and stop the bleeding.
And take a strip of flax, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other day;
if the bleeding stops, that's good; if not, then treat him as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
and the stopping of bleeding is not hindered in many dispositions for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm ligament.
The pulse of the vein in the middle helps as much as it treats blood from above the head and below the belly. because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary about the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply in front, and he finds the nerve, and it swells up and the wound is hindered, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you cut into the wound with an iron like a scythe; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The pulse of the cephalic helps, which treats blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to treat in puncturing the olive vein or the myrtle vein, for it is the most safe of all veins, because there are no nerves or arteries below.
However, it is necessary to seek the lighter place and do not trouble anything if one does not take hold at first time, and one begins again; and by chance the places swell up in some men, when one does not take hold at first time, but it does not trouble anything. The quality of the pulse is according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about healing, is that healing is not most important except for preserving health,
and to avoid diseases from coming; and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are opened: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic; and one should heal at the beginning of prayer time in spring, and after eating in autumn and winter, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should heal on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The healing that is administered for diseases has no fixed hour or time, but only when need arises by day or night, at all hours and in every moment.
and it is not necessary to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant except until the seventh month. And one should not heal those who have passed 60 years of age.
And when anyone wants to be healed, however it may be, then it is necessary that he purge the intestines with a light clyster. if he has a great many foul humors retained, so that the veins do not draw off the superfluities from the intestines, which are hurtful to the principal members;
nor does one heal who is too fat from eating meat, or drunk, until they are free of it, nor those with dropsy.
and beware when healing after colic passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequenting with women, and traveling, watching, and fasting, and all that comes from the whole virtue, or from some part of the arm or body;
then subtlely separate the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter or take a bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtlety the blood,
and heal from the vein of the kidneys around the third time, as we have said;
and guard that day from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
and be pleased and joyful, and let the healer be more high than he who is being healed, and wipe the arm two or three times.
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
and then wipe the place with hands, until the veins swell, and one can feel it;
then moisten the healer's hand with a small amount of old oil, then place his left thumb on that vein below the place where he wants to heal. so that the vein does not fall and fail when struck. For there are veins that flow like cords to the healer, and some that are full of windiness. so that when one puts the oil on it, it draws back the oil, and cannot open up the vein, and thus is one of those.
and if it is to open the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the surgeons be aware of these things.
And if the vein works at the first time, that's good; if not, then it recommences a little below or above quickly, unless the lump is swollen.
And if the lump is swollen and the patient is alarmed, then let it last one or two days and do not bind the arm yet: in case an abscess forms; do not put him in the bath, then recommence the treatment if it pleases him;
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it won't bleed as much as you see, then trust in that very same wound to bleed freely altogether;
and work a little quickly, as long as the lump is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the lump swollen, then do not recommence the treatment, and put a little bit of olive oil on top; for it lightens the body's blood, and is good in this swelling that the oil lies.
and thus administer the oil in each treatment that you treat veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes a triangle and a bow from the eyes, when it is put on the lump; thus subtlety of blood and separation occurs when it is too large.
And if a big abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not treated except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, so hasten, and put on the lump a damp sponge in water and a little warm oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains at the lump after some days with any blackness or greenish color, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with vinegar, poultice, or similar.
And many times an abscess and appearance of the treatment of the basilica occur: put then your hand on it, and if you find the lump soft to the compression of the hand, that is that bad appearance. Therefore do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance it may cut off the flow of blood from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the lump, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting by extraction, to make the wound wider and have wide bleeding.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let it heal little by little and often, and it should be treated by cutting across, not piercing.
and this manner of treatment is safe from the decoration of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than the treatment of the long or the wide.
And for one whose body needs the treatment, it is necessary to give him moist bread in apple juice; if he is overheated, then treat the blood three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, then mix before the treatment moist bread in a mixture of musk syrup or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he vomits after the treatment, after the flow of much blood, then it is necessary that he drinks broth of beef and a subtle, scented syrup.
and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of swooning, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to flex his arm and be healed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And if he wants to flex his arm after the first treatment, and he has a strong body, then he heals in about 7 hours after the first treatment, or around the ninth hour.
And if he wants to be healed from another part, then he should be treated again on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood inside the body that is already overheated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening so that it reaches the palate. then you will fulfill all the conditions of treatment, and put your hand on the pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come instead of healing. and this happens many times, when the surgeon is negligent;
and it is not necessary when you see the arm separated, and blood flowing out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on top; nor if it is crooked, should he stretch his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let him heal the second time; or you will put at the tip of the flow, until the blood that has been congealed at the opening of the vein issues forth, and put on one little bit of oil mixed with water, and press on lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, then let him bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein within the arm is treated at the location of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the abscess becomes red.
then it is tied gently, so that the vein appears well, then he is treated across, not lengthwise or widthwise.
and be the opening wide, and be treated well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it's in summer, then do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts more in winter than in summer;
and the wound of this vein is more safe than all other veins, for it has no artery or nerve.
The wound on the thumb side of the right hand is good against all liver diseases, and this is how:
strain the hand, and soak it in hot water until the swelling subsides, so that it can be seen. and if the wound is across, and you cover it entirely with a cloth, then nothing will trouble it;
and don't go too far in depth, for the nerves are underneath all this denuded flesh,
and then put the hand back in hot water, if the wound is frozen on the skin and cannot emerge.
And when you have bled out as much as is necessary, then put oil and gall on the vein to speed up the healing, and do this for each one.
The wound on the left hand is good against mouse disease, and do everything in the same way as I told you for the right hand.
The wound on the soles of the feet is good against all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of urine, and disease of the reins, and hips, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its wound is that the patient dips their foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it bleeds. and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from there many veins go.
heal then the largest vein or the one at the ankle, which is most valuable.
And if you heal it above the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below, and cut across as when sewing; and let the scar be even.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the wound needs to be cleansed the first time, then repeat the second time above a little bit, for the flesh is salty; do not fear the nerves, as we have said, and do this with the soles of both feet equally.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its wound is good against the pain of the backside when it is for hot blood.
And the quality of its wound is that the patient enters or bathes, and stretches above the ankle 4 fingers while twisting.
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and across. and is more valuable than covering it, for the flesh is sound, and it is much recovered in four or five days.
and is more valuable than covering it, for the flesh is sound, and it is much recovered in four or five days. And if you don't believe it, then heal any vein that opens at the back of the foot or towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let the blood run as you see fit, and then loosen the bandage, and put on a cloth and tighten it; it is now healed.
(I'll start translating again)
Leeches are made from horns, or earth, or glass; and leeching is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this leeching that is done without piercing is done in two ways: either it is with fire, or without fire;
and two others in the two sides of the neck, and the leech below the chin; and the leech on the two shoulders, and the leech above the hips; and the leeches in the two arms, and the leeches in the two legs; and the leeches of the two ankles; and this leeching does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and therefore it is not weakened by any means, just as one makes an incision into a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, whether with fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for habituations, then we should administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
for there are those who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and there are those who suffer from repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are those who suffer from a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and redden with blood; and there are those who dream, and see by night's blood and hurt and dead and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The purging of the menses helps with the swelling of the head which comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this should be done after the evacuation of all the body.
and this leeching is in place of the purging of the cephalic.
and it is not necessary for those who have a cold complexion to use this, or those who have catharrics, because this does them great harm;
and therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use this, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who recover from this often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the leech a little lower by the fear of forgetfulness.
The leeching in the neck is in place of the purging of the head and the cephalic, and therefore it is good for the constriction of the belly. and to bursting of the channel of the womb, and to all, and to repletion;
and it is necessary to push it a little bit, for if it holds too tightly, it will bring forgetfulness or swelling of the stomach and heart.
The leechings on the two sides of the neck are good for headaches, and obtalmies, and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth.
and it is in place of the purging of the cephalic; and it is necessary that you instruct the servant to put his hand on top while placing it, so that he does not touch the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
The leechings below the chin are good for mouth diseases, and for corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of purgings of the two lips.
The leechings on the shoulders are good for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
The leechings on the ribs are as good as those on the three veins of the arm. for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the servant not to pierce too deeply in front, for the flesh is thin there, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
The leech that is on the backside is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the leech be large, and made of earth, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break through; and it could make great wounds.
The leeches on the legs clearly purge, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are good for old pains in the reins, and the kidneys, and the bladder, and remove the flowers; and they are in place of the two shins, and the two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, and cause numbness in many dispositions.
The way to apply the leech is that you should first put it empty, and then suck in a temperate manner, and place it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the spot red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then pierce, and remove the leeches, and take note of the bodily disposition, for there are those who have thick skin, and clear pores: therefore it is necessary to prick only once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to make a fine opening for the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood a little at a time, we only need to do so once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart; and if the blood is thick, we prick deep, and the end result is that the veins are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you anoint the spots where the leeches are with oil that is appetizing and dissolving: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with pumpkin seed oil.
and if it is in winter, with oil of balm, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balsamic oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
And if one is being treated for tender skin and large pores, there is no need to apply oil.
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with water of red vinegar, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porphyry, or another similar one.
And that person who has much moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities should rise with old wine, or water of sage, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not necessary to apply a poultice before the bath or after the bath, but rather an hour or two hours after the bath; and do not sleep at all after the purging.
and it is necessary for him to be warned when he should purge and when he is purged. And beware of those who are being treated are choleric, and the skin is too rough and inflamed. so it is necessary for him to take cold things, such as green grapes and endive and lettuce at ease, and similar things.
and boiled meats, and the flesh of kid, and moist game.
And that person who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine of middle age, which is between old and new, and boiled meats, and boiled fowl, and small game birds.
and the day when he will purge, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men sometimes treacle or musk at the time of purging, or afterwards, in order to comfort the main members; and let it be subtle and thin, but it is not necessary that those who are hot should drink it.
The poultices that are applied without striking pain are those that are applied on the liver, and on the kidneys, and podagra, and on the belly and the navel and the reins and the hip, for these members do not tolerate being struck with blows.
and one does this only to draw blood from member to member. as we do on the breasts when the milk is flowing; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply poultices on the belly and navel to reduce the swelling.
and it removes the pain when there is an abscess or a stone, and it removes by its attractive power either the abscess or dislodges the stone from its place.
and thus it does when one applies it on the liver and kidneys when there is retained flatulence.
and these poultices are administered empty to suck up as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
as in cases of catarrah, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with hot water or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
The shape of the poultice administered at fire is this:
And it has two fingers of width and half a palm in depth, and on the border around the middle one small perforation, just as for pushing in a needle.
and it is of earth, softened beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the member.
and in the middle a bar of earth or iron, for putting a candle inside.
and there are both large and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and for thin people than for fat ones.
And one should thus apply this poultice to the member:
take a candle of wax or a linen thread, and put it inside the poultice across the bar that is inside the poultice, so that the light may be at the bottom of the poultice and not burn the patient.
and then put it on the member, and have the two fingers on the perforation that we said, so that when one wants, the steam may go out, and remove the poultice.
and take the linen thread as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
In the poultice then which is administered in cases of catarrah, it has no bar or perforation, and is applied only when it is full of water, and is put on the member just once.
and that's the shape:
Withoutuses are applied only in places where one cannot apply poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on bare areas of skin, such as the head or neck, and other similar ones.
and the quality of the user is that when you find withoutuses that are in sweet waters free from putridity, then take them.
and put them into fresh water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cleansed with wine and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and apply the withoutuses.
and when they are full and firm, if it is a place where one can apply a poultice, then do so, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, then lift the place gently with water, very well, and then stretch it;
and if the place is healing too close to the body of the withoutuses, then wet a linen cloth with cold water and apply it, until the withoutus are shrunk.
and if the withoutus are multiplied, then apply vitriolized oil, or gall, and similar things, until it is shrunk.
or you put half a handful of peeled peas on the place and leave them until they dry out at the place, which will now be shrunk.
and if you need more, then take other withoutuses.
And if the withoutus do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the withoutus come out. and then apply them and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry up.
and when you see that they are falling, then powder on a little bit of alum and powdered silk, or ash, so that they will now stick.
This begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a treatment for fracture and desiccation.
Here is the translation:
and therefore is estranged the art in our land, for I never found a good one;
and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are brought forth, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old men.
or if the time is not very cold or too hot; and mixed cholers, that is to say cold humors, such as wind, and hare's fat, and does not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and does not fill himself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt of hot aposteme, or spreading of matter to the member; then let the patient return to his previous government which he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a good nourishment, or he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and belly of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and rich wine, and similar things. For with good nourishment, the muscles are restored more quickly and the break is healed sooner.
And know that the broken bones of old men and the decrepit do not recover or heal well according to their nature because of the shrinkage of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but take no care, reset on the broken bone .i. strong ligaments that bind and join the member together, until it is strengthened as before; and do not leave his work undone, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with thick meats, such as we have said.
And know that breaks are diverse in many ways.
For a break of the head is another thing than a break of the breast or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks. For there are breaks that occur by twisting, and others by bending, such as the cutting of a quill to write.
For there are breaks that occur by twisting, and others by bending, such as the cutting of a quill to write. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with all a small split.
And each kind has its own method, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings it into place;
and the break of the bone is known by the fact that the joint is twisted, and appears well by inspection, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor sound on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there is a break;
but it can well have twisting, or splitting, or small break. So you must not move it by hand, but put on medicines that come after this, and then restrain it subtly.
And know that the break that occurs by twisting, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary now to put them in equal alignment, so that hot aposteme may not come.
and if hot aposteme comes, then leave it alone for a day or two, until the aposteme is appeased; then put it in alignment with the joint that you can do easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of one is more easy than the restorations of those who have pieces; then restrain, as is necessary after this.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and they are separated into two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is small members, or by two strings, or by one string and at your hand;
and set the member in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then reset by all means the additions to their places at the joint, as far as you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then set it beautifully and do not restrain it too much, nor press it as those who bring forth hot aposteme and contraction in the member through their work do, as we have often seen.
And when the member is in place, then chastise well the patient so that they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, or turning, or in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a state that it feels no pain;
For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a state that it feels no pain; and take care that it is set straightly, lest twisting come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are as I am telling you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: then it is necessary to wrap them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: then it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, because the wide bandages encircle the entire great member and restrain it evenly from all parts, so that there is no crease.
then wrap it around with light poultices, three or four turns according to the member, and restrain your hand somewhat on all the bandage, then go above the break and restrain less, so that the break may separate a little from the break.
and soften the bandage little by little, until you take a great part of the healthy joint, then take another bandage and wrap it around again above the broken joint.
then go back to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then put between the bandages are woven strips of linen or cloths, until they are all even, then tie everything above with one bandage, and then place well-made stakes on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing for the abscess hot, which removes the swelling, and leaves it thus for some days.
Then strain the stakes on top, and they should be of one-quarter of a well-hoofed oxhide, or of fir wood which is used to make cleats, or of palm saplings, and according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the stake which one puts on the breakage is a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
and be also as long as it needs for the member of smallness or largeness;
then strain on top of the stakes just as you did in the first layer, then tie above with a thread well, just as in the first layer above the breakage;
tighter on top, then looser; and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft flax.
for if the thread is too thick, it is as if I want to do works of fools who make their bands from twisted linen cords, and that is a great error, for the band cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not need at all to have between each stake less than two fingers' breadth.
And if the patient is injured by the points of the stakes after the straining in their own flesh, then put under them strips of linen or wool, so that he may not be hurt.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will say the treatment hereafter.
And know that it does not need to strain on all the members that are broken on the first day. For when the members are great, it does not need to put stakes on them more than after five or seven days, or more according to your security about the abscess that may happen afterwards.
and behold here the manner of ancient ointments to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a plenty of eggs, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common manner of the ointment restoring the breakage in many dispositions, and indeed for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of ointment restoring breakage and dislocation and twisting: take 10 parts of gallnut and ladanium and hellebore and asafoetida and gum arabic; 5 parts of myrrh and aloes; 8 parts of aloe; and grind into powder, and mix with a plenty of eggs; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this ointment, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many people.
Another manner of ointment that is worth for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 8 parts; acacia, 6 parts; Armenian balm, 10 parts, and grind well, and mix with water or a plenty of eggs, and administer.
Another manner of ointment for joints and bones that have left their places, and soothes the pain that follows, and the usage is to cut away the bone, and breakage: take new wool, and soak it in ale and cooked oil, and put it on the joint. This ointment does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removes the pains.
Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and earthy leaves of poplar, and grind them together, and make an ointment.
Another manner of ointment for the restoration of broken bones and to ease the remaining part of the abscess. Take root of wormwood, camomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour, each one a part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the members are inflamed, then mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another manner of ointment more powerful than the first, when abscess lasts during the restoration of the member. Take roots of wormwood, and flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and safflower, and flowers of violets and camomile, each one a part; and grind, and mix with salt water or sweet water or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything more than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else besides, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of ointment that is worth for lesion and pain: take mugwort and human hair or bird feathers, and wormwood, and mix them equally, and grind them, and make an ointment and a bandage.
And then remove the bandage a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, do not remove it for several days.
And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten and remove the bandage, and take away the ointment now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge it into water, and lift up the joint, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and tie it with a nut, until you are sure of hot abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member settle, and be removed the pain, then resume the subtle bandage and a little ointment, and do not strain it so hard as before; and proceed with subtlety until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is gone and redness, pain, and swelling are all removed from it, and you need to use ointment and bandage again, then resume, as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we said comes to the member, then do not release it until three days or four days or five days or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the bone hardens, and approaches the adjustment to the flesh.
Then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come. Then heat the water bath then, every time you loosen it, and let it be for each third day, and slacken it a little.
By this work, then, the nourishment is cut off from the member, and hasten what foolish doctors do, that leave the member twisted: it is bad, and it is poor work, and I see nothing else but to tire and toil correctly.
of various types of breaking There are many ways of breakings, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined;
For there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way down to the sacrum which is below the bone, as does a hatchet or a club; and therefore this manner of breaking is called "hachure".
Or the sword strikes the bone above sense of piercing, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound of these two breakings is great or small.
And if there is a stuck percussive blow, or a splitting or collar bone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persisting break that approaches just to the tendon which is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound is healed in the bone as fine as a thread, and it is a small splitting, and therefore this break is called "capillary";
and if the wound is made or by piercing with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the bone piece go down, and it becomes loose like when blacksmiths heat metal on their forges; so the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have or had moist bones, like children's heads;
and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislocated as they are, and I will speak of them in their place.
And we know all ways of breakings by stripping away from them, and inquiring into tests, and through the corrupted flesh that is above.
The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then opens up the black break.
In the treatment of the break, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of gall, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar things in more or less dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unendurable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounds come to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day if you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the tendon below the bone will be corrupted, and the accidents we have said will come.
And if the break of the bone comes just to the tendon that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the split part thus: and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can.
and if the bleeding of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess forms, then provide the aid that is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil. and let the wound rest until the abscess is appeased and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut at the narrow cutting before, and it is the form:
And then I put another cutting larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have various cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron end; and work lightly, so that you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you can administer cuttings with tareers, not too deep, so that they do not go beyond the bone of the test, and should have above the point a margin or one circle, which does not allow the point to go beyond the bone; and you will need several, so that each comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have tareers for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of tareers:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one tareer on the bone, and turn to your right until you know that the bone is pierced; then place the tareer somewhere else a little bit later, and do this all around, then cut at the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertu, and make it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have, such as tenacula, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or sacrum.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you take the aperture that remains of the bone to all one another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more taut and subtler than the other incisors.
and if there remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of work is that which Galen says, which is more sure; and he affirms it very strongly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears more clearly; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place below the head of this lenticular incisor, which has this form:
And do not cut from one side only, and the parts are aligned in two directions, so that the cutter is directed towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chop around the bone and take good care of the cloth that is below.
If it is applied to the bone, so lightly scrape it, for one scrapes well without harm and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only on top, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape away the scales with a fine scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
Then use coarse scrapers first, and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
In each of the other fine and subtle cutting and breaking, it is necessary to make a case according to its direction; and this is something that is not always known by him who has put his study into this art.
And if the scab is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to injure the scab, then administer above one other linen, and do not stretch it too tight except just enough to keep the wound simply.
and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed, then loosen it and administer medicines such as lily roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicines without mordication.
and watch that the wound is soon clean, so that you do not leave a poultice, nor allow it to assemble bowe, for when bowe assembles above the cloth of the brain, they will flow and burst forth, and great harm befalls the patient; for when something biting is put on the scab, it necrotizes above.
Take heed therefore, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing bad comes but due to the medicine you have put on, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix one cloth with glue, and place it on the scab. then complete the cure in the manner of cures as is necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one only by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but rather becomes inflamed or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you make a small hole or puncture in the neck, and put that breakage inside your finger's index, and at the back by the way out, until the neck returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the head of a rod, rather large.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed, then bind at the head of the neck with linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Or you bind another part from the other side, if there is a break there; and let the bands be so large that they fill the punctures of the neck.
And some restorers say that one should moisten the bands with butter and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a mixture of hen's egg white and mill powder; then leave the band on until the bone is hard and the cartilage is tough.
And sometimes one binds the neck with goose down instead of bands, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and keeps the breakage, and breathes gently through it for the patient; then do as you see.
And if an abscess appears on the neck while you are working there, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of aquilione.
And if an abscess does not appear, then put an emplaster at the back, made from sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with hen's egg white, and place it on light poultices, and do not bind the neck.
and if the break in the neck is small and it is broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this, then close the wound, and cure it with things that congeal and solidify, such as emplasters and poultices suitable for this.
and if there is no wound inside the neck, then bind it with cloth, and put poultices of flour, until he is healed.
(Note: This appears to be a title or heading, rather than a sentence to be translated)
When the lower jawbone is out of place, and there is no wound to drain, and the break is only so slight that it is not actually broken in two, except perhaps inside, then one knows this lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right side, that you insert your two index fingers into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left jawbone, then insert your two index fingers from the right hand, and press the break gently inside, and fit it to the other hand by draining, and make even.
And if the jawbone break is separated into two pieces, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until they are even.
And if the tooth movement is, or loosening, then strain them with gold or silver or silk thread, and put on top of the broken jawbone a poultice, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a large well-made nail or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and give them light foods.
And if you see that the swelling changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put on top, with mill powder mixed with a great deal of egg or wheat flour, after you have removed the poultice; and put on top a light linen cloth, and if the poultres are set, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until they are healed; many times they are healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes forth, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, take out no part of the bone that is gone; but gently remove with instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it as needed.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then sew the wound shut, if it is wide, and put on top suitable poultices to promote flesh, until they are healed.
of the strength The shoulder is broken more often than this, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is thus when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, one of whom holds the shoulder-piece which feels the broken forcele; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then make equal the break with your hands, so that the form may be as it should be, and there be no appearance or unevenness.
And if you need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your need; and stretch and lift the forcele, and strain the sphere with your hand, so that you place the break as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele forward because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatrail, and put under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow, and have the assistants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
And then address the break to your hands, and if you find it debris-filled, then it is necessary that you cut into it; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut with one of the incisors that you have; but put this instrument under the forcele to protect the synovial fluid.
and resembles a spoon, and is not at all rough, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one should be broad and the other narrow, just like the cutting of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then sew the wound, and if the cutting is small, or if you doubt that it is a hot abscess, then pack the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes forth, then moisten one cloth with rose oil, and oil of lily, and wine, and put it on top.
The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a poultice made from mill powder and a great deal of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the armpit, if you need to. Then take a very wide band of palm size, then put one double cloth on top of the bandages and poultice; then take a subtle strip three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. and put the strip on top of the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the armpit well, and under the armpit ill; and tighten each part, and when you see that the binding holds the break well, and you see clearly that the strip does not move above the broken bone, then rewrap it every day, and when the bindings loosen, then restrain them.
and make the patient sit on his backside, and put a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the shoulder high; so that the break of the forcele will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad events occur, up to 20 days.
and then reapply the poultice if you see that it is needed, and strain it and leave it so until it is restored; and it is restored in the most part within 28 days, and less to some people.
of the shoulder break
It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes swollen and does not go away; nor is it hot except by touch; so dress it according to the shape of the break, and bind it according to its natural form, in all the ways you can. Then put on the swelling powder made with mill dust and a great deal of egg, and light bandages, and put on one double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is hair growing from any part of the shoulder, use that hair to tie it with linen bandages so that the strip remains steady. Then wrap it tightly in a great bandage so that the strip does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and each time it becomes loose, rewrap it, and put the same strip back if it has strayed from its place, and have the patient sit on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is completed, then unbind it, and be careful, for it's not a bone that becomes loose easily.
And if a piece of the bone is bent forward and points downwards at the joint, then straighten it up and the bone, and do what we have said about calming down an abscess.
Of the breaking of the rib.
The rib is sometimes broken in the middle, but this is rare; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, then it inclines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the fractures in the broken rib, and it is felt to be so.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and gently adjust to make all equal in every way that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply poultices and bandages over the subtle salt, or other lightweight material, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it on the broken rib so that it does not move; and turn the bond around to the back, and tighten it gently, and reward every hour by loosening, and if it becomes loose, then tighten again; and if it is necessary to release it, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the joint, or pain or abscess, then hurry and release it, and remove the poultice, and address what has come forth in ways of cures; then reapply the poultice, and tighten until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the ribs.
Know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in large people after the back and at the top inside, and they do not bend except because they are brittle; and it is known well by investigation on the back.
And the restoration is that you set the break in place as it should be. And then apply a poultice and tighten with a cloth if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and stitching, just as with pleurisy, for the bone punctures the membrane; and breathes faintly, and all and vomits a great abundance of blood, and this is a grievous condition, and the ancients have put great ingenuity into it.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that fill the belly, in order to push the break backward.
We do not do this except when abscesses hot and present arise, if they have come. And if it has come, then it is healed.
And some of us say that you should apply poultices to the joint to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the poultice may attract superfluities to the joint due to weakness.
And some of us say that you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to set equal the breathing around, then take care of the treatment of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which punctures the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open on top of the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to place an instrument below one to ward off the synfasc; and then you must cut into the bone, and pull gently, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure with poultices until he is healed. And if hot abscesses come, then apply wet cloths in rose oil on top of the bone; and treat the bone as needed for abscess, and be very cautious about the ribcage where it should be, until he is healed.
Of the breaking of the neck.
Sometimes comes a break in the bone of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and also to the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, it does not feel anything. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they are numb and feel well when they are pressed and punctured, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one applies treatment there.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and excretion without volition; and when one has been soviened on their belly, there is excretion without volition. And when he is soviened on his back and wants to rest, then he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not strive in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is easier.
And the cure is that you apply oil of roses or egg yolk oil to the spine if there is hot abscess, until it is calmed down; then put on a poultice that comforts and dries, and tie it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed. And if some bones become loose, it is necessary to cover on top of the joint; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then apply ointment allowing fat, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hollow", if there is something loose in the joint, put your pouchet from your left hand into your right hand to your power, then apply poultice and cloth on top, if you need it; then tighten it, and if there are loose bones, do the same, and remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the hip bone.
Rarely does the hip bone break, and if it does, then it is not much of a diminishment at the top; and it bends long and declines downwards, and comes to the patient with pain at the joint, and puncturing, and swelling what is broken.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, so that you are above the breakage; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then put equal to that break, until it is in its natural figure.
And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, so lie down the patient on their stomach until the restoration of that break is apparent. And when you have set it equal, so place on the poultice, then place on a piece of cedar or hawthorn, and hold the break in place so that it does not move; and apply the remedy below the ribs until the parts are equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their right side or back.
And if the abscesses are cool and come forth, do not touch it, until the abscess is cooled down, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration and hold it as necessary, unless there be some bad accident; and that's the way.
of the shoulder break
The shoulder is what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: of which one is that you take one piece of wood smooth with a groove, in this shape:
And tie the two heads together with two strings, and bend them upwards, and have the patient sit on one seat; then throw the broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to rest, and has in it a groove of wood, then bend it above some heavy thing or let the attendants stretch it downwards; then place the splint so that the break is equal to his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hat or headrest, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two attendants, one to hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other to hold below at each string, and stretch each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold one string below the break, and above the break, and stretch each one of the attendants to his part. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one string in the middle under the seat, and another towards the neck, under the break; and also if the break is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put one string slightly, without labor, until the break is equal on the arm and on the neck; then set the break even as it should be, and hold it, unless abscesses come forth.
And if abscesses come forth, then do not hold it until 7 days, and place a moist cloth in a warm place and in rose oil, until the abscess is cooled down; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you put the poultice on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and wrap with a bandage, and hold on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and place on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two spacers between each splint, and have each splint so large that it passes over the break three fingerbreadths from each side; then hold on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less distant.
And if you see the setting of the splints and the straining, as we have said, in the case that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days the binding, lest inflammation or swelling comes to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If so, direct it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not remove the binding until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and place beneath the shoulder a cushion made of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or night to see that the figure of the broken member does not move, or become loose the bindings; if it is directed by the power of medicine, and give them food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when it begins to regain, let it be thick. And it is custom for the shoulder and leg to be reset within 40 days from the start; and then one must remove and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the place. And if the stricture is foul and swollen, then wait until the binding is removed after 1 day or 2 months.
of the break in the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicle", from which one is small and is the one that attaches to the pouch; and the other is large and is the one that is below, towards the little finger. By chance, break only the large fossicle, or the small one, or by chance both together.
When the small fossicle is broken, the restoration is light and easy; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it's the small fossicle that is broken alone, then it must be slightly extended and set even.
And if it's the large fossicle, then it must be held more firmly; and stretch it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient crossed over himself, with a cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the attendants' arm to the part below his hand, or to one string, and another attendant above. And then put it into its equal shape, according to its best form.
And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that are loose and cannot be held by force, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and use an osteum, as we have said before.
And if the break has a wound, which I spoke of in the singular chapter, then take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses appear, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and bind the poultice gently above, until the hot abscess is calmed. And then remove the poultice, and put on an emplastrum with powder from the mill and a lot of egg; then apply the splints, and have the splint of the break as strong as possible, and slightly wider than the others; and know that it should have 6-8 splints or more, depending on the disposition: whether the break is in one bone or two bones; and strain more above the break than other parts, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the drapes above the break be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the filaments that are strained be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the ligament after some days. And if some bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you bathe the member with hot water until those itchings are appeased; and let the member not rest too tightly. And then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones relaxed, and similar things, so address them.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little bit and leave it thus for some days until the swelling comes, and then bind.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not bind him for twenty days or so, and then let him put his hands on his neck, and may his necks be even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the bruise of the hand
Know that behind the hand and in the fingers many bruises occur, and there is no other way than to bend them many times.
And when the palm of the hand is bruised or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed-legged and sit straight before him evenly; then place his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the broken bones, and make them equal to the mirrors, so long as they are well joined; and apply the poultice and bandages if abscesses do not come, then put a bandage according to the size of the limb; and be wrapped in one fold of linen.
And if the bruise is on the back of the palm around the belly of the hand, make a sphere of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it to his bruised hand; then bind it with a long piece of cloth, and let the bandage be as thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is necessary.
And if the bruise is on the outside, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another one underneath in the hand, so that the fingers be open and straight, then tie all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
And if the bruise comes to any of our fingers, if it's the middle ones, so make them equal, as is necessary; and bind with the hand, and if you see that you put a straight small bandage to lift the bruise, and don't move; and if the bruise is on other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, so make them equal, and bind with the healthy finger that comes next; or tie all together in one holding, as is good, or put a bandage on top, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot apostemes, and provide for what comes, as I have said.
of the broken shin
The shin bone is many times broken, and it can be well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is to bind one bandage on top of the break, and another one underneath. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister's bandage to his equal part; and it is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the shin, then one bandage should be towards the wrist and the other bandages below the break. And also if it is near the knee, and then put the bandages below the knee, and extend downwards; then make the mirrors equal to both hands, so long as they are according to their natural figure, and then apply the poultice, and bind, if hot apostemes do not come.
And if there is a hot aposteme, then let it be appeased and then return to your work and your care; the bandage is made in this same manner. It is necessary that you wrap a bandage on top of the break, two layers of doubled cloth, and leave out any superfluity; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the calf, and tie one long thread between the shin and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the shin the bandage, then put bandages on top of the break, and place one bandage on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the shin with soft cloth to equalize the binding; then begin to bind firmly three or four turns around the break; and as you go above the break, and less tighten; then take out two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the shin, and tie three bandages that are on top, then return below to the end of the thread, until you come to the foot; and bind it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless there comes aposteme or swelling or any similar thing.
And if there is something, then unbind it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, then it is necessary to sew, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the flesh, and pull through; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the shin is broken in such a way that one puts bandages on it, as in the arm and shoulder; nevertheless, in this restoration made, the patient does not stumble.
And know that the shin is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the diversities of complexions.
of the swelling of the knee
Know that in the swelling of the knee there is often bruising, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is just a small split or a pit, and has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and this one knows well.
And the restoration is to put equal what is torn to its fingers, so long as it can be assembled; then apply the poultice, and place a rounded bandage if you need it, and bind it as is necessary; then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breakages, such as hot apostemes and similar things; then put what each accident requires, until it is healed.
of the break of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; and all breaks are alike as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is done entirely.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen clearly; and it turns downwards. Then extend it, put it in place, and tie the splints equally; but always, if the break is ugly and there are many pieces, let the extension be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of smooth wood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the ankle; then wrap in four places with a bandage above and below, and tie it securely in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some give one pole of the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and put the leg in order to prevent movement, and properly make what is in the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; then cure it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and two or three pieces, and in most cases it does not exceed more than four dispositions.
And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if it were going to walk; and then place your own foot alongside theirs, where the bones are lifted up; then press down until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and below put a small tablet with two full bags of bread, then bind the foot tightly, after you have wrapped cloth around it, and other things that you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the toes broken, then restore them as we have said about the fingers; then put a splint on each broken toe according to its length, and make it a little wider; then place that tablet under the foot as I said, and bind it tightly; and if there are two or three or more toes broken, then put a splint on each toe according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the tablet under the foot; and let it be so that the belly of the foot holds it well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, as we have said; and treat each accident according to its need.
of the breaking of the bones of the wrist
When the natural bone of a woman is broken, make her sit with legs apart, then incline her to the part of the back and hold her by the hindquarters; then fill the wound with cotton, and put as much in as one stook; then lift up the woman, and raise the back little by little, and then the cotton will jump until it comes to the entrance of the natural bone, and the bone will return with the stook; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or around: the break will be restored; and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cord to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the natural bone; then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is emptied inside: the natural bone will return to its place; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it in this way as we have said about the bones of the hand; and these breakages are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into them and understands my book. For the break signifies the right path to restoration in multiple dispositions: understand then.
In the arm, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and pour it into the arm; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed quickly.
of breakage with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with an open wound, whether it be large like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to heal now, as the wounds that we have said bear witness.
And if the wound is healing, but then becomes infected with vinegar, and you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, lest abscesses form and do not come.
And if abscesses form, then leave the restoration alone for nine days, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the surface of the skin, it is necessary that you place it in slight extension with your hands.
And if the extension is not suitable for you to put in equal parts with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight pieces or as much length as the wound requires; and it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, according to what he needs for each treatment of a breakage; and let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be straight ahead, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason it is necessary that the curved clamps be placed on top of the apparent bone; and wrap it once, until it returns to its place, and let the two be equal in front of each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut off the top of the bone, so that the instruments have possession.
And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it off with an instrument suitable for this purpose, or a saw or chisel, to your ability; and then ream out what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So make sure it is in its place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic vinegar, and properly apply it if it is at ease; and do not put cerote or any other greasy substance on the wound unless you want to bring infection and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut off the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; and many times this has happened to foolish surgeons, and they have brought harm or death or corruption upon the patient at times; and be the bandages softer and more gentle than those used for other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, and if the wound is bad or large,
And it is necessary that you stretch the member two times a day, morning and evening, until it is fixed and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs are aligned in such a way that the bow string runs down lightly.
And if it happens that way for several days, and it cannot heal but instead swells again, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these disjointed pieces that bring forth that pain.
And if an abscess comes to the surface or another manner of corruption, so it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter before this. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, as with the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar ones of the great members, do not pull it out at all, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it bursts; perhaps it will come out by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of boils that come on the swelling
We often see after the healing of the breakage, especially when it is near the jointure, and it is a bad sight to behold the shape of the member; and by chance the members cannot perform their natural works.
Then take care if the flesh is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, aconite, and similar others, either taking one of these things or all together, and mixing it with a stiptic wine or with an abundance of egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and strain it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and begin another, until the nodations are removed; or you strain it over a piece of cloth well made; for the properties of the cloth are that they remove all swellings from above the members; and if the nodation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut it off, and make the excess appear; or give it to any barber until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the breakage of the bone is restored and remains after the member weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one reason being because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should be; or because there were too many bindings, and could not allow the nourishment to come to the member; or because of excessive inflammation; or because of too great movements, nor in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and cause their body to be soft, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths, and give them joy and comfort; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and often washes with cold water, until the nourishment flows into the member; and brings it back to its natural figure.
of the twisted member after healing
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is apparent, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say that one should break the member all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these deeds are blamed, and bring great evils, and perhaps death; however, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, so it is necessary to remove them with hot water, or cook mollifying herbs, such as nettle leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make one molificating plaster, like well-made dyaquilon, and take the poultice of nettle, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take fatty figs, and grind them with rye flour, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And at no time is the nodation removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with many moist things. And have gentle movements on the member every hour.
And if the tortuosities are hardened and indurated like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then cover it just up to the bone, with a subtle incision; and put careful attention and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, so it is necessary now to bring it back into place.
For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and perhaps it will be reset with pains at the joint; therefore do not move it to its place when it is swollen: many times this brings on shame and other pains;
However, when this happens, make the patient whole again, then leave them alone until the abscesses are appeased; then bathe the member with hot water and oil, then gently stretch it, and cure each member as the remedy comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
of the jawbone
There is often a case where the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are slightly pulled out of their place and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held in, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through many gentle procedures.
And if it is complete and accomplished, so it is necessary that you stretch it hastily, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and put the fingers of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be ready to make equal, and command the patient to soften their jawbones and move them from all parts.
And the fingers put it back in place, until it returns to its natural position.
And if returning is difficult, even when it's both jawbones together, then bathe them with hot water and oil until they relax somewhat; do not delay in the return, as we have said.
And when they are brought back even, and the patient's mouth closes well with a sense of softening, so put moist cloths on them in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft threads.
and the patient sleeps on their back, and their legs are between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he make an effort to swallow, but takes light food until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are numb.
and then ease off what he wants lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth to eat or drink, until the jawbone is well numb and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not converted back to their natural state, then fevers and sore habits ensue, and possibly also bowel looseness, and possibly also vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a peril; and many times death comes to him who has it, within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the chest within its continuity and from the breastbone, and is dislocated sometimes to the back, and it is well felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies thus on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses the joint firmly onto your palm, and it will return; then apply the poultice and bandage it, and tighten.
and the head of the shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate once, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the poultice and bandage it, and tighten, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
and thus also is brought back the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: how one is that it dislocates at the lower part of the socket; and the second is at the breastbone; and possibly also at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inwards for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for they leap forth hastily; in those who have enough flesh, it leaps forth slowly and returns slowly.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the socket, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear distinction. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket at the touchstone the top of the shoulder, as if it were an ox; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move with any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touchstone.
and this manner of dislocation is not to be cured, unless it is new or if the child is sick.
And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts their fingers below the socket, and lifts the jointure forcibly upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, stretches it up high, then puts it back down; thus it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within eight days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister gently and soothingly applies, as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and brings them.
then the patient should be placed on their back, and a piece of wool linen put below the socket, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror's heel on top of the piece, and lift the top of the shoulder correctly, and guide the patient's hand.
and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see that it resets in this manner:
and that you make someone who is larger than the patient be present; and stand facing the side, and push their shoulder under the socket of the patient, and lift the socket up high, so that the patient hangs in mid-air. and another minister guides the patient's hand downwards towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then let them hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation comes back now.
And reset it in another way: and is that one long poker is stuck in the earth, so that the head of the shoulder is as steady as a pistol, and not too big nor too small. then be placed below the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient being held by the long wooden beam; then their hand should be stretched down to the other side firmly, and the jointure will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod of two arms long and three fingers wide, which has the head rounded so as to easily enter into the socket below the shoulder, in this shape:
then bind soft cloths on top of the head of the wooden beam so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it below the socket of the patient; and stretch one arm above the long beam, and tie the aid above the beam, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm above a shelf of large width, and have the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the jointure will return now.
And when it is returned, in whatever way that may be, then it is necessary that you put below the socket a ball of wool evenly, then apply the poultice around with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all the shoulder and around, then strain below the socket gently, and turn the cloth on the poultice, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he be massaged little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage him more after five or seven days, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, it is sound.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three places, as it is written in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and after seven days it slips out of place, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is near the breast and armpits or behind is caused by pushing or stretching with hands, and another treatment should be administered; and care for it until it is sound.
And if after the healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take many baths until that swelling is alleviated and the member returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is displaced in points and returns to those points; and it is displaced from all sides, both before and behind, and the dislocation is not repositioned, for one sees it well and feels it well; and displace it according to each figure. And when you join the diseased shoulder with the sound one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is roughened, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it before the abscess grows there, for if the abscess were to grow there, it would be hard to bring back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back at all, especially when it is behind; and this dislocation is worse than the others, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
And the restoration is when it is such that you can bring it back, that you stretch out his hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread, and the hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above and below, and push the joint into its sockets together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and pushes it to the root of the palm onto the shoulder that is out of place.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two people should stretch out the arm, and hold it for two people, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double thickness of cloth long and wide.
and when the mirror joins the joint to its hand, it anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint firmly until it returns.
and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with some egg on top, and hold it firmly, and bend the arm at the collar of the patient, and leave it for some days, then displace it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, displace the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, renew the plaster and the bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then displace it.
And if he feels swelling after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe him and rub him gently, and press until it is soothed; or you put a layer of sheep's fat on the joint, then let it be for one day and one night, then take it off, and make him enter the bath; and when he bathes, rub the joint temperately, then put the fat back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is sound; and if you see fit, apply moist warm flaxseed with butter, and hold it in place; then he will return to his normal state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is out of place, and the return is gentle, more than other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same way that it is out of place, before the swelling subsides or an abscess grows warm.
And the setting is that you place the diseased hand on a table, and stretch out the assistants' hands, and the mirror places it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Furthermore, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table for extension and setting. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient put the back of his hand on the table, and the mirror place its hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's good.
If not, then apply soothing plasters to calm the abscesses, and leave it thus without reapplying.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot get the joint to return to its place after some days, then the twisted joint remains.
and nothing else can harm the patient except for as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; and there is no other remedy except to strain by cauterizing in this case, and perhaps it is not worth anything.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then strain and leave it for five days, then displace and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, apply warm water to it, and rub it until it is sound.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are out of place on one side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist.
then stretch out the finger, and push the dislocation into your fingers as far as it returns, then support the tip of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disconnected.
and leave it for two days, then put it back in the same way that day; and bind the joint with a cloth, as we have said, and displace it from day to day, make it move, and rebind the joint; and do this often until it is tight.
and do the same for everything else, if it is dislocated in the hand's belly, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another side.
and treatment of the hump on the back
When the hump on the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations jump out without will, nor can they hold it, and many times certain members become soft, or both hips or two arms or one.
And many times the hump moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "humpiness".
The treatment is that you will restore if humpiness has come from childhood; if there is no treatment nor healing of the whole thing.
And that which comes from falling or beatings or similar things, the ancient methods of cures with big words say, where there is no great benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the humpiness that comes at the breast before, there is no sense nor healing.
and similarly that which comes straightly in both sides, and one can only cure those that come properly to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be extended on their face in one place even, and have a bandage underneath them, so they do not hurt themselves.
then stick one spit in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the joints of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
and two assistants know the bandages, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two spits;
and be well closed, the spit as we have said, and the attendant puts their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover with this treatment, then take a three-branched staff of long length, and place it underneath the appearance, and the patient should be in position, and push the head of the staff underneath the appearance, then put the middle part of the staff on the spine; and the attendant puts their feet on the other head of the staff, and presses well, until it recovers to its place; and if you see, then do the same to the turner who turns at the hand.
And it is that you stick two spits at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet, two others, and have between each spit, above and below, a palm-sized length of esparto.
and have in each spit one hole, where the turner runs, and the spits be firmly stuck in the earth, so they do not move; and between each two spits is another turning spit, on which the bandage turns, and have in each two turners two small spits of a palm-sized length to turn the turner.
and then tie the bandage that is between the joints to the turner towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the attendants turns their turner to all the bandages, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on dry plaster with a lot of egg white, and then stop up the holes, and then take an iron plate of three fingers in length that will straighten out the humpiness and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use gentle nourishment on the patient until they are healed.
and if nothing comes in the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the iron plate that we have said before; and sometimes one must administer a piece of mallow.
and sometimes the appearance comes in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens up, so one should not have presumptions about it: by chance death might come.
of the dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come only with dislocations alone, nor does it come as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: inward and outward, and in front and back; and more inwardly than outwardly, and less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inwardly is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more the sick patient's knee than the healthy one, and the sick patient cannot double their kneecap. and it is the place that is below swollen apostemes hot, because the head of the hip comes loose.
And the sign of him to whom it happens on the outside is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well aligned according to its completion; however, he does not double his kneecap without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells with anger, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in back is that he cannot spread his kneecap, nor double it, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and is the head of the hip at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you restore if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its disposition, so there is no treatment; and it is not necessary that one have presumptions about it.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three kinds of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, stretching it inwardly and outwardly, and adjusting it to both right and left; perhaps it will recover, and there is no need for further treatment.
And if it does not recover in this way, then it is necessary that you get a strong assistant and stretch the leg strongly to two hands, or to one bandage that is tied on the kneecap. and another assistant stretches his hand above in the same manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft bandage on the hip; and another ties the head of the bandage.
and extend above and below all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains pending.
This manner of extension is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, just as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its similarity. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must instruct the patient to lift their healthy side, then place the strap on the root of the hip, and the bolt below the angle, then stretch the strap upwards towards the angle, and towards the armpit;
then take another assistant to hold their arms, and encircle the large bone of the sick hip, and stretch it out to the farthest point: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a soft strap on both heels, and on both knees, and let the sick leg be stretched one doot more than the others.
then be suspended from the head of a tree, and be above ground two arms long; then instruct one assistant to encircle the head of the hip, and let another assistant hold with the patient who encircles the hip firmly, for the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the farthest point, then let the patient lie down as we have said in one who has gilbosite, and stretch one strap over the sick leg properly, and over the shin also.
then place two spits, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick one spit between the hips of the patient in its form. and have damp cloths planted around, so that the patient does not get hurt, then stretch each assistant towards him, and the surgeon puts equal pressure on his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put on the table and press thus as we have said in gilbosite, and let the patient lie down on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I said; and put the surgeon's hand on top of the malaide angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the farthest point, it does not need to be extended downward, nor lifted up to the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip was dislocated at the farthest point, just as we have said about the position on both hips. and be on his face, and the strap stretched as we have said before, and must not press on the jointure at the table.
and it will be at a point when the patient stretches their legs, and they will be equal; then join the hips, and apply the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if it rests three or four days, then release it, and apply the poultice on top; and if you see that they are equal, then strain, just as before, and leave it for three days; then release it, and let it walk gently, until the members are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; and does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their hip, and if it does not straighten at their hip, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take their knee in your hands, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee properly; and another assistant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they straighten their leg slightly.
and apply the poultice on top, and make their leg straighten at the hip, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release; and do not trouble the patient to walk until the members are comforted.
And if the members are not at rest, then administer strong extension, just as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inwardly and outwardly.
And the sign is that the ankle is inflamed, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
the remedies are gentle, and one must stretch it gently with their hands when it is swollen only.
And when it is completely dislocated, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold firmly above the ankle on the heel.
then draw the foot to you at your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it up, and push the foot gently upwards.
and do this two times, just as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then start again with the work, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie down on their back on the ground, and place one strap firmly in the earth between their hips, and wrap damp cloths around, so that the patient does not get hurt.
then hold the hip with one assistant, and have another assistant stretch out the foot to their hands or to a strap that they tie on top of the ankle. then stretch each assistant evenly, and the straps be thus between the patient's hips to hold the patient when one is stretching.
then place the surgeon's hand equally on the dislocation, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, then apply the poultice and bandage on top, and strain properly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the straps are not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the straps become loose, then re-tighten them; then release it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for three days. and if he goes beyond this limit, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if the abscess bursts forth, it is necessary to lance it, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
you must
When the joints are dislocated, you should gently stretch them without effort, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any way bent at the back of the foot or leg, you should make the patient sit on one level plain or on .i. table altogether straight, and place your foot upon that which appears from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it recovers;
and when it is equal and there is nothing apparent, you place under the sole of the foot a board at two heels, then strain firmly, and let it be for three days, then release him; and make him rest, until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not non-presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitying and merciful and slow, nor too hasty;
and use at the beginning gentle and soothing things on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of healing; and when you see hope, then reset the limb now in its place, just as the abscess bursts forth;
and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing things to the abscess, and treat the wound with dried ointments, as it is fitting.
and if with the dislocation there is breaking and small bones separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and take care to enter into the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will move you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of thy arm and thy body. Amen
