You sons, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest in the field of medical science, assembling its fulfillment, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I have completed it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fathers except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed off, and the science is estranged.
It seems to me that I want to vivify the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other instruments of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine extended. And it is necessary for the one who takes it upon himself to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and rest, and the origin of their issue.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and little with the work; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand, if they are not careful they will fall into error and harm people; thus I have seen many of those who get involved in this science and abandon their sense and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess or swelling of a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of an old man's age, and the stone was large; if he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died within three days.
And I had called him to treat the patient, and I saw the condition of the sick person and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they touched him he would die.
And he saw another doctor who took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors, ignorant of treatment, held the break steady over the wound as they were strongly bound, and did not let the wound be touched, and thus they ended it; and he ordered that it should not be disturbed; and remained thus until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had it dislocated, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was almost lost.
And he saw another doctor who burst open an abscess that had grown proud, and then became inflamed due to the evil of his lordship.
Here is the translation:
And for this reason, third son, you are in need of knowing that the work of hands is divided into 10 divisions: it is to know where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish people cannot speak evil of you.
Take your arms in caution, and tackle your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the maladies of grievous sanity; and lay down your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolish by the mirror."
I have divided this treatise into four chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medicinal cauterization, and this chapter is organized from head to feet; and on the forms of instruments, and the iron rods for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and has the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and has the forms of instruments.
Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and from this the wisest men spoke, and agreed with each other; and I suffered few blows for their words, for I reduced length.
I say that fire cautery aids universally in every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know hot temperaments with matter, and dry temperaments without matter.
In hot and dry complexions with matter, some thought that fire cautery was of great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not effective for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Here is the translation: Because when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times by experiment.
And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine's burning cautery.
For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless named.
The burning medicines come from one member to another by allying, and bring to the sick member grief and bad healing; and thus often kills the patient.
The fires, because of their height and the goodness of their substance, do not make it unnecessary, if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I should remove the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on the time when the cauterizations should be done, and choose the opportune moments.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries which occur are often mitigated by the aid of cauterization; and also because cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasty wounds that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think anything, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for in the disease that is healthy through cautery there is no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine due to the speed of its value, and for the virtue of his work and his sign.
And it is possible that the disease comes back several times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return at all; but it happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered ways of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth. Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauteries of golden instrument are more moderate than those of iron, and did not say that they were fiercer because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and said that the handles of cautery do not make putridity, but it is not seen because I have experienced it, and found that it is seen in some homes; and golden cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they did say.
And always when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled; and if one heats it too much, they make a fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have made appear more suitable to our work.
Here I have ordered this chapter of the loin just below the feet, because it is easier to find the way.
where cauterization of olive oil is commanded to the patient
Fire cauterization is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done due to a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, ears, and for multitude of songs and pain in teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by medicine solutively modifying the head, either three or four times, according to what the strength and age and the habit of the patient can suffer; and then make the head of the patient ready.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cauterization which is called "olivare", because this is its form.
And place the sign of ink on the affected area, and make a small incision, and slowly withdraw your hand while turning it; then lift your hand slightly, and examine the affected area to see if you can see the opening; and if you do not see it, start the fire cautery again until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread, and put it in soft cotton, and place it on the affected area, and leave it for three days; afterwards put a warm poultice on it; and let it stay there until the swelling subsides; afterwards treat the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it heals.
And thus said the ancient ones, that the more one delays opening a wound, the more it festers; and for this reason, aid is delayed.
And some of them said that one should not leave the fire cautery so long that part of the opening is burned, and then reset on what is burned of the opening, and be cured.
And others said that one should leave the fire cautery on for so long, and press so hard that one would burn as large an area as the circumference of a vertoil, which women put in their fuseaux, because the humors issue forth badly; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and soothe it.
Here is the translation:
of the old pain of the head
When the entire head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, if the patient should use iris and pills that are called "cochiae", and of purging the head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we mentioned before, and it is not worth.
Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then afterwards, the cauterization below that cautery a little that we mentioned above.
After doing the cautery on each corner of the head just to the bone, as we mentioned before, and do the cautery or the place that is called "vasselz"; and it is in this way that one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those on which one does the cautery of the middle of the head, and this is the form.
for fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head pain suddenly comes, and the disease reaches up to the eye, and the head is purged with mundane medicines, and other treatments are made that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then you make cauteries according to .ij. ways, that is to know of medicine and fire.
The medicine fire cauteries are that you take a dozen of hazels, and remove the bark and recook it .i. times as .ij. heads, and then make a temple where the pain holds in some way that you can replace the dozen of hazels under the skin; and when it will be replaced tie it well and let it stay thus .xij. hours; and then dislodge it and treat further the dozen of oil, and let the wound stay thus .ij. days or .iij.; then put a poultice on the affected part in a wrapping cloth so that it can absorb into the skin.
After the treatment of anointing until it is healthy; and if you see that it makes some of those burning medicines that I have written or the twelve treatments of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this manner. Heat the cautery where it is in the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the espés (thickness?) of the heart be lifted; and lift your hand so the artery is not harmed, which is devoid, and abundance of blood flows.
After putting cotton in the wound, and placing it on the spot for three days; then put moist cotton in a wrapping, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat migraines as we have previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries beforehand said about medicine and iron do not suit, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and thus mark on the aching eye with a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and hold still so you do not touch the artery and do not go to the bone; and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is touched, or touching has great fear and discomfort for him who does not know, and who is not skilled and experienced; but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound at the top of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter on extracting the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. cutting edges; and these cauteries are better than those and more helpful.
from the pain of the ears caused by cold
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is its form:
After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you detach a little from the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the bite; and it has .x. points around each ear; after curing the place until it is healthy.
of the torment of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not except for those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this type of torture that moves with inflammation of the throat and purgings of the head and gurgling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you perform three cauteries on the patient: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third in the joint of the jaw; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on top of the head of the ear slightly below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the heat is absorbed; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the similarity of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cautery instrument be a little larger; after curing the vein as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit at all, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vessel which is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, take the whole head of the patient and apply to the occiput a plaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the book of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is sane in this way, it is good; and if he is not, you make three cauteries within the head descending to the neck, and have a space of two fingers' width between each cautery; and treat as with the others, and if you see him struggling, and the patient is suffering, you make one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, three others on the three horns, and treat until he is sane; and it is the cautery which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the cold pain of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of years and of what we have said before; afterwards raise the head of the patient, then apply fire cautery to the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is fierce, apply three fire cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is reached, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until he is healthy, and it is the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first purify the brain of years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from taking medicine.
And if it's an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew mundifying the brain often with good meat; afterwards they regurgitate the chief in a thousand ways, and apply fire cautery according to what we said before, and apply fire cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, apply fire cautery as I said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive oil cautery be according to the method I said.
If the patient is an infant, apply subtle fire cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupted and gross moisture, then apply fire cautery in such a way as we said to one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is the excessive declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what was said before in the division.
After the patient's head is injured; after making a well-made tortoise shell, like a circle, if you put it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held tightly from all parts; after presenting the bandage, and winding with old berry burs; and heating it with fire tempered, so that the fingers can suffer the pain; after seeing the circle within the head, and letting it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with other good government, until they are healthy.
Where you see that the fire cauterize does more harm than good to the entire cautery. This method of cautery inflames the brain equally; and then put on cotton soaked in butter and grease of goose.
of the pride of the eyes When pride comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have told in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humidifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or take a bath more often than fasting.
After commanding to rear his head, and make him cauterize within the head, and make him cauterize on both temples if the descent of pride is in both eyes together, or if the descent is in one; and remove all cauteries from all veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of detriment of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the flow of blood as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will hold it steady; and no one makes a cautery or touches the two hindmost joints.
through the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear in the chief forehead; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold humors, then I do the cautery as I said at the beginning of the treatment descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the temples, and .ij. cauteries or heating beneath the bones; and if there is need for more, if one cauterizes strongly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
through the course of tears behind the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give a drink to the patient .iij. nine cochiae; afterwards take hold of the head, and do cautery or milking with the olive cautery; and do .ij. cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the .ij. eyebrows, a little beneath the hairline; and beware of the artery that you do not cut it. And this is the form of fire cautery which is called "clavilis".
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this fire which is called "olivare" is suitable; for it is the form.
And if you see that the cauteries are made on the sensitive areas as long as the hairs are; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair which pricks the eye Here is the translation:
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then I put moist cotton in the glare of an egg white and musk oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery to its form:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the crust forms there; and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a poultice until the scorching is removed; afterwards cure with unctions until it is healthy.
And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place, just as you did at first; and if the hairs are deflected, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Here is the translation: When you have made the groove long enough, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the mortification will have passed, lift the skin of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraining fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put medicine on the skin again or the medicine has not worked, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put cotton soaked in borax to the extent that the keen arcs are chosen, after curing the skin of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if you are more skilled than to carefully watch over your operation by great care so that it does not reach the eyes with the medicine.  And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the skin which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the foil of the dead mirror:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constraining accordingly; and do not misrepresent the direct way to him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position; and hold their forehead with your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it bend its head; afterwards, apply a moist cotton cloth on the affected area or on a juice of persil around the eye; afterwards, heat the cauterization tool which is thus: and it is placed at the head as if in the form of a curved pen, along with which the cautery should be; if you see, if one end is pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but nevertheless, this which is placed is worth more for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is overturned, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, if you open it, and extract the fluid from the bowel; afterwards, place the hot cauterization tool in a circular form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the eye socket, so that your hand does not make a fool of itself; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Here is the translation:
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then make an incision, and open the flesh; afterwards put in the incision a subtle hollow cane, of which this is the form: and they make a quantity of a Z-shaped tube; and hold your hand or cane firmly, and do not move the patient's joints at all, so that the tubes fixed to their oil do not run; and it is necessary to put on the oil a cotton wad soaked in water or in wine: the tube thus artfully reaches the flesh of the fistula, and the healthy part marvelously sanitizes.
And if the fistula is healthy due to the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer poultices to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is suitable in its own proper place.
of cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur on the skin that are called "hairs", and similarly on the skin of children.
When you treat these cracks in the skin as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat it with a small cautery tool according to this form:
And apply it quickly to these cracks until it reaches just at the source; afterwards, treat the skin with cerate so that it may be healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
Here is the translation:
double movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery whose form will come hereafter in such a way that you place a chain on the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your volition; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in such a way the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain comes from cold, or there is cold or fever, and the treatments of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to resort to cautery in two ways: and cautery with a hot iron and cautery with fire.
Cautery with a hot iron is such that you take a hot iron rod, and the end in a holder of iron or copper; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it in boiling water, and place it on the aching tooth immediately and hold it until it cools; and do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and cloth are cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it on the hot iron rod as long as the fever reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cauteries with fire are such that you take a metal rod of iron or copper, and it should be large so that the fever does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, so that its form comes to this afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed either that day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good hot water in the impression of this cautery, and then rinse thoroughly; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scalp lesions are from flux and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn with fire cautery where afterwards the form comes, and make openings for the fumes to issue out at the cautery of the other part; and apply hot cautery once on the abscess, or wherever it is, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply on a cotton cloth moistened with burre as much as the soreness is removed; after curing the limb of signs and of tenderness until it is healthy.
When the moistures descend upon the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by solutive medicines; afterwards, make fire cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but only a little. Afterwards, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" where we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
of the cough When all diseases of the chest are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is an ancient disease, then apply fire cautery on the strong fleshy part; and another cautery in the breast between two nipples; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned above.
And if you see, apply fire cautery by pricking the entire cautery that is called "poins" because its form is thus in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just as ..., or as needed. Afterwards, cure the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three places according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make three of them in one go.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After the patient is seized with pain in his back and in his side; after lift the heart that is deep inside the tender flesh as you do with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves where it is in the form:
and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and there would be the figure of the cautery with three cauteries; and because it is done with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a thread and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
And at no time is it joined to this .i. nerve because there are eight cauteries.
After applying fire cautery with a probe, then make the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then do fire cautery on the thick part of the cauterized clavicle, or many fire cauteries in pricking. For the joint is restored, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
with fire cautery of the ribs
The ancient ones said that one must do fire cautery of the ribs according to Aristologe's root, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristologe, the largest you can find, and dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your two fingers; and grind it into oil, and heat it over fire, and cauterize. Do cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and do small cauteries descending a little to the part that is under the beard; and do cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little; and do cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and another as between the ribs which are above the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press with your hand, but make an opening just like when scenting.
Here is the translation:
of the wound
When you treat the disease of the wound according to what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they add three manners of cauterization that are all good.
One of these manners is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the wound, according to the figure of the cauterization of the foil that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient be comfortable on their back;
and another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cauterization iron which has three points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the wound, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization iron be according to the width of the body.
After they have blown the .ij. nerves inflamed so that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then they have treated with fire cautery, and thus there will be .iiij.. And if you see, if you cauterize all the fire cautery at .iij. nerves. After the cure when it has been obtained by lengthy tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is not suitable for a dropsical person, because it has the manner which is called "asclytes". When you treat according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you perform four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the pis; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the heart.
After letting the cautery open for a short time, and not leaving the treatment of the patient's illness after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be a clavele, which we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is written here before.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cauter without turning. And do not enter too much inside, lest it would be forced out the citrine water, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After doing so on the legs, do two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from the loin, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing, so that the water exits; after curing with the other cures that we have said.
of the meningitis
When the stomach solution comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about beforehand or stomach cautery, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel, one subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each of these places, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great, for the cure is profitable when it has good help.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and of gross cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you do cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all defiled below the middle and a little in triangular, and one cautery below the bowel; two fingers.
and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face inflamed, then one applies a great fire cautery to the stomach, as it was said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the fire cautery tools; and leave the fire cautery on for a long time. After curing the limb so that it is healthy.
of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
When you burn the fleshiness which is named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems suitable, and then place it all wrapped up on the burned fleshiness; and hold your hand so the cauteries come to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much of the fleshiness, if you cautery each one as we have said; after the treatment of wounds, it profits until they are healthy; and if you cautery with a great cautery on the skin, it will have more aid.
of a badly healed wound
When the patient cannot suffer touching or pressure, that we will recount in its place, if such a disease comes that cannot be healed unless by cautery.
Here is the translation:
of the kidney disease When pain from cold comes with great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman's advice, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other to the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cautery, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply cautery to the upper part of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as our finger; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have need; and the clavicle cautery should be according to the form mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together; and it is found that the places of departure are visible, then it is necessary to cautery the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which we have cautered the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not presented to you, make three cauteries of olive oil, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the veins; and heal until they are healthy.
of the pain in the ankle When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After making the cautery; and the manner of making the cautery is in three ways: it is to know how to assemble burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint in this form, and make a good profoundness and greatness, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive oil; never make a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three such ones according to this form.
And if you see, if the cautery is made in a circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but make it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are burned.
And it is the manner in which one performs on sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, make two or three cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds, and make a cautery above the ankle three fingers, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be shallow, and let the skin be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or nearly to the edge, then cauterize there where they feel the pain in nine points or eight at the cautery which is called "points".
And if the masters are, then make more; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the shallow or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause more great annoyance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. Afterwards, a flux of belly occurred which led to their death.
And if the pain is in two adjacent parts, perform cautery on one and the other, in this manner. And the wise men say about the cautery of the thigh, that it is thus: make a fire iron as large as a turnip, or slightly smaller, and hold it between two irons spaced apart by the width of a thumb; and let the irons be on both sides, and also like a nest, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form.
And let it be heated until it is completely red-hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the thigh of the afflicted area, and turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery stroke and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is fully healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for fear of its regimen, and few see who uses it; and nevertheless this is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is applied.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar signs of cold matter spread out, none of these signs is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after this, that the patient is relieved of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the cautery claw mark, following this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow arm when they get up, and fear; and you find in the lower part of the spine of the back and in the appearance which comes onto the other spines.
When you see this and you have seen it cured, then cauterize it at the cautery of that one according to this form.
Here is the translation:
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and treatment with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form.
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at each point that they call "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee, two or three cauteries for each part, with an olive-shaped cautery; and if you have more skill, do more, but do not hold your hand firmer than necessary, so that the space of the burn is burned.
And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains some pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good government and you purge the blood, it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the treatment of this face
When treatment comes to abscesses, and the boils descend to the intestines and it's new, if it is necessary that when you want to cure the eye, do not touch it with your finger today; and use things that warm the belly, so that the fevers come down from their belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the boil is repaired, and reset them at your hands, and sign below the treatment on the bone of the finger, and all around a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then apply the fire cautery in this form:
as long as it is white and it gives a sweet scent. Then reset the boils to their place; and have the servants hold his hand so they do not return again; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put beneath him a cushion and a sheet on the thighs, and another on the chest that holds his hands; then apply the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and the right hand and the left hand as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again until you come near to the bone; and be subtly aware that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that because of this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not come near to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their years, and for great people also great according to their measure; after 22 days cure the face with the cautery of borax so that the inflammation is removed; after curing other ulcers so that they are healthy, and lay the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well sucked; and it is necessary that their nourishments be given lengthily, so that the boil does not burst when they prepare to go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made splint, and the same for 40 other days; and have good rest, so that he does not work too much and is wary of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high pride; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will describe hereafter the treatment of surgery in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are acquainted, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make him a fire cautery of the same quantity, and let it be according to the third degree of heat; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery with 12 angles according to this form:
But first mark the place of the injury and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand inside the entire fire cautery instrument. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moderate.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes in no member, or from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of twisting and of its pain. if it is healthy from the first cautery, that's good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it must be moved to the member that is next to it, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
of messiness
The messiness is often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. As soon as you see it being cauterized, take care that the disease is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not delay nor doubt, lest the corruption spread throughout the patient; then make .v. cauteries on the chief: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. corners, and .i. behind on the haiterel; and leave so much space that the cauteries reach just to the bone, and so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before it.
And if the meselry is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to those cauteries that we have mentioned above, and one cauterization on the navel, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and three cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the chest and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the veins that are on the derrière calcant, so you do not burn them; and never apply cauterization to the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that patients feel no pain from cauterization as the healthy ones feel, because the body is already totally corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the masters. After curing the limb with flour of veins with honey and other cures until it is healthy.
of inflammation
Here is the translation:
of the scalps
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the medicine's engines are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness be removed, and its color be changed; then treat with flour of fenugreek and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alecost, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the skin until it be healthy.
The treatment of cancer by cautery
When cancer begins, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the tumor of the cancer. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the cancer; and always this does not seem good to me, because I think it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and more rightly it is cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the inflammation which cannot heal
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it takes time to heal or because of the excess heat that it produces, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say too old) and there is little blood, or because of the tension; and you see the hastiness to heal: then cauterize around many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards let them be. For it will hasten healing.
And if you see that the entire cautery is pierced, then heat the cautery to the form of which it is:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the heart, and let them be such that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated. Afterwards, cure until it is perfectly healthy.
the healing by fire through iron
Another type of illness is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a wound to the limb, for it eats away at the members just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this illness in someone who can suffer cautery along with fire, then burn the small and large cauteries according to what is needed for the limb or the illness; after cautering all parts so that you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupted may be removed. And then let them lie .iij. days, and apply cauteries to the limbs suffering from burning with oil until the fires are removed, and all corruption. After the cure of ointments engendering flesh.  And if you see after .iij. days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this wound has often been cured by medicine in the form of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of great aid, and I have already said the cure of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
of pores that come to the feet
Many times it happens that feet are afflicted by a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a big faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in .ij. ways. It's to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you burn .i. cautery that cuts like a pen of vinegar, and is made from good iron according to the measure that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after putting everything hot on the nail, and turning your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and then leaving it thus .iij. days until it begins to putrefy; then make a poultice of wild savages boiled with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be uprooted from their roots. Then cure the foot with ointments engendering flesh until it is healthy.
Here is the translation:
the cure for trembling hands
When some people tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cautery; thus they will stop trembling, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
of painful pustules
No time appears by delay the bodies baths, or painful pustules, that come from gross corrupt matters. if it is necessary at first when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of fir of myrtle, of which the point is taken in fire, or of root of aristologe long, or of lenticular cautery. And no time do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot increase from then on, but are dislodged the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
And always when this happens to someone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very still so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue further; then apply fire to the cauteries olive oil more or less small and large as long as they are all red; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and the place in which the artery is located, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery still so that the blood is stanched.
And if it happens to flow again when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not stop doing one thing after another until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not irritate the nerve which is delicate, and that no other evil does not come to the patient; and know that when the blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched at once because the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and held firmly in place.
Who administers stanching of the blood by tightly binding with strips or putting hard things on, or similar things, does not profit if it does not hold for a little while.
And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it tightly until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still with a cold wet cloth so that it may be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make inquiries beforehand about those things which require cauteries and medicines.
Here is the translation:
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who are afflicted with such illness that they die quickly due to the force of their disease, and the greatness of their evil; and one should fear this. And of these, there is one who gives his sense, and says: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is despised. It does not become you to consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but rather put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that which you are certain, and of which you can take possession; and use prophecy and indication in the cures of your diseases to whom salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long-lasting memory.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and direction, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cauterizations, that I have devised from head to feet, because you will find more easily what you need to master.
from a head full of water
Know that this illness comes very often to infants at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too strongly; and sometimes it happens for a hidden cause that one does not know.
And I never saw this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen hasten their death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth abandoning the work on some cures.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not be supported; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture was assembled beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows; and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head swollen on each side, and the water bursts out when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
And after cutting, extract all the moisture. After holding back the folds of bandages and powders, and put in wine and oil, and let it be so until the fifth day; then disengage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head dry out gradually, and give gentle food to the patient, dry meat without much moisture, until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine whether the opening of the abscess is above, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and do so according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and take care to make a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the deterioration of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of swelling
When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort of treatment is cautery with fire that one covers the .ij. arteries.
It is necessary then, when you cover the eyes, that the patient makes his head bent back; after scrubbing the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then stretching the patient's neck to the entire cloth; then look where the veins are beating, and the eyelids of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly bent back; then sign the eyelids from below, then cover one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument .ij. parts, until the vein reaches just to the bone, and it is thus by the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cover it above, cutting similarly as .ij. two at the crossing.
And when the vein is covered, then the blood flows continuously upward from below.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign of an inch and make just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood in excess if it is seven drops per c/, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of two syphac, if you find that apostemes do not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of migrating
When ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the cold in the temples and old foolishness and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and the cauterizations, as we have related.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly restored except in some homes that are too cold; and if it is restored, then the patient strangles with some drapels, then rubs the bone with some rough cloth, and raises the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then takes the spatula of this form.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, fill the cavity with a lot of cotton and place well-made tents; and when you remove them, be cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and tents, until it is healthy; and if there is no crust on the artery as long as you operate, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or fill the cavity with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, place your finger on the cavity until the blood is congealed, and raise the cavity of cold water until the blood ceases, and be steady as necessary; and that which is more moderate and easier in extracting the artery is that you cautery the vein with a trenchant .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to wait longer for the heat. Because when the instrument is too tight, it holds less its heat. And it should have between the eyes of the patient, a large space, and then when you have signed on the eyes of the patient, and you hold the burning iron as long as it comes just to the bone, and cover the vein in the eyes; and so are they separated between the eyes because it is not suitable for this cautery from everything to everything; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head of fire, and it does not profit from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient inflaming, and feel a frontal ambulation as if of frenzy; and thus they are tight and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the ardor of the tears, so it is necessary to use this cure.
And they call the old "cured contusion", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs so that they have them in front, then you make three equal incisions in front according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions goes just as far into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others go just as far along the ribs above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are just as far above the papers; and keep your hand from the continuation of the jaws, and each wound has the quantity of three fingers in traversing joints;
from the incision that is to be made on the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the crust that is between the three wounds to the very skin that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract with this spatula.
if you put in the first wound the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and that is the form; And put the cautery fire near the heart to clear the air in the chest, and gently move the hand towards the bone, and bend until it reaches the middle incision. And carefully remove the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the continuous incision reaches what opens into the heart, and then proceed further in the middle incision to the other side; and then extract evenly the blood pressure, and press on the hand for the taken blood; then put in each incision a piece of old cotton, and apply moistened drapes with wine, oil, and vinegar, and ensure that apostemes do not reach; and on the third day, remove the bandage, and anoint with great abundance of warm water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments that cure wounds, until it is healthy.
Let the hairs grow back.
When a vein is accustomed to frequent inflammation, and you see the hairs thin and small, and the vision is clouded, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head hurts in front of the pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know through these accidents that those matters and that catharr come not only from many veins, and the treatment is difficult because it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one on the side. And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, then suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the lips of the incision and put cotton threads, and bind with linen; then wrap the drappling in milliae wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is osteized, then you must rub the bone so that the flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that expel char.
In this manner: take three parties of flour of wheat, and of colocynth three parties, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to expel char throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of these three things: either grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, stone or another kind of thing that does not stick to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, distill a little bit of violet oil or sesame oil, then make an extraction; and when you do this, the nostrils will become congested, and the hairs of the nose will fall out, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and raise the ear above. Many times it becomes cured through this treatment; and if it does not cure, make an extraction with subtle pincers, from which the form is:
If it gets cured through the pincers, that's good; if not, make an extraction with a subtle instrument of small double hook; and if it doesn't get cured by this, make a cane of iron and push the head of the cane or perforate the ear strongly, and block what is around the cane so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull out the form, for many times it gets cured as we have said; and if it doesn't get cured in this way, take glue from which one takes the bones, and put some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull out. And if she does not sweat from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus that an abscess falls out with spasm; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and heal until they are healthy. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot exit, then administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus like a thorn and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel, thus amenistrated extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, thus it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if you see no worms, take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the vein of what is its form.
And it is constricted below and expanded above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out all the vein; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, stop up the vein with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not jump out as we have said, amenistrated distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear through all this instrument, from what is its form as you see.
And it is of silver or copper constricted below at a small opening, and expanded above for distilling; and to press down into the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the scraper and envelop it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines into the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and it is the distillations that are slightly warmed by fire, so that they are distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of the wound, or a boil that forms inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes go deep into the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole becomes small due to the boil, and one sees it well.
That which goes deep inside, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, if the work has all this spatula-like form from which it is made.
And let it be smooth and flat in front and behind, so that it does not block the ear; if the opilation is from a boil or abscess of the ear, if you take subtle pincers, and gently touch it, so that the boil is entirely removed.
And if the opilations are deeply embedded in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and carefully shave around the small area with fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation which the patient feels great pain in the ear, perceive lightly, and be careful not to graze the edges of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and the mucus in the Egyptian ointment.
Do not leave it for a day until the wound is soured, or take a tent and mucus in rose water, and powder with vitriol broth; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace another mucous tent made of rosed oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the flow of blood which are treating with distillations.
of the flesh of papers
Here is the translation:
And if without decay, if the cautery fire subtly burns the lens-like skin, and the cautery expert afterwards makes it worthless; and many times they repair, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are burned by fire, so are those roots destroyed and do not return.
of the fat
Many times things that seem like fat in their shape and hardness come into the papers of the eyes, and because of this, this malady is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below; the operations are such: take warily so the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make then a large incision, then lightly scrape each part, and take it with pincers, and cover. if you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not grieve anything to the patient; and if the fissure is great, attach it to a bandage, and cure until it be healthy; and if it's small, do not make any force, for the ointments restore it soon and enjoin charity.
And if the grandine descends into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not grieve anything; and when the grandine is covered, lift the oil of salt water, and cure the limb of what charity brings as long as the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
There is a fatness that grows in the thin skin of the eyelids above, and this happens more to young children than to old people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces again, and sleep there, and their eyelids become moist and swollen with the fatness that appears in the eye. And when you press the skin with your fingers and feel the fatness entering inside.
And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts his head in a healthy position; and then takes a thread of linen, and sets up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains fatness from each part, then places it on him; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fatness is gathered within the circle; then makes a slight cut with a sharp scalpel, and does not make it larger than the wound made for bloodletting; and makes the skin deep enough that you reach the fatness; and in many dispositions the fatness comes out of the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Draw out then with a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the bottom, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread; and be careful not to touch the cut, that you do not reach the whole scalpel just up to the eye, that you do not make it bleed.
And if the patient does not open at the beginning of the wound, apply a small amount of gentle pressure to the wound so it opens; then hold steady as we have said, then spread a thin layer on the affected area and water, and put it on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then heal until it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then heal with soothing plasters until it is healthy.
of the hairs of the papers
When in papers hairs are born joined to another than the natural ones, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and cause various kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iii. ways: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine applied according to whether it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick a needle at all points; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn to the ruler; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the hairs adjusted, all the spatula coping, from the large needle up to the small; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper an image of an anchor, like the leaf of myrtle, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into sections.
And if you have a part that masters the craft of coping with a great quantity of paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the lines that you have signed, and start from the large needle up to the small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then prick the awl at one of the angles of the heart, and scrape everything; then assemble the edges to a stitching with a thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads above the eyebrows all things sticky, if you see fit to do so; and if not, take no care, then leave the stitching and the threads up to three days or four; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, for the paper relives suddenly from the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is useless (as the ancients say), and it is a work without fear.
and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with an image that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, at three pricks of the awl, according to the form that is here.
then apply this which overcomes small equal forces uniformly according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tourniquets, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or it has .i. thread, and put it in the figure; and put .i. another thread from the large lancet, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble the two threads equally; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over where you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with a soothing ointment and similar gentle treatments.
and it never happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture in one and in the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it dense according to what I have said, and then make .ij. wounds by art, and .ij. subtle stitches as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and apply as .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what overcomes the parchment of the eye, and strain the .ij. wounds of the .ij. parties firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that was strained will become numb and harden, and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if the pursuit is treated and the hairs do not come with it, so pull the pursuit to the underside along the entire thread that you have ordered it, until the pursuit appears through two pertuses above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then if you pull the pursuit and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 8 or 9 hours, until the hairs are rooted in their place and the flesh grows over; and if the hairs are short, so accompany them with a long hair from natural whiskers, and be elevated with that which you leave, until it is elongated and then set free.
from the vision of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the vision comes into the eye, there are 8 ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cutting, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And the manner of treatment is that you split open the sutures, and separate the lips from it, and put in tents of linen, and leave it until it is healthy; and do not think that you should use in the cure of it things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first; but work with mollifying things, like fenugreic; and rose water or alea and linseed oil are cures, and apply a poultice of dyapulon founded on none of the eyes, and envelop it in a tent, and cure it thus.
And the treasures of your cure are that you take heed not to let it sink back into its original form; and these works that we have spoken of are only remedies for this illness, so that it does not relapse into its original form.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This illness that is beneath which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cracks and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make a hole from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread goes into the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a spatula large.
And if the figure on the parchment returns according to what it wants, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the crack, and turn the parchment, and make two cracks or seams within the parchment; and let the heads of the two cracks be at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter that has not "j" scribbles; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are agitated beneath, from what follows the parchment, then add the two severed parts, and sew with a thread of linen; then use the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and of tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a wound or a break or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is presented before; then remove between the .ij. leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to arrange everything so that they can make it return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of treatment and instruments in many dispositions.
because of the suddenness of the paper
When this joint has mains homes in such a way that the paper above is soaked with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, so that you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient may not suffer from the too-sharp or too-blunt spatula touching the oil; and make your incision, by carefully scraping off what is assembled, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and it is all healthy, and never again becomes inflamed with salty water, and raises a gentle and soothing warmth, and of collar; then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and place on the oil a soft, abundant ointment; and after three days use gentle collars and soothing things until it is healthy.
of the corner of the eye
You know that the corner is affected in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard, rough spot, and another which is not nervous but appears as a white, moist, congealed humor, when touched with iron and pricked with pincers, if it cannot be om; and both and other appearances start from the great eyelid, and increase little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then opens their eyes; and holds the skin with one hand, then coils the corner with pincers of small double wire, and stretches it upwards; then takes a needle, and inserts a horsehair, or a cow hair, or an ox hair, and a strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and fixes it in the corner, and pierces it all the way through, and holds the corner with a thread and stretches it upwards, and scrapes all the hair from the side of the corner which leads to the prune and the swoop of the hair just at the head, then cuts off the remaining part at the root of the eyelid with a subtle and fine force, and lets the natural flesh or eyelid heal, so that by the incision, the course of the tears does not become accustomed; and never does the corner settle into the onion-shaped wound, nor to the thread, as we have said; then scrapes all the subtle skin from which this form is made.
And be careful that the skin does not touch the raw flesh and breaks it, and that the prune is not perceived; and after the incision, put a little of soothing boric water in the eye, and make a collar of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what he needs so that he may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot apply the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines; and grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so open the eye of the patient, and take the lighter spatula according to this form:
And raise the nail subtly, and if you see it diminishes to a point and the reason approaches, so distill from your mouth into the hollow of the colon made of litargire and red colon and broiet, and stop up the eye just until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method, until it is entirely restored.
If nothing opposes you in the eye, as if an aposteme is hot, then apply the lathe, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts at night in the eye by great annoyance, so suspend it from the nail, and cut off a part but not entirely, because the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the hollow red colon made of litargire.
of the flesh which grows on the fingernail
It is the eyes of some men that sometimes grow red flesh, and cover the fingernail and stretch over the skin and twist to the finger, and seem a rose of baluster; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in your healthy state, then he opens his eyes, and gathers all this flesh as convenient stitches to that, and holds it with force; then cuts the first flesh, and goes cutting to the raspier until the end, and take care not to bleed at the operation; and be the incision of the spatula we have said in the incision of the ankle and with small forces from which one removes the splint, as it forms after this chapter that demonstrates.
and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, apply the oil of sweet broom or where you distill red coliere and seeming corrosive medicines, and put on the finger a cotton with egg white, so that it may be assured of hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the wound begins to suppurate, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the finger and cure the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus you will heal all the flesh that is affected in the finger by this similarity.
But always it is necessary that you elevate the cure of each oil weak from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they take away its function and blind the eye every hour. It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which the vein is, it is false, and there is no other disease besides the vein; then coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be thus in this form:
And let there be two onions by degrees in the body according to this form:
then you coil the strong veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye at the points of the tiny pores, and perform this operation at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your operation so that you do not grasp more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill in the collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining of the vein.
And if you cannot collect all that in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are alleviated and are assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this manner which is presented beforehand until it is healthy; and this is the form of the treatments:
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is named "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said beforehand, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the eyes that you make an incision on the abscess, there where it must be opened, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take out all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and make it from iron indeed a chief reont, and sharpen it as if it were a lime, just as it is in the present form:
And place it on the corroded part of the bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the bone with excitative medications.
If the joints are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not improve and is not abscessed, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the perforated nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time with iron, and with watery medications, and when they are discovered take .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at 3 angles, and the fistula should be attenuated until the head as you see here.
Then place it on the bone of the arm, and separate your hand from the eye a little, then turn the entire forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes into the nostril if he holds his hand against his nose; and then restore the bone with dry medications, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the joints, you see the matter at the nose; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the discharge from the eye
Here is the translation:
because of the tearing apart of a diseased vein
When disruptions come in the diseased vein, then it opens, and comes forth like grains of resin, and is astonishing to see; then if you see the vein clogged, the operations are such that you put a needle at the root of the affected part below, then put another needle where it has double thread from the affected vein; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then take hold of the vein with double thread and bind one part of the vein around, and hold it well, then pull out the needle and put it on the same moist place in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads join with the vein, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healthy; and often the wound is restrained by the vein each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce with a subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and correct the moist albugeous matter and descend beneath the eyes, and enter soon thereafter; then hold it steady until it is healthy.
of the orbit of the eye
Here is the translation:
the veins of the eye
We have seen the veins in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce; if it works according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye firmly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye at the least tearful corner, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and twist your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda goes to the clear thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prunelle just to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the opening in that paper for the clarity of the woven fabric, and then put the instrument just to where the vein is, then press it one way after another. If the vein descends now, you will see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting a little, and if the vein rises again in the second way, put the strength with the instrument, and when it is well fixed and does not mount, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the vein a little of that gemstone, and remove from the eye within. Then put beneath the eye stupes or laid moillie in oil rosset and abundance of eggs, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on common broiet with abundance of eggs.
And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is thus formed:
And pierce the conjunctiva gently, and do not insert too much in depth, but make a subtle hole, then put in the maggots, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient who is sleeping on his back in the dark room; and be deprived of all movements, and take light food, and do not move their head neither to the right nor to the left, and be arranged according to its disposition until the third day; then dislodge them from that dark room, and test their vision, and make them see some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, for the water mounts hastily.
If apostemes come, which you dislodge the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then dislodge the vision and put on its rim a golden ring to cover for some days, and be again in that dark room. And then go out of the room little by little, and convert into its cases; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made maggots perciet, which drew out the water, but nevertheless I never saw any of them in our land, nor did I ever read about them in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of amputation, because those who do not know them go astray; and thus they should be properly prepared.
And thus the head of the bone is in this subtle joint, and the last one in three angled corners.
of the flesh above the nose
Never born or nose flesh joined diversely, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; and if it has flesh of a fixed color, and if it has flesh of bone color. In this way of those flesh that is soft, and not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open its nostrils, and throw the onion at those flesh, and remove the false flesh; then hold what you can sustain with subtle skill on one side, until you know that this flesh is all removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be cured, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing stays; and without overwhelming yourself, or an abscess bursts, drain it as it should; and if they are malignant apostemes, hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then pour in water or vinegar and wine.
If the vein does not open, and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is new flesh growing above the bone, although the instruments do not come for cutting: then it is necessary to thread .i. a somewhat thick linen filament, and be careful with our hands, and take time between each space of about an inch or less; and put the patient's head in the nostril of the filament as far as possible, and pull out as much as comes through the nostril into the mouth; and many times children do so at school, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after another as we are pulling on a thread. Do this until you know that the vein has corroded away all the remaining flesh, then pull out the filament, suck out the blood, and wrap the filament in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this three days or more, until the ointments corrode away everything that remains of flesh; and then put a small tube in the nostril for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines into the nostrils.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp cover, like a small tube, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a small tube close by, and let the instruments be plain for cleansing the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the flesh above the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" occurs on the head above the nose, and it grows and becomes large, so much that it is visible to behold; and therefore you must burn the tumor at its beginning, and remove all the flesh, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in covering until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of a dark color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when you cover it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that you can completely cover it, then you cure the patient and remove their fear, and heal the place with drying and constricting things.
when the nose is covered and swollen
You know that when continuous solutions come into one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, for in some homes. Therefore, you must consider what has happened to none, if you look at the wound and see that all its blood is fresh; and then you join the .ij. veins together, then treat until it is healthy; and if the veins are separated from one part to another, you must scrape off all parts of their skin until they heal, then assemble the .ij. veins together, and constrict, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and encense broiet; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
The manner of the treatment is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
of abscesses on the lips
At the hands of men who have dens abscesses on the lips, similar to grains of vezes, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and divide into each node, and take them as pincers and cut into each part; then apply the lee after the incision of vitriol broth, so that the blood is staunched; and then apply the oil of Hazel, and cure the lip of dry things until it be healthy.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times it is necessary to cauterize the gums that are swollen, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary for you to hold them in place with bandages, and apply a poultice at their root, and let the blood or wound flow; then put on top of the vitriol ointment, or other powders that constrict and dry; and if this swelling returns after incision, and many times happens, if you cauterize it for the second time, and it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatment for coping with excess flesh.
of wounds
Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs which are smooth and slippery; and sometimes the black, citrine, and greenish teeth come to corruption, and are foul-smelling; if it is necessary for you to hold the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws be in your saint, and take out the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have taken everything out; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatment for removal, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one removes from the teeth have other forms than those that are between the teeth; and these forms and others will be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat a tooth with pain that you delay to handle it as much as you can, because one should not hurry to do it; for it is a very high substance just up to then that one has no excuse to hurry. Then when the patient is constrained to handle it, it is necessary that you be certain of the aching tooth. Often the pain bothers the patient, and they think it is a healthy tooth, and they make the good tooth ache; and at all times do not depart from the pain for that, as long as the bad ones are strained, because we have already wanted to do this to these healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you excavate around the tooth everywhere in a spatula strongly to ward off the gum on all sides; then you apply it with your fingers or subtle tongs at first a little and a little, so that they are well loosened, then you firmly fasten the tongs; and let the head of the patient be well between your knees, and hold it well so it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently push it into each part lightly, and remove it as you had done previously. And if the teeth are perceived and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill them with threads, where the perforations are; and if you extract subtly with tongs, so that they do not break while extracting; and it is very important to work carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take care to avoid breaking it, and leaving a part behind, and returning to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than at first. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have mentioned; but often they come to the opening of great illness through the roots that remain, or through the cartilage that breaks, as we have often wanted; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the spot with wine or vinegar and salt; and if a flow of blood comes, which often happens, apply the vitriol ointment; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Here is the translation:
And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the track, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold in place.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the track, then you must put on the soft cotton cloth moistened with burr.i. oil or ij., as long as the limbs are numb, then you apply the pincers called "algefri", of which the head seems to be a beak; and let them be made thus like a file, and that is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to issue into all these pincers, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape:
And let it be strong and big so it does not break easily, and if the root jumps up through that, it is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards:
And if one aids with this instrument which has many rules, from which the form is:
and other instruments that are presented in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles a large clamp, from which the form is:
And let these instruments be strong so they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are some diseases where the ancient ones did not teach at all about an instrument due to the diversity of ages, and it does not break in the cartilage or in other bones, or it pierces, if one searches for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and aid with the gestures, from which the form is: And be thick and hold well to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and ostrude; and then restore the lever of convenient medicines for that, and if there is porousness in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body shape, and its form is ugly, especially in small women, then it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot smooth or file: then take the file; and if it is sharp with the tooth, then take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is of iron inde at the end of the instrument.
And the handle is small and small in the hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a part of the file as it is its shape.
and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth small and small in the hands gently, so that it does not move too much while it cuts; then smooth out the end to remove any roughness, and if the teeth are too pointed and they bite the tongue, then it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when the tooth aches
when the front tooth aches, either from percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on it so they chew, and you treat them with constricting medicines, but it is not worth it; if you need to restrain with a thread of gold, for the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and let the middle thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the healthy teeth, then put the heads between the bad teeth, if there are one or more, until you come close to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering from the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then cut the heads of the thread with a tenaculum, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy teeth, and set it so it does not obstruct the tongue; and then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, hold it in place with another thread; if it stays in place and serves all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the healthy teeth, and of the bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not intervene with one who is not wise and suffers, and never makes the form of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and holds it in place as we have said, and stays and serves for a long time.
from the copper of the tongue
Sometimes it is the ligament that comes from under the tongue or by nature, which is born in this way; or by accident of a wounded wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament of the large one, so much that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if it has dryness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you anoint with the unguent and cut the large ligament; and beware that the fissure is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the water of rose and of willow, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and each night, tie the patient's bandage, so they cannot sleep. And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the spot vitriol bruised; and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize with the fire cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see the color of the wound as copper or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a blister, and there is moisture, then anoint with unguent, and make a subtle spasm of the skin, and deliver from one part and another; and if the wound does not heal according to your work, then put on vitriol bruised as much as it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated everything fully; then lift up the water of willow and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle, because it is the shape:
And be cutting from one part, and name the other; and when you have cut one of the armatures, cut the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and cold, and if the blood flow is stopped, gargle the patient with hot water, or apply poultices of green grapes so they are ripe, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is staunched; then cure until it is healthy; and no other time do abscesses grow in the throat except the two armatures, if you cut them thus like the two armatures together.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, it is to know .i. a small abscess; and it had almost closed off the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days. And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed .ij. threads through the .ij. openings of the nose. I hastened to treat her, and inserted an onion in one nostril, then made her cough and brought up a large portion of phlegm; then I reopened another passage of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I inserted the onion into those abscesses, and cut away part of it, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the passages of the woman's throat were cleared, and she began to drink hot wine and then vinegar, and did not stop cutting away from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred, and filled the space I had emptied, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I parted from those regions, and knew only God could do more after me.
of the grape
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
This cure is safer than incision, not like the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put ash in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and in the pot there should be an instrument that filters according to this manner: And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, you often repeat this, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do it further than at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a crust of egg white in the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the crust of egg white does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether, safe and healthy.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or something else; so you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing clearly; and what does not appear and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and attach the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be stuck, and then pull it out further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument for extracting according to this form:
And let the curved instrument be at the head so that it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest everything goes awry, nor does it push inside; and it is of value that the patient holds the instrument, because it is held or the thing is easy; if it holds below, where it draws everything equally along the entire instrument, as long as it goes smoothly.
from the sensitivity of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the sensitivity, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then gaze at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the sensitivity, draw it out completely with a small hook, or subtle tongs that are suitable for this. And if it is not effective, take a hairpin, and put it in the throat of the patient, then push or pull the hairpin with iron heat, and make it so often. And if you hold the patient's water all day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and let it glide in sense, and move it to his hand often; and if you soon feel the sensitivity, then cough.
And if it does not cough as we have said, then fumigate the patient with absinthium at the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the uvea; do this many times, for it will clear the sense. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let the pot be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that pertus is the head of the instrument; then you put the fumigation, and the patient holds the end of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches just to the sensitivity; and the sensitivity will clear now, and if it does not cough, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary that it goes away through this government.
And the form of the instrument to which one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, similar to bent tenailles entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see there the form:
the surgeons of abscesses
Many types of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size; and it is in 18 ways that one is in its own appearance, and from what it holds moisture. And the second way is through the veins where they are in the body. For abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are other than those which come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess is not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is ripe according to its accomplishment; and if there are those that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are in the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one lets them be until they are ripe inside, by chance so that the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because it is a cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one pierces it thus so that it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce an abscess ripe without complete digestion, unless it is in the foundation, so that it does not ripen inside, and becomes fistulous; and it cannot be healed in a long term.
And it is necessary that you know the sign of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its accomplishment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and gentle debate and arrangement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be long in the course of the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or joints and veins, and in all equal parts where there is no putridity.
In those that putrefy, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is worth more that you leave the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, then the body is lengthened by the venom from it, and is full of much ordure; and perhaps the lips and the deepest parts of it are hardened. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to the members in need of it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
of sores
Where the wounds come from small abscesses, and are manners of ours that are in tiles, just like the joiner of a joint, and there is much similarity. There is fat and such things where moisture accumulates, just like in poultices; and if there are hard and piercing ones to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act against it. And the work of the cutting is that you test all .i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then fill with poultices from above the wound. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving any residue containing that moisture, for it returns again when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and vinegar, and apply to the wound, and leave until another day; and this cures what has remained of the night. And then reapply the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with ointment in a suitable way, so that it is healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. fat, then cut according to this form, from above the wound; and apply your poultices, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment for driving out what is in the wound; and if the artery acts against you, then do what I have told you afterwards. And do the same for the abscess if it is piercing, and of cutting and curing as I have told you.
And the cutting on the piercing abscess and the moisture, is more gentle, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or wounds where there is no moisture, and of those that were .i. abscesses that I cut into or wounded an old woman; and found the abscess just like a pierced stone, rough and whitish, and could not break it; and if one had made any incision, one would have done well to wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming from wounds, because those that come from children and roots of ears, the treatment should be done for at least three days, depending on the person, so that the swelling subsides; and the cures are done as it is necessary.
of the scalp ulcers
Many times do these scalp ulcers occur on the neck, and beneath the shoulders, and in the groin area, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are connected with each other. And each ulcer is properly located on its side, just like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this way you see good disposition on the body, and it appears similar in color to the body, and changes in each part and is not airy as the veins in the neck nor in the arteries, and is not deep; so it is necessary that you cover them from above, and scrape off each part, and anoint the skin of the heart with ointments, if you are skilled in this, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and treat slowly and carefully, so be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not become too hasty, lest you touch something you should not.
And if you touch the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to purge. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, so that you accomplish it; then inquire about your duty if there remain small ulcers, treat them and bandage them. And if there is a great vein at the root of the ulcer, do not think that you should touch that ulcer at its root, but rather tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you touch the entire ulcer, it is necessary that you assemble the skin edges of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the ulcer. It is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it, and treat it firmly, and sew as we have said. Those ulcers that hold superfluity, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce thus, as previously mentioned, depending on the circumstances, then anoint with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well bandaged, cure it with a gentle ointment, so that it may be healthy.
of squinting
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it's the writing of their words.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the partition of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be examined; and one should not do anything except by this, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels. When the disease is in the channel of the pormon, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to puncture the epiglottis, that we puncture it beneath two or three circles or a small puncture through the traversing, between the two circles or by the quantity of the puncture through the siphac, not in the cartilage;
and thus the veins are suitable for sectioning of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough to be reached.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then puncture the heart as far as it reaches the uvula; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the siphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the uvula which becomes swollen through the broken place, and by the defect of the voice.
and let the wound open a part.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with a sweet cure, and sew underneath the sense without the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so that it may be healthy.
Do not stop doing this just so long as the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be near death, and lacks breath. Then cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and therefore command the old man to let the open wound heal for as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four days. And then they command to bind the wound and cure, until it is cured;
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinews of her arm;
and I was called by the healer, and I found him almost as dead.
I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that was issuing from it, and I knew well that it had not been properly covered with a bandage or dressing other than the throat, and the veins were pouring out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and I treated it until it was healthy.
and I had nothing against the maiden except that she was hoarse of voice, and she recovered afterwards to her disposition;
because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced person, and they occur much in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or natural does not have any obstacle.
And the accident is according to two manners, one of which is similar to a thick abscess that comes from our artery, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our arteriole. and there is fear, and it does not seem to work with fiery passion except in the small one, and it proves and searches for all the interior. if you find it thus as if in a thick abscess, and it does not penetrate to any vein, if it is a coping, if as we cope with them, and it draws to all its coiffe, if there is a point. and search thoroughly everywhere, and heal thus as it seems, so that it may be perfectly healthy.
of us
There are many ways of treating us, of which I will describe all the similarities.
and it is necessary that I say all the differences that exist between them and us.
I say that the patient is feverish and has a chill, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it has accomplished the putrefaction; then the fever and chill are restored.
With the ninth node, there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a syrup, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus as a jaundice, and becomes large.
and they are according to their similarities, whether gray, or moist, and many colors are thus as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to its form whether it comes from a chapter or a treatise which follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nodes is that you take or make more moist the place where you find the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have penetrated to the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this that it knows how to force.
If the running moisture flows, which has the colour it has, thus do as I have said about the other abscesses;
and after the entromissoire no moisture comes, know that it is fat, thus do as I have said in a cross, and take it with pincers, and gently scrape each part and turn the cotte where you treat it healthy with the nouement;
and if you cannot treat it healthy, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if he remains there, he returns to us many times;
and if he stays there a little while, and the wound does not grieve him, apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put soothing remedies on the hot abscess, and treat other wounds until he is healthy;
and if it is great to us, thus cut the lips of the wound, and treat what injures flesh.
and if the vein is swollen against you, or otherwise, hasten and apply the vitriol ointment, and leave it there for 8 or 10 hours, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which has been removed from the navel.
Here is the translation:
and they are like the needles whose sources are cut, and are of citrin iron, or silver, and those that are yellow, and are more experienced in avoiding black plague by encircling the fistula's cavities;
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the anelots are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are anelots that have three cavities of three manners also;
and there are anelots that have three cavities, and are also of three manners; and there are anelots that have two cavities, and anelots with a single cavity only, and are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
The head of those who are wounded are piercing, and of such there is who do not cut more than one part, from which they scratch the nails, because they cannot cope with the vein or nerve;
and of these introjected [things] are the leeches placed in the handles, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three manners: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
and one does not use more than the clear skin, as in legs, and arms, and limbs, and fingers, and similar things;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to fistulas of the veins, according to this form, whereby one stains blood:
and one puts it sometimes at the healthy spot that connects the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes one finds according to this great form:
Sometimes they swell the breasts of some men when their corruption begins, so that they seem like women's breasts;
and they become thick and swollen, and who wants to cure them, if one knows how to treat them according to this form of these lines up to .g.: then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicine of janrant char in a circle, then bring together the edges of the wound to suture, and care for it until it is healthy;
and the nipple sinks downward, and is amazed by its greatness just like it happens to women, if they make a circle above, with similar notches; because one is holding onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to the line G; then scrape off the skin that is between the edges, and remove the fat, and amend what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flowing of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. and let it absorb the remaining moisture and fat, then treat until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the sitting (or perhaps "of the seated" or "of the sediment")
These abscesses that come from under the sitting are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Those who hold moisture need to be treated according to this form, from line b to line g. And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment coming to that point so it becomes healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is full of pus, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
from the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and also it has inflamed veins with an abscess.
and if one touches thereon as much as it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the constriction; and when it is due to the vein, then there are signs of fever appearing.
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it is beneath the wings and angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in he who is inflamed with artery fever, make a cut above the skin of the loin;
It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in he who is inflamed with artery fever, make a cut above the skin of the loin; then open the size of the onion layers, and beautifully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered;
then put below it a needle, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in the jugular veins, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the jugular arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the place which is between the jugular veins of an intermediary vein, as far as the blood that is in it, and be freed from the abscess;
then administer the treatment which injures the bowel, as much as the ligament shrinks; then heal the one who is wounded at the eye, as much as it becomes healthy;
and if the abscess is according to the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can remove from the abscess to the whole skin; then thrust the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there is a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then the abscess, as I have told you, or the swelling of one of those parts as the head of a finger;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then push in another needle under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four fingers;
then press on the abscess until the superfluities come out, then press on the superfluity that comes from the heart and let go what is tied;
then put on a warm cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply remedies of tents and ointments until he is healthy.
of the abscesses of the veins
Also, how abscesses come into the artery and into the vein, they come into the veins when they are injured, or by too great exertion, and similar things.
And it happens more often in the joints and in the two and in all those where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but beneath the skin;
and it must be well treated from all parts, and does not go ahead or back, nor downwards nor upwards, and he who is in joints does not need to be coped by iron: by chance it will make contraction;
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin on the spatula-like. If the abscesses are small, you hold them with pincers, and cut into their root;
and if it is large, you suspend it with an oncin, and scrape it, then remove the bone and assemble the wound to the suture, and treat it until it is healthy.
the large hanging lips Sometimes it occurs in the stomach and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw some people who had them in their stomach which looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split apart, and it corroded immediately with moisture.
I cut them and found in one 18 ounces heavy, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of the incision shows that you examine if the patient is moist, and the color of the tissue is pale and moist and of subtle root;
Here is the translation:
and if you see the patient frightening and afraid of the incision with the iron, take a well-made thread of flax, and tie it to the joint as we have said, and let it stay there for two days;
and then hold it back, and do not cease constricting the thread of flax until it touches the joint, and thus you will perceive by it without effort; and if the roots are thick, take care to cover them immediately around the belly, but you can easily cover most of it,
then cauterize so it does not relapse; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the abscess which is of foul color and poor sensation and weak regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre hereafter.
when the skin is on fire
If the appearance of the skin comes from cauterization of a wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the skin, just as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
and if it is through the rupture of the skin and through the exit of the belly, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens to various exits. And if it is through the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers, it recedes, and then returns, and by chance, it becomes narrower, and grows much at the entrance of the bath, and through strong labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and it appears well when you press it with your hand, it doesn't resist at all; and if it's due to blood, it appears through these signs: large and hard abscesses, and it's fixed in a certain quantity.
And if it's due to windiness, it's soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or from the vein, or windiness. You should leave off the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then you should instruct the patient to hold his belly, and it should be stretched out straight, then sign from the navel all around the abdomen. then he instructs to place it carefully between your hands, then go inside the bed that you have prepared in every way, then locate the majority of the abscess above all the large uncle;
then open most of the abscess extended onto the lien, and you prick your finger indicating, and seek the intestine; if you find true vesicles taken from the lien, if you dissolve them, and prick the intestine at the bottom of the belly;
and if you find the boil, if you take it on the onion, and cut off the superfluity;
and if the artery is made contrary, or the vein, if you go gently inside, then return to your work and take nine needles, and prick nine strong threads, and prick the nine needles into what you have done in a cross that you make pierce;
Then strain the abscess in 3 places under the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb relax as long as it needs, and separate the dead flesh by itself. where you touch when it is subtle and porous, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said.
where you touch when it is subtle and porous, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be healed, and sew the limb.
a chancre disease
Here is the translation:
And the operations, when it is in its place or where you can osteer, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him healthier if he has manifest repletion, then anoint the patient with good health to perform the operation; then cut your incisions or tumor, and shave all parts, and remove all excess flesh without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb firmly in your hand or in something, and see that the blood does not make a contrary motion against the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize so that the blood is stanched; then cure with another cure until he is healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only clarified; and one must not touch iron for these .ij. similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy called "clarified" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you see the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as distension and solution of the stomach and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient having strong virtue, and he has no other disease but only dropsy, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must operate thusly. Here is the translation:
then look to see if the hydropisy is in excess towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the navel .iij. two fingers from the pubic bone; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then on the right, and it does not matter that the patient guides himself on the incision so that the superfluous do not flow towards the weak place;
Then prick the entire skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to the entire spatula-like area between the skin and the underlying tissue, as if scraping out a quantity of an ounce or so; then prick the underlying tissue until the spatula-like area reaches the empty vein, and that is the level of the water, then pull it back, and cut this instrument in the shape: And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of lighter iron or steel, with a small hole at its tip; and on one side there are two holes, and three on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, and that is the shape of the incision for which the writers cut the pen.
at the top is the scalpel, so when the instrument reaches the water level, then descend now onto the instrument; empty it at that moment, either half or a third part, because if you empty more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the arm, or he falls into a coma, or approaches death.
but empty it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then pull back the instrument and hold the water level, and it is held now by the cord which stops up the hole that is on the underlying tissue, as I have spoken, so you prick in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and pull from the water a small quantity.
Here is the translation:
of the stopping of the rod Never is born a child who has no hole in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If it suits thus that it does not appear at all .i. spatiumile very subtle according to this form: then put or hole .i. close subtly of plank, and bind and tie thus .iij. hours or .iiij. and when it wants to make urine, if so be removed the close, and make urine, and then put it back; and by chance there is no suit, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed. Those whose hole is small, it is medicated with a close of plank, as we have said, so it will enlarge. Those who do not have the hole in its place are blinded, for none are born who have the hole at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they elevate their rod high; and they cannot be relieved because the matter cannot come up to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patients lie on their back, then they are placed at the head of the rod and the cope as well as the size of a pen, so that the hole appears in the middle, as it suits; and beware of the efflux of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the flow of blood, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
the blisters of the penis Many times there are ulcers on the penis, and it is a bad appearance of foul lichen; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with a subtle onion-like remedy, and clean and wash all, then put on a cotton dressing in an Egyptian ointment; then treat the ointment daily until it is healthy. And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cauterization. When you have cleaned it, and the ulcer is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the ulcer which is inside first; and when it is removed, treat what remains. For when you treat them together, it is not assured that the area of the penis will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into the penis and the surrounding area; therefore, it is necessary to cut out all that is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice made from honey and flour, which has been made with the juice of green pomgranates and veal, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if blood flows out, apply lunar cauterization in this form: The cauterizations aid in these dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at the corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a lead tube into the penis, and urinate through it; and when the skin is torn apart at the head of the penis which has occurred in those who have not been circumcised, or which has happened due to wound or abscess, it is necessary then that you cut with an instrument curved like a ram's horn, so that the ligaments are disentangled, and the area of the penis is freed from all parts.
and if it is a serious matter to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument at the point of the rod and the skin; then separate it gently between the two, and I put subtly under a cold compress of millet in a cold water, so that it does not become inflamed again.
of the circumcision
Circumcision is not one of the least bothersome continuations, just like other wounds; however when we perform this work of our volition, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I wanted the largest part of the masters and the surgeons who performed circumcision around the thigh, and with forces, and in all a new incision; if they encountered the case because there are two tendons, and by chance if one cuts above and delays that below.
Or the recovery is slow, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two days hence it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrodes the vein, and many times they are born thus that they have no need of mending and I wanted.
From the mending which is done with forces to all the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all directions; but the thread should be well stretched over the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if they understand, that you do not make them bind the thread around the rod so strongly, and then make it move in all the ways that you can. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a dressing made with an egg white cooked in rose water, mixed with rose oil and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and treat with another treatment until it is healthy.
The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be tender and should be piercing, and the heads should be as large as the equally matched main.
The error in the mundification is when the heart within fails at the incision; then it is necessary that you extend to your finger, so that the eyes make an abscess; and the equal coping, and if you cannot hold with your finger, then take a holding, and then cope.
And if it lasts for three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the scabbing is light; then cope as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm it at all.
Here is the translation:
the retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the kidney, or congealed blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is there or in the neck of the bladder, so it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and let him put his feet on his back, and extend his belly from the top of the back, and stretch out the patient as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the kidney above, because the urine is discharged.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments which are called "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be a subtle silver needle, shaped like a bird's feather; and let it be a tube one and a half palms long, and subtle at the head.
And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double filament, and tie it to the head of the groin or of the thigh, and insert the head of the filament into the syringe; and cut off the superfluous part of the thread and insert just up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the vessel and the rod of moist olive oil and water.
Then place the syringe lightly in the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bulb; then insert the syringe up to the vessel, and feel the patient's urine come up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the conduits or it goes astray; then pull the thread all along the thread little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then extract it forth, and make the urine flow.
and reintroduce the syringe until the vessel is empty, and alleviate the patient's pain.
of the diseases of the bladder
When the blood or fluid comes into the bladder, where it is collected, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and that's its shape.
It is closed, and if you prick in two places: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the veins are prepared so that the medicine can be inserted well into the penis without excess, so that one can then remove the moisture, and stop when it's enough.
and when you see the medicines in the bladder, put the head of the instrument into the moisture, and pull out the fluid that is inside; if you pull out the moisture from the instrument, and then strongly push back the fluid inside; if the moisture enters again, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and that's the shape of a subtle syringe with which one injects into the bladder; that's how it is.
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below to the .i. breast or the tendons of the shoulder; then take a mutton bladder and put the moisture in which you will cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the shape of a double twisted thread, and heat .i. piece that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the instrument in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to expel all the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has just come into the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put .i. strong thread in these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles .i. deal, and put inside that which you will need of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes into the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction of assembled medicines; and I have told the difference between the stone in the kidneys as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cutting edge; and in the bladder, and in the rod; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety; and it appears suddenly, and the patient feels their penis, and they urinate frequently, and then become constipated; and many of these jumps are foundations; and it is easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in old people, and it's as youthful moisture, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders one from finding the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and push them back and move to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the lowest part of the bladder, and rises no higher than the belly; then make them sit between your hands, prepared in advance, and their hands should be below their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut into the stone. And if it does not yield to the touch of all, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger, if the patient is a youth; and press into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, lubricate it at the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the place where you saw to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand lift the skin which is under the loins in the part where one makes the cut; then he applies the spatula shaped instrument, so that it is the form:
And make a cut between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and let it be straight on the stone, and both sides should be equally deep or shallow, and let the cutting be so that it is wide by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps press the stone which is on the fundament, so that it feels no pain from the work; and know that there is a part of the stone where it has angles, and edges: if it is difficult to remove; and if there is a part which is beneath, similar to a pebble, and rounded, whose removal is light.
At that point where it has angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract it with the instruments which are like a lime at the head, in order to remove the stone so that it does not break apart; or you apply beneath it the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small perforation, and if there is no decay, then extract it with vitriol.
and if it has more than one stone, first apply the largest to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the flow, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must operate, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either they die, or the urine comes back through the wound that the eyes cannot hold; but in any case you must strive to remove, or to break up the tendons, as much as you can remove it piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound dressing of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put above it a warm oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then reset the patient on their bed, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, rise very well the level of oil and water, then treat with ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it be healthy.
And if abscesses and corrosions come in the wound, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and thus retain the urine, which is known in such a manner that without sound with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and rot it.
Then lift the wound of water and fire and sun, and aid it in all ways that you know, so long as it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the openings that you cure, that you bind the .ij. thighs, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; so I advise to cure in this way, that you cut many times, it is an excuse for cutting through this treatment. I have already proven this thus.
Take a forest of iron in this form and let it be at .iij. angled points fixed in the tison:
Then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron into the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is within the rod. If it is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, so lift the foot off the stone and another above, then make the stick straight in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then hold the stick firmly, and release the ligament, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it be healthy.
of the stone of women
Sometimes it happens that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens often, then the cure is grievous, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well acquainted with herself, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well acquainted with this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more hidden than the stone of the man, because it requires a deeper cut, and great fear has to be had there.
And if you need to resort to this, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and touch the true wound on, and if you do not find it, then ask for .i. subtle casting; and she presents a wise remedy in the life of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command of the inquiry into the stone;
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to make her push her finger or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain below her finger, and recommend that she pushes her finger or with the patient, and presses her left hand on the bladder firmly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feel upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft tissue, where it has moved apart, and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and be careful with the first small incision;
then put the reason in the incision, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to be known, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have roots. if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the blood does not flow, set on the vitriol broiet and hold for an hour so that the blood is staunched; then return to your work, until the stone is broken, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as tools to help you with your task.
And if the blood does not flow, and it is from an artery that is cut, set powder on the wound and hold with tourniquets and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it anymore, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the flow of blood is appeased, and the wounds are purified, then return to your work, until the stone is broken.
of carnous hernia
Here is the translation:
And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and is expanded that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining yellow to jaundice, or without red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or yellowish as we have said, then it is the red abscesses, .i. almost round in shape like the figure of an egg, and does not open into the joints, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then it is the red abscesses with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white surface, it feels so good; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should try all the inner corners, because its form is thus presented before. According to what comes after the inner corner, judge from what is inside.
According to what comes after the inner corner, judge from what is inside. And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to their power and the replenishment of their body; then he rests on his back, on something a little high, and put many blankets under him.
then he sits on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extends the rod to one of the ribs of the joints.
Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the nail, and make your incision entirely straight in dividing the skin of the joints until you reach the white fascia, and carefully strip it according to the tone.
Then pierce the plain fascia with a large perforator, and remove all the fluid, and then put your hooks, and stretch the fascia above; and do not touch the core of the joints, but only the fascia should be touched; cut out the entire or piecemeal costal cartilage of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
and if the fluid flows for a long time, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the fascia; then assemble the ligaments of the core of the joints into a single structure, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you raise the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decrement of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspended parts, and remove the fluid, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is assembled in three parts together, know that these are three branches; if you cut the other part just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a soft oil rosate.
and put another soft layer in wine and oil, and put on the three corners, and put above double sheets, and tie it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Then take three sheets, and fill them with layer of charpie according to this resemblance and sew them together by stitching in the gullet of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold on the foundation just up to the back, and the other on the part of the thigh; and the other two heads on the three angles, and let all be assembled, the restraint in the loop of the arm.
and no one is medicated with this branch of cautery in the size of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the corners, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the wound is uncovered.
If you take the fire cautery according to this form, and pierce that skin as on a curve, and strip it with this subtle fire cautery thus.
And take the cope in all the ways that you can, as much as you stretch; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of the decay of blood, and be wary of the operations of size.
and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses swell or decays of blood or something else, if it cures what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, if you make a small perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that the water is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining water, then treat it until the wound is healthy.
and if the white cloth does not let the water issue from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you apply a tube or instrument through which one draws out the watery discharge, so that its form appears before; and enlarges the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or within, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
from the abscess of the thighs
Know that in the treatment of this limb, there is fear in more disposals, because it seems to me that many are worth leaving it.
and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from corrupt humors, and similarly from bad habits; and it is often the case.
It is to know by excessive sharpness and fever, which is spread through bad habits, or from a blow.
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the corrupt humor; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance there are some painful and piercing abscesses, of a dark color, and sometimes they come from an artery, or from inflaming a vein.
When it comes from an artery, it is known by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and do not think that you should touch it.
That which is made from inflaming a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of tender touch with the fingers.
and one can well do the cutting on this similarity, and on the other flesh. and it is that you cut the cord of the loins, then place the egg in high, and throw away the white flux, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already sewn with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you throw away the egg, and cut it.
and if it is attached to the flux, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of the flesh is behind the true skin, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the skin, as we have said.
And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of warm oil and rose wine, and afterwards treat with other treatments until he is healthy.
of the abscess of the groin
These are abscesses enveloped by an envelopment resembling a .i. burden, with the softening of the groin, and the patient must be gently moved when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is well pressed as also rather frightening like this one before,
and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high chair, then bind him with suspensories from the joints down to his toes, for all the vessels that are close to the edge, and they sting the masters, and they stretch forth in this manner;
then cut into the spatula-like instrument broadly doubling over where the vessels are, so that they may be discovered,
and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
then fix a needle or where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein is found, and tie it again to the other head; then they grasp the copious right away, according to the length of the body, and in extracting the corrupting moisture;
then heal the wound as if like others or by anointing with a balm, so that no vessel sucks in, nourishing one of the limbs;
for by this, no harm comes, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the limbs with all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of the Syphac The symptoms of this rupture are by the section that comes from the Syphac, or the extension onto the belly in the area of the loins, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the hollows;
and this rupture is from the Syphac, or from the extension of it, and these .ij. manners of movement come from several causes: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is an extension from the Syphac, are that it comes on slowly and gradually, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal right up to the peritoneum, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the affected section of the swelling, which causes sudden severe pain at its onset, and there are various abscesses appearing under the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue with the intestine and body from the failure of the swelling.
And sometimes it settles beneath the intestines with the intestine, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments with fear, because they think they will be harmed.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to insert their finger into the wound within the hand, if they can reintegrate. then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips.
then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the joints from the length. then put within the flaps of the incision according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that your eyes can see issuing forth.
Then scrape the skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, so much that the white skin beneath becomes uncovered on all parts;
Then put your finger index in the one that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white skin beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second skin,
and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curvature of the joints, and hold the white skin above with your left hand, and lift the vein to all the skin towards the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein upwards, and separate what is above behind the ligament;
and if you find that the intestine is wrapped around or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
then take a needle or one that has a large thread made of ten threads, and sew up the back part of the syfac, which is behind the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syfac with a strong thread of two parts, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in, that the abscess does not grow there; and put the thread according to the first thread long and even, and after these threads leave two fingers' width of space which is beneath the heart of the joints the size of a finger;
and after all the others according to the roundness that the egg makes; then cut into the part which is beneath the skin of the joints, until the vein runs correctly, and the bowel, as we have said before;
then mix the cloudy mixture in oil, and put it in wounds, and I will mix the thread that we have mentioned. And no time is it cauterized beneath the skin as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
For this happens often, and let the ligament grow as long as it chooses for itself; and if it delays in healing, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a flesh wound
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done thus as the reeds which are assembled at the nose, in such a manner that you lift the veins, afterwards cutting lightly underneath.
then cauterize in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who have a tumor, until the veins burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
No rupture occurs in the anguish, as we have said, and opens the eyes; and do not descend into the intestines with the bowels, and if you do, it is little, and repair all hours.
and always if it stays too long at this point, the wound or syphilis believes, so much that the intestine descends.
and it happens through the extension of the swollen vein that is in the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and inflamed the eyes and opened.
and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and no cure is made with iron in this manner.
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then feels the limb of the swollen vein according to the quantity of two dots.
and then extract the vein that is beneath the skin which is swollen, then take the iron and place it on the apparent limb of the vein.
and press on the fontanel of the belly, then cut the two eyes appearing on the face of the ruler, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head of the ruler, and do not touch a point on the face that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the veins, if it is inflamed and heal the wound, so that it may be healthy.
The face is constrained, and has no appearance in the ruturation, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is a pleasant sight; and it is a masterful task, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient sit on his back, and to cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a seam, and if you see, first remove the superfluity of the mollified skin at .iij. seams or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the seams, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy, and sew the thread.
of the chastening
I know that chastenings are established in our law, and therefore I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to discuss them except for .ij. ways: one is that the mirrors respond when asked, and cure accordingly; and the other, because we often have mastery over chastening certain beasts to aid us, such as goats and sheep and chamois and other beasts. I say then that chastenings are made in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. In the one we make by attraction, we seat the beast in warm water, so long as the skin is mollified and pendulous; then take it with your hand, so long as it is reset and you no longer feel it. Of the chastening of size: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each hole with a .i. plug, when you have well cleansed them; and leave none of the subtle subtlety of the syfac which is above the vessels; and this manner of chastening is more moderate than that made by attraction, because at attraction something of the thighs remains, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are in two manners as follows: one is when they occur between the buttocks, shaped like a figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes constricting the urine. And the other manner is in women, and it has a prickly appearance like a rod and two buttocks.  And the treatment for men and women is that you cauterize the affected places completely, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, of those whose urine jumps through the skin of the buttocks, there is no cure.
of the tetany
Tetany is a wound affected on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tetany from your hand or from the joints, and cauterize lightly; and do not inject too deeply, lest blood comes out, then treat with another treatment until it is healthy; and there is another wound that arises at the mouth of the marrows, and swells, and by chance breaks forth, and resembles a cowe's disease, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow's disease". It is necessary that you treat it, as we have said about tetany, and treat until it is healthy.
of the rash
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are overgrowths of veins that without proper treatment become accustomed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thelul; and we have already said in the division the similarities with them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive curation. I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are deeply embedded in the marrow, and do not appear to the sense, if it is not the cure by iron. Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, one can feel, are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then apply the altelul as tenailles, and the cope in its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galenon, and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and confit it with honey and oil, and apply a plaster to her back. And if it is inflamed, that is good. If not, apply ventouses to the back and massage with iron; then take lard, and melt it in plantain juice or aglentier juice with old wine, and apply to the place.  And when the abscess rests, cure the place of ointment as long as it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough chief, so it is necessary to cover it as I said about thelul; and then cure until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the marrow
Here is the translation:
from birth
It is necessary first to know the natural figure of the infant at birth, and the signs are when you see the woman approaching below, and desire to smell the air: then hurry the infants to come out; then know that this infant's birth is according to the natural figure, and it issues from its head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on his belly, so that the infant comes out quickly; for when he descends onto his head, the second is with him, and the maternal superfluousness is purified by good moderation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes onto its feet, and comes upon the body or the shoulders, and the hands, or it comes onto its belly, or somewhere, and is converted by a fortunate accident on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid him.
If the infant comes out of its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a chair, or let the women hold her; and raise its nature from oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the midwife between her two little spatula-shaped fingers, which is the form: and find the second one, and cut to its nail as much as the moisture that is in the cord was; and press on the woman's belly so that the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesamum; then make her take a bath and be comforted by condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the infant is born. And if their hands come out, then it is necessary that you move them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet high; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not fall at the removal; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, then take hold of the hands at the outlet that is placed before, and extract the infant, and move it equally.
from the birth of the child upon its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, if it needs to be held upright. and then turn it little by little, until it is even.
then take its feet and extend them little by little.
When it jumps just above the elbows, if you command to grasp, and make steady with condition; if it jumps forth, then God wishes.
And if it does not jump forth as we have said, if it turns little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lighter.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a poultice of alum, and oil of sasam, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar. and put it on the nature of the woman within and drive out this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to the loins.
and when she is softened beneath, have her a girdle of myrrh, and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour; Then make them sit on the seat, then make them lean forward and hold their mouth and nose, and they take in the air lightly, for the infant is now jumping. from the escape of the child upon its knees When the infant comes in this form, then you put the bandage on its hands little by little.
from the birth of the child who comes out with one hand while One must learn to reposition the hand: if one cannot reposition it, one should elevate the arm, and move it.
if it cannot be moved, one should make it sit on a bed, and straighten the legs in a normal way.
then adjust the muscle that I have mentioned.
and it does not swell, if you make it sit on a seat, then study how to reposition the hand; and guide the infant according to their natural posture, and make it straighten up, and instruct it to take hold as long as the infant has strength for it.
of the rising of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face is turned towards its mother's back. I think that the child should hold your hand, then turn it little by little, and rock it gently.
and when it is even, then place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady. in this same manner for all the secondary (parts)
in this same manner for all the secondary (parts) When it comes to be in this manner for all the secondary (parts), then cut the secondary (part) at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated.
and he puts his fingers on his face and on his neck, if the top of the abscess, so it is not retained, and kills him;
then put the infant inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman that she take hold of it at no time:
of the issue of twins Here is the translation: They are strange things, and do not live, if few names;
I know that they should be multiplied, and are divided by the syrup which separates them, which is tied to the belly;
and no time is it so naturally like all those under us, as we have said.
And if they are grievously ill, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be applied, and make everything lighter and easier for her to do; and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six, or more up to fifteen, and all are fully formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise and glorious sage.
and it is fitting that the wise old man knows all this, for by chance it seems that these things have happened to him. if you do according to what he wants.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman with a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to perform manual operations; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of good virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be bent over on her back, and her arms be inclined downward, and her legs raised.
and the midwife hold the thigh from below, or she be tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart by the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils of alum, and fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint the bath with these oils and these poultices; then place them in the womb gently, then want the womb to receive them or she places the fingers that are suitable for this;
and take care that the infant's fontanelles are open so they descend onto their head; if you touch the onions in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
and if the descension is on his feet, touch them or prick them and massage the moist areas;
and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and let him lift all his hand lightly, and touch the onion in none of these places that we have said, until he comes to the desired thing;
then fix an encounter with another onion, or the third where you are in this profession, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they are equal in moving from one part to another, so that the onions issue forth, and the onions are held firm, as it is their form:
And if one part remains, oil the boil with some of its olive oil, and cut into that part, and treat the other part;
and if it remains a single point, set this anvil or higher up, and do it so much that it goes out entirely.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to stiffness. so you must wrap it in a bandage, so much that it becomes entirely still.
then apply the cup to the joint of the sole or to the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and in this way for the feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at the issue, or it has an assembled sharp chief, it is necessary that you insert the spine-like spatula between the two, and make the head straight and extract the sharpness; where you round it at the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus in this way the children are naturally given a great natural head; and then treat the bones as ligaments,
and if the head stands firm and holds to the strength, so it be not broken, until the moisture that is or worse comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces at the joints where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you puncture it until the moisture flows out.
And if he falls on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the remedies at the mouth of the marrow are light.
And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch it out with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and rub the belly or the breast, until the moisture that is there clears up;
and if the other limbs are numb, and the head remains still, If he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just up to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts an onion or two, and draws it forth;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, you must not work on it; then you must administer moist and greasy things; and he applies plasters, and injects with soft, warm, and soothing remedies.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it upright, then apply what we have said in the case of a living infant.
and if one cannot get around, if the treatment is carried out in parts, and nothing is left to chance.
And when you have done this, then apply what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow.
and if a flow of blood comes, it should be stopped with a tight bandage, and other remedies should be applied.
And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had died in, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the dead one. After long tension came an abscess in the belly, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to great putrefaction.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I place on an emplaster of strong attraction, and there issues out a bone, and after some days another. I marvel very much, because this belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in better condition. and you examine the woman's long tense skin, and then you touch a little of the belly around the loins;
and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
to return the thigh to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the presser, to which one adds the books; and at .ij. turnings as .ij. heads of the ligaments. In every way, the horns should be more subtle of the constrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the instrument be of a foot in length, and the margin of the trees should be thus, and it is one palm and a half; and in the midst of these, the ligaments should be adjusted to this same instrument, which should be firmly fixed at one end and the other, at half a palm's length or a little more;
and this adjustment is inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the horns.
Another form, similar to it but more subtle and lighter, should be made from ebony wood or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tongs. and it should have two arms, as you see, a palm's length long, and two fingers wide;
and when you want to open the marrow to all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs covered; then insert the two arms of the instrument together into the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument deep between her thighs; then you should put your hand on the entire instrument, if you have done as the equal ligatures, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, until the bail makes what it wants.
These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much is hastier the work, and higher at home according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared to it, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the second is retained in the infantment, then you must command the patient to retrieve his wing, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose. and if it jumps through the skin, it is good.
If the skin does not, it takes the pot, and makes a poultice or cover, and you put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calmant, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centuary.
all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or put in water over the fire; then put a cloth or poultice from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow.
and the string as long as the vapors come out from the marrow; then make it sterile, as we have said. If the secondary inflammation hurries. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get worse, then instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or mussels, and then apply the remedy naturally.
and seek the secondary inflammation; and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it gently and directly, so that the marrow does not break at the extraction. but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes out and disarticulates.
And if the mouth of the diseased is already narrowed, we have mentioned the treatment of sternutation, and of fumigation with herbs.
and it is not all of this that we have said, if you beware that you do not fall into error in treating.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the diseased, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then you administer a cluster of four remedies.
if the poultice is applied and replaced, and it will come to an end; but meanwhile, when it putrefies thus, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Here is the translation:
The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one is this:
And it is to be seen similarly to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tinea until it is exhausted, and then begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their fundament perceived, thus it is stupefied by subtle signs. it is necessary then to apply the bait so that it perceives the subtle sign with its finger, and does not touch the spatula with the ague, and holds back the ligature so that it does not touch it.
then put on the affected limb a mixture of wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not recover, then put or apply a poultice of plant material, and leave it on for days, and be removed when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess comes; it is necessary to cover that suddenness: if it is cured, if we have spoken of the treatment of a piercing wound.
of the fistula from its foundation Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and larger than those that come from beneath the foundation of the flesh, or in the space of the injured parts,
if there is a fistula or more; and when that nodulation is ancient, it operates, and encrusts moisture or white subtle pus,
and often these are fistulous ulcers; and are recognized by the fact that they burst or have evacuation or flatulence when the patient makes evacuation, and sometimes by chance in their jumping up.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod, and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes a penetrating fistula by its foundation, and it does not penetrate further. and it is that you touch your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if he has tortuousness, if you put a subtle probe of a horse's hair, as long as you feel the probe or the hair on your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come with pertussive ejection or windiness or veri, as we have said; know that it does not pierce well; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is piercing just next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then it is the tendon coming up to the place; if there is no twist and the discovery of pain within, then it is that he needs immediate relief, and no medicine is worth a sudden oath;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through work, and the vain efforts of foolish doctors who get involved.
In those that are not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is torsion, as long as you know where the tent goes.
If the patient feels it at the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger there,
if you feel afterwards that the tent has penetrated; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or flesh, then know that it is permeating; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One can hardly heal some of them, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that one makes, if it is subtle heat according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. and the whole hot thing in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these heated rods are burned, which resemble a bird's feather.
and then the treatment of many wounds in a muddy place, as long as that wound becomes strong, then the treatment of ointments, spreading and drying.
If it is thus healthy, it is good.  See, no other way can it be healthy;
and hold it between, and do not prick exactly to the finger which is at the foundation, and place a thick covering of flesh or skin between your finger and the hold, and you see the fistula in that which shows the covering of the wound; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and cut again before the hold, and then apply the cautery, as long as it reaches the head of the hold;
and it will be delivered the tension, and it will fall; then I will show you those withered fingers that seem a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
And if the blood does not come to you, and it is short between you and the vein, then cauterize with fire or with medicinal water.
For the fire cauterizes assembled in this way: it is to know, the dryness of these joined fingers, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the treatment of swollen veins in mud or in broken earth, as long as the veins open wide, and it makes the dry fingers burst forth from the mud.
Then cure the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed with dry medications.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes near the deep foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the cord or the suture or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no fiercer ways than the path of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the bone, or if you can, put tents and cure as at first;
and do not go too deep in the wound, so you do not cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and come to the evacuations by the voluntary sense. then the cure, as we have said;
then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the wound then when it is cut from the true foundation, or by tension or by another appointed instrument; then define the faulty vein which is in the wound, as much as you can;
then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that undermines the foundation: if it is something lighter for the patient.
And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or touches the bottom of the foundation beneath the skin above. if you take a perforated tent at the head in this form: And thrust it deep into the fistula until it reaches the head, and thrust the tent entirely along the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is penetrating into the margin of the deep wound, then pull out the thread of that perforated one, so that you thrust your finger or fondement.
and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the fistula heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay there for a day or two.
and restrain it no more than once, until the threads grasp those flesh parts that are between the two, and heal.
Then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healthy.
If the fistula does not pass, if you make it pass in all the ways that you can, so it is not too deep inside.
For it does not seem to make a copper plate for the ulcer's dressing, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spine-like fistula that one makes from the ulcer is very similar to one, partly and cutting. and on the other hand not, because one does not see what one should not see, if as you see here:
Emproys are according to two manners: where they are in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they immediately stop bleeding, and there is one or more, and they are removed from the foundation and from the top of the foundation; but those that are removed have little moisture,
and immediately afterward add a little water of citrine or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deep in the fundament, it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go to the bathroom, until the foundations are loose, and they appear with threads; if you hurry, and the pent is like tendons, or you hold it on your finger, then you cut into its roots;
and if the uncines cannot hold them back due to their moisture, then take them with a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of chamelot cloth; and extract them with your fingers, then cut, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the vein of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said or chapter of cautery, then you treat with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient of piercing and bitter clusters through washing what is in the foundation, so that it can issue openly;
when the patient cannot urinate, and if the thread is outside the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you take them to your nail or to the fastenings, and you cut them, then you treat as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron;
Here is the translation: and it is two fingers wide; and hold the thread firmly, then touch the thread, and extract the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave it thus to correct the excessive bleeding of blood.
then put on the dressing, a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let it be until it heals, and when they are healed, if they are treated with ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
of the dryness of the veins or base Many times there is dryness of feces in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you touch at the tip of a spatula or on an ungual nail the scab which does not allow it to become moist. then heal it as long as it is swollen, just as it is necessary.
and if it cannot be healed, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, until it hurts much, and becomes scarred. then heal him as long as he remains healthy.
you excrete A formice is a small, false appearance within the body, and it goes very deep in perforation;
and sometimes it finds the blood, and one feels as if dead from excretion, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than in any other part.
And the cure is that you take a vein of a bird's feather, or a strong feather from a vulture, and place that vein on the affected area, so that the circles penetrate the affected area entirely. then turn your hand all around the vein so that you grasp everything entirely around the affected area, and place it in depth, and extract the affected area from its roots.
And if you see, make a tool in the form of a cane or iron, and be subtle below and draw above.
do not prick, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the affected area, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
of the form of theclyster Never make a clyster of silver or copper, or of tin or lead alloy; and never use these small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Those that one prepares for the treatment of children who are weak and painful are small.
The form of the small and large clyster is above, wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there is a disunion where the intestines are bound together, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and one of the sides has .ij. perforations, and in the other .i.
and let the intestines be wrapped with medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and let it be perceived all around with many small perforations,
and let there be between each perforation .i. fingers' breadth of space, then insert into these perforations .i. strong thread twisted from crude hemp in .x. or elsewhere, and assemble the intestines as if it were a bag; and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front of with a strong thread, then clusterize; and that is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the patient with oil of a cloister or of apricot kernel, or similar thing, then apply it lightly.
then sprinkle the ministers with his two hands together, so that it be all visible, then remove the cloister, and lift the patient's legs to the bench,
and let the medicine be absorbed, if it can penetrate thus far as it can; and if he sleeps a night entirely, it is more great aid.
And if you treat the patient for a disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to be absorbed, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
And if the morbid matters are at the foundation, or an abscess, then the cluster should be as subtle as possible for a child.
and it is the shape of the subtle cluster above where the skin is held back:
of wounds
We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things with which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and stroke of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
or that are made according to the locations of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's a matter of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great, And you should gently touch the abscessed area: if you make it immediately healthier around the head wound, so that little blood comes from the wound, and the healing should be on the opposite side of the naval area;
and avoid the patient's fullness from wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to get better, then reduce his meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
and apply to the wound, abscessed hot oil that comes from a mill wheel, or rose oil, or wine steeped in it.
and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, as it is fresh with all its blood, and it does not move because of air or powder, which I will mention a little later;
and if the wound is moved, put on some ointments, until it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, such as a sword or similar wound, and the edges cannot be assembled by themselves, then assemble them by suturing, as I will say for wounds of the belly, concerning the stitching.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and is deep, and only holds on for a little while, then cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the skin to its natural state. and instruct the patient to eat large pieces of meat, if they are tested and well-cooked, as with poultry, and similar things.
And if you find an ulcer or putrid flesh, and it does not adhere to the bone, then remove all the putrid flesh, and throw it away, then apply the treatment.
and if it has become stuck in the wound or vein, without a crust, and it cannot be removed by medicines, then try to extract it, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread. and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in this way that the arsenic has not moved.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; lively chalk three parts, and powder subtly. and fill the wound, and constrict it firmly, so that it heals well and joins with all its sap.
and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so that it does not inflame; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
And often one makes a poultice of hot ashes when there is no incense nor the blood of dragon, but only that the wound has not been treated.
And if the wound has been treated, meanwhile in this way, if you do not put this powder on it;
but put on some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it throws off the pus; then heal other wounds as much as he is healthy.
And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold steady as subtle pinces.
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerves, if there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, because it hurts the nerves and makes them retract. and not to put anything cold on the wound, because the nerve substance is cold, and its connection with it is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soothing, thus heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it thus in warm water. and other mines of a similar kind, prepared in this manner, and applied with moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, thus lay on bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, thus pierce or below the level.
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, thus stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is the profession.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular, and the conduit is guarded, because the passage goes. if you burn the heart on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and let no days pass, then heal the ulcers of the jaws as long as they are healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers; and let it be unbound and aligned the exit;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
from a wound of a lance or a knife
If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, examine whether the wound has taken in air as the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not stop the bleeding. and examine the body, and look at the patient. but I put an attractive ointment, and bind it with a bandage for two days.
and if you have no ointment, then put much cotton on the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart, nor disturbance in the alignment; and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed. Here is the translation:
and if she cannot heal, and operate, then knows that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do it.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught hold of pieces, thus cure the wound, and remove the false fractures if they are dislocated. and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound putrefy, thus alleviate the extractions.
and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
Here is the translation:
The breakdowns of the belly are great and mighty and small;
of the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the internal bruising;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one;
because when one puts back the intestines in place, they must not be pushed back in a hurry; Because the intestines are swollen so much that they feel cold, if they return more to points,
and because this is why the inner wound hurts, because that's how one resets the intestine to its place like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is in three ways:
the common fractures have a fracture of the belly,
and the treatment of other wounds of the body and .ij. other proper treatments are common to other wounds;
and they are even more proper with the treatment of the belly, and I will describe each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside, and a grievous thing is to reset it, which is by one of the .ij. methods: for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, for that which the intestine is swollen by the cold.
And when it is chilled, warm it in such a manner: soften a sponge or a piece of cloth in water and apply it gently, where you burn with acid splashing and piercing. and scorch the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and no time makes these wines restraining, and it is murderous that I should suck for dis-inflaming.
And when you see the inflammation departing, then anoint the intestine with acid or salt and evil humors are cooked. for it is aligned the entry to little of thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument from which one gathers the humors;
and the first treatment is to drain that which is swollen; that we should not cut without great necessity for it;
and it's the instruments for splitting:
if you cut within the curve and do not deviate, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps outside, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, Here is the translation:
When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part of the belly. it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and it is in the lower part of the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is on one of the sides. if you make an incision in that place where the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to manage what I say about large wounds and injuries.
In small wounds, it is necessary that you are well-prepared,
then you have between your hands, I minister piously, who pulls out the entire bandage with his hand, and bring together the lips; and it is the common manner of stitches,
and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, Then let the skin of the wound rest, which is of the same thickness, and he makes a thread or it has a strong twisted fibre; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac,
Then he strains with a double thread around the needle of the .ij. parts, then assemble the .ij. heads of the wound together,
and then let .i. fingers of space, and he fixes another needle; then thread the double thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you have mastery of the needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large, for the subtle needles grasp all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well: Because it is necessary for them to be moistened;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
so that they do not close over and open the wound before the suture;
and then close the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and he must hold tight or wrap around the head of the needles to keep them still, and let them be until the wound is sewn;
and this method of removing the needles is more convenient in small wounds, for it suffices to leave a needle or two.
The second caution is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of leather and the two heads of skin sewn into a needle or it has a strong middle thread; and when you have pierced these heads all together,
and when you have pierced these heads all together, then reset the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and put a space between each vertebra, the thickness of a smaller finger;
this vertebra belongs to the man,
and I treated a wound that one of my servants had in his belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and it was a wound more than a palm large, and it was well of the intestines about two palms large,
and it was a wound within the belly. I replaced the intestine then, and it had been without food for 23 hours.
and the wound was sewn up to fifteen days, and it healed, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not heal at all from the ointment, for I stayed in a place where they found nothing, nor any medicine; and put on a cotton pad over the wound many times a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healthy.
Now I shall tell you the proper ways of cauterization:
Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to the area within;
when it has pierced the straight heart in a straight line, if you have struck the head of the siphac or cauterized or where you have pricked with the needle,
and make it pierce another part of the area within just up to the defective part;
and the understanding of this treatment is that you should burn away just as the barber does the hairs, and let it simmer on one side, and take it back from another, until the treatment is completely accomplished.
The second way of treatment, which Galen describes properly,
it is thus that some do, who naturally assemble the injured parts together, and apply one of the heads so that it faces another head, in such manner:
fix a needle or head that has been inserted proximally, and make it pierce the soul of the limb, and let the heads of the joint face; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the part that is weakest just up to the innermost part, as the head of the sick person suffers;
then make a piercing on one and the other part of the affected area up to the interior, in the other heads of the mirror that are on the other side;
and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen says this in his book, and no one testifies to it,
one must cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or it has thread in each one;
and one must thrust one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is a suture more grievous than others in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus the arrow has moved, if you reinsert the intestine, and sew up the cut; then put on a powder made from charming charcoal,
if you reinsert the intestine, and sew up the cut; then put on a powder made from charming charcoal, and the arrow has moved, if you put on no dressing that is present, as long as the wound closes; and they pull the thread, and are sewn the sutures, and the mirrors; then heal the wound as the others, until it be healthy;
and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, cotton much, and remove it several times a day until it be healthy.
For you have no other remedy in many dispositions except when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not affect the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light anointing oil of temperate heat, or a rose oil, and put it between the fingers, and beneath the axilla;
and if they feel pain or rotting in the belly, and often happens, if they are given a cluster of black wine immediately, and meanwhile the rotting reaches just up to the intestine;
and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is through the sensitivity of the veins that they are, and through the subtlety of the whole body, and the approximation of its natural strength.
And if the serum flows from the wound, set it back just as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turns towards yellow or black, then you must read the spot that is black, which removes blood that does not come from a vein. for there are veins and arteries;
Then remove what is between the ligament, and put the joints in their proper place beneath the wound until it is far enough to extract the arrow when the skin is cut, and the wound is swollen.
of the rupture of the good intestine
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some homes,
because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by the point of a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and thus obstructed the digestion and ventilation;
I examine a patient according to what I can see, and do not cease from subtly probing until he is healthy, and the light shines through.
And when I saw him shining through, I doubted that the patient did not have a bad condition in his stomach; and there was no point of pain, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner: Take flame tongs to large wounds, then bring together the lips of the wound. and when the tongs have opened their mouth, then place them on the two lips,
then put another cauterizing iron afterwards in the same way as before, so that the wound is entirely cauterized;
and cut into the wound. If the head becomes fixed in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
in such manner: take the head of this gut thread that is very loose, and then attach it to the head of this subtle twisted thread of linen, then put the thread on the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper position;
and this manner of treatment of wounds is not beyond what follows the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal tubes, if there is no skill to heal it, except with subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is universally called a "fistula". and likewise when it is combed and rendered numb.
And a fistula is according to the true nodulation, hard and whitish, where one does not feel pain, and it is thus combed like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and numb, and other times dense; Sometimes little, sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not whole, and there is no flesh; it is not due to one of the eight causes:
it is to know, by the small flow of blood or course; where for his evil. where for that which has hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not let anything grow there. where it has too much swelling. where the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality. where the medicine is not good in the treatment; because for that reason the corruption is a kind of plague; where because of the property in the region the digestion is slow, and the health is slow, and it is weakened by nature; where there are veins or bones;
and I have already demonstrated all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by operation of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, where at the spleen, or at the intestine, or at the bladder, or at some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or at some joint of the hands or of the feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor and ignorance;
and if it is an ulcer that does not heal until it reaches the place I have told, and you are confident of the cure, and you examine it, if you take a probe of iron or steel, if the ulcer is straight, if it is so;
and if the ulcer is twisted, then search with a subtle probe of lead, for the leads bend into the twistedness;
and you should make a fistula at the main perforations, and you cannot search it well by feeling. if you cleanse it through one of the perforations,
for the mists flow from one perforation to another, and purify;
then you should search with your power, whether you feel an bone or nerve, and it is separated in the background,
and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressing with your hand, and the place where they feel it;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if the wound follows what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if the wound follows what I have told you, and remove the rotten flesh and the corrupt humors that are within; and then the treatment until it is healthy
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, it is necessary that you cut in deeply, as much as you can, then I usually apply a soft poultice in medicine for fever, and the boutons just at the head of the fistula,
then I usually apply a soft poultice in medicine for fever, and the boutons just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is accumulated at the bottom;
and then he puts ointments on the wounds, so they heal quickly.
and if it is not healed by this, he cauterizes as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, he cuts. If a vein or nerve is not troubling you in principal members, as we have said;
and if his skin is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let them remove it as much as the decay is entirely removed, then heal the things infected with charcoal as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and render it hollow as if before, know that you are not mistaken just as it was done:
If you discover and inquire as much as you can while being at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healthy, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deeply rooted, that you cannot overcome it; if there is no other remedy than to let nature do its work;
and if it has a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with bandages, if the extraction is made with a suitable instrument for that,
and if it has many bones, so remove them all, do not leave a single one;
and if moisture makes it counter, there is no error or fear if it suppurates and becomes moist and flesh, and releases the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them at one hour, then put on the wound a poultice that induces suppuration, and let it be until the abscess is formed between the bones,
and then if they have lighter bones;
and if it's a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, if you remove only the corrupted part so that the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corrupted blood, it comes just below the bone; if they want to heal and cover everything just up to the corruption, and then treat until it is sound;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, if you take an example and help with your work.
It was a young man of thirty years old who had a pain in his leg for a reason that came from within the body,
until the matters came to the leg and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to remove it by opening;
but the doctor operated foolishly, overriding so much that the abscesses opened, and corroding many matters, and it became fistula, and there were many perforations that all went bad and moist in the body;
and many a mirror mirrored cure within ten years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and that which flows through the pores to a large body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
I poked a tent in one of these holes, and then sought all the holes.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the holes as far as I discovered a part of the bone. and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went just to the bone within;
I saw this one who appeared to me with a corrupt bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, because that is what I suspected.
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but could not succeed;
and then I started again, and discovered the bone as it was before,
and found the continued corruption in the bone, and I saw it, and then I suspected it, and I thought of resetting the limb;
but I could not touch as much as I grasped around a palm of the bone, and it was stronger than all its joints. then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and relieved suddenly.
and it did not need to recommence the work for the faintness of the patient, who could not suffer. and because of the fear of death that I had of him. For the evacuation of blood often happens, but it was completely healthy,
For the evacuation of blood often happens, but it was completely healthy, and it grew on the bone of the shoulder a hard callus, and was of good disposition and had no hindrance nor contrariness in everything, neither to the wing nor to come.
and stop the bleeding, so that you remove the corrupted flesh from beneath, and uncover the flesh above the bone where you saw the ulcer, so that the ulcer does not infect the flesh; and put a probe or a tube beneath the bone to remove the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to cauterize so much as one can see and feel the corruption, and cauterize again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it discovers the entire flesh; then apply a hot iron underneath,
and then cauterize from one part to the other the corruption, and be the cauterizer far from the corruption, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone or it contains from the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate;
and if the corruption is on the finger of the hand or on the finger of the foot, then it is very serious; but however it is necessary that you inquire into this corruption, how it appears to you; and you should mummify in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not counteract you;
and know that the incisors and the nerves for coping with these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the outlets, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for that reason it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
and you will know how to show the instrument with which you have mastery, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you prepare the instrument with which you have mastery, according to what is suitable for it.
of fire The head perishes either because of inward decay or because of outward putrefaction.
and when you will have medicated that corrosion through the treatment with medicines, and it does not improve at all, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, then the patient escapes by means of death, or through malice, which is a greater fault, than the defect of the limb;
then the patient escapes by means of death, or through malice, which is a greater fault, than the defect of the limb; and the signs are such that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire. and afterwards the blackness spreads, then it corrodes from one limb to another, and takes hold of the entire body; if you hasten to copper,
and it is through the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar things,
If the corrosion is at the top of the finger, thus the cupping, and do not give it space to reach up to the hand.
And if it reaches up to the hand, thus cupping at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, thus cupping at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and it does not matter to apply remedies that are contrary to its strength;
and thus we do when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it will seize after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, it seizes the whole foot; and if it rises in the leg, then it seizes at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the manner of applying the copper or the soot to the limb is such that you bind it above and below, and stretch one minister down at the lower end, and another minister up at the upper end, and you dissect the flesh which is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
then apply the copper or soot, and put a piece of clean linen on each part, so that the soot does not touch the healthy skin, and bring to the patient another wound and abscess because of a fall.
And if blood flows out when you operate, then cauterize the wound hastily. where you apply some retaining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
then bind the numb member with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will counteract it when it has to do with a man having a swollen foot:
he had a black spot that seemed to be burnt by fire,
and that corrosion first went into his toe of the foot, so much that it took over the entire foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was without sense;
and long afterwards he felt the corroding or pain of the hand, and it came to me
and I applied things rebounding after the purification of the body, but could not stop the corroding;
and he saw that I was binding the hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to rebound the material; and doubted also that if I cut off his hand, it would not die, because the strength of the man was feeble; and he became desperate, and fell back to his ground, and he hastened to cover his hand, and was wounded;
and I have not seen it happen otherwise than that one does something else, so that one has mastery.
Never does an abscess come to the flesh of a nut, and it stays for so long that it makes a great accumulation of pus; and then they break and pierce, and jump the bow, and hold the empty places, as if one is unloading. and the skin that is above is as subtle as the delicate sheets. and do not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches just to the bone in the fontanel, it is called "fistula".
and the skin if it is that you cut completely around, and similarly when it is subtle, just like an unraveling; and do not be mistaken by its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is damaged, and the corruption is not in the fontanel, and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the clyster is thus:
look at how the ulcers are large, and the pus that comes from them is of foul smell, then the clyster of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take assafetida, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in the vessel over the fire, as long as the medicine is red, and distills as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it into water and into honey, and cleanse the womb, and hold back the perforations; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then extract it in sprinkling;
Do this many times, until the breasts are exhausted, and the pus is evacuated.
and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of wood from vine, and throw water above,
then strain, and cleanse, until you know that the breasts are well cleaned;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither Egyptian medicine nor the powder of ashes if they are to be treated with a mixture of water and honey or if there is a little bit of litharge paste; or you treat it with a mixture of honey and wine, which the honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the chest is well purified, if you cleanse what makes the flesh grow in it,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; where you cleanse with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties or treatment of ointments I have mentioned;
and if the perforations of the breast are small, and the cane of the lancet cannot enter, if you enlarge it with a piece of iron a little, and place there a tent of Egyptian ointment, or ointment of balsam, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and let it close slightly so that the lancet can enter,
and if he feels that the blow is above, whether it is on the head or lower than where it is. For when the blow is in the forehead, then do not let it swell up there; and if you cannot cover the affected area below, just as you saw, if it appears in such a way that the blow runs to the lowest part where it is,
and if you cannot cover the wound beneath in this way as you have seen, if it appears in such a manner: that the bowel collapses gently downwards, and does not leave anything of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound,
and stand upon the drapery of linen that covers the entire breast; then gather all the strength in the right place of the breast, a little larger than at first, then there is a gentle ointment on the other drapery according to the quantity of the breast, and put it on the breast to align the bandage, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days, once;
and he who is above the pertussis of the breast, often helps by opening the cavity, and knows that it runs from the cavity, whether it is venom or a little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed of the patient's feelings of pain or name, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the pertussis of the breast, If you know that the senses are affected already, and approach the saints;
and then untangle it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untangle the wound, if you change to another dressing, and renew the binding.
And if the senses are troubled by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not affected yet. And if subtle wounds occur after a long time, do not despair of the health.
for the health approaches. For it is men who delay in giving remedies for their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if a swollen belly hurts the soul after many days, know that the senses are not changed.
and if the senses delay in perceiving, and it is prolonged, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue. if we apply ointment of diafynit, because it has a great part of glass, and it's the last medicine;
take ointment of diafynit, and make it with oil of rose, and the juice of equal vintage in substance;
then confit it and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked in groats, when the ointments of diafynit are not present,
where you take mirror and alum and incense, and the broth, and powder on the honey when it is above the fire; and then in glue the cloth, and spread it on the breast, and no one administers to an Aristologist often, and roots of the heavenly lily, which is as effective as flour of veils and a hundred;
and roots of the heavenly lily, which is as effective as flour of veils and a hundred; and in use of simples or composites: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use; and if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,
and if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard parts, or in the ligaments; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the finger
A boil is an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the thumb. or beneath the foot, or by chance it grows on other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care of it, then an abscess of the foot comes. and it corrodes and gnaws away so much that it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes the whole thing;
and there come the ulcers up to the bone, so that they bring putrid pain, and it is the head of two large fingers, and it is a dark complexion.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you cut to the flesh, removing all the superfluity that is accumulated on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy.
and if the nail presses on the flesh in, and it starts to point, and the blister, then it is necessary that you put a remedy beneath the nail that points to the flesh, and apply a poultice on top, and gently and lightly soothe the subtle and delicate flesh, and apply to the remaining flesh of the wound burning and corrosive remedies to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, scrape it, and pull out fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the decayed tooth, scrape it in the name of us, just as it has been said before; then heal them as long as they are healthy;
and if he is feverish and swollen, and feels great pain, then you must first heal him; then cut the finger of the thumb stuck in the wound, cutting across above;
and beware that the cut does not reach just to the flesh which is beneath the finger, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something soothing on it.
The two fingers that are born on the hands of certain men by chance are all numb, and by chance they have a piece or bone, and never an ankle,
and none of them grow at the root of the joint, where the growth is in no way from the fingers. Those that grow on no knuckle of the toe do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the toe, perhaps move;
the size of one who is withered is slight, in such a manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold it softly.
In he who is born or should be in the back of the spine, it is necessary that you cauterize first the round flesh up to the bone. Then cauterize the bone with a suitable burnt offering to that, then treat it until it is healthy.
The sudden pains that come together come from birth, or from sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
If it happens that you feel that pain, then the doctor must repair according to their natural forms; then put between two tender or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two subtle pieces of lead, as long as the eyes are stuck, as it is necessary.
If suddenly he comes to one of his fingers with the palm, if it is numb, as it seems.
Of veins
They are large, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come into many parts of the body;
and they have more in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
It is necessary therefore that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the soundness of the basilica.
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is that they take it by drinking, and another way is to draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein, and draw out all the blood.
The cutting is done in this manner: first raise the leg of warm water very strongly, so that the gross blood is subtly divided. Then stretch the leg of the patient from above the thigh just to the part below the knee; then vein cut in one place, or in two, or in three, of a large size,
then extract and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one head to the other, as much as the patient can suffer without issuing the virtuous blood;
and then lay it down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black-colored foods;
and recommend evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not annoy the patient.
The elevations of the foot are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to warm water as hot as it turns red, and fills the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then cover the vein from the loin to the head of the knee, or in the part below the joint;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of this part, until it appears when one feels it;
and it looks red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
then insert the rod below, until it is lifted from under the skin, and then prick at the ankle more lightly;
then cut in another place above the two fingers; then scrape the skin on the vein until it appears; then apply the poultice to the reason, if you have done so, and bind it to another ulcer, if you had done so previously;
then cut away another piece of flesh, or more if you are a master of it, then apply the poultice, and bind it to the toe of the foot;
then remove and apply the poultice up to the second cut; then strip away the flesh from cut to cut, until it is completely bare, then bind;
and if you cannot remove and lift it, then push a needle through everything, if it is a strong double thread; and the ladder and the tray, and you take off below; you straighten it, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as it fits; and beware that it does not slip, for if it slips, you cannot draw or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have drawn it all out, then put on the place of the wound a warm poultice made with wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
And if the veins are contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and they are not straight, as we have said, It seems you want me to translate the given medieval medical treatise from Old French into English. Here is the translation of the first sentence:
It seems you want me to translate the given medieval medical treatise from Old French into English. Here is the translation of the first sentence: The shape of the iron tool with which one opens the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it does not open the vein.
and it is of large curvature, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is engendered in legs, in hot parts where no herbs nor tree grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance, it happens to another part rather than the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that spreads beneath the skin,
as it comes within the body like snakes and worms, inserting themselves between the skin and the flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its course, and the veins begin to issue forth, just like the root of a plant.
When the chest is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth measuring one and a half inches up to the nipple.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if you envelop it around the cloth, and the nipple; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, so that it may be entirely freed. for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease.
Here is the translation:
and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with 5 or 10 pouces of length, or of 10. and a hand comes to me, from which it issues 10 pouces of length, and when you cut it, if you find a bone or pierced, and pierce it just to the bottom,
if all of it issues; and let the material that is within be evacuated, and apply to the limb medicines that cause no putrefaction whatsoever a day, then cure as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein runs into the marrow of the foot, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the toe, or of the foot. and there come many perils, and where it jumps suddenly; cure the wounds thus as we have said before.
From the wounds that grow between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cow's disease", because it often affects the oxen.
and it is a small wound that grows between skin and flesh, and spreads throughout the whole body, ascending and descending. and they feel well by walking from limb to limb, as long as they straighten their skin or where it hurts, and jumps suddenly;
and it is caused by bad digestion of certain humors, like worms, snakes and lice, or tapeworms in the belly;
and doubt not of its evil nature, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot force it, as long as it goes:
it is necessary then that you bind the limb above and below with a strong, tightly-strung bandage,
then cut above and the trajectory of the fracture, and if the verse is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cut above, and pull forward;
and it is necessary to use the patient's purification of body with dissolving medicines for the bad humor pores,
and beware of rotten infected flesh.
From the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes into some members, and then it moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a swollen arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and afterwards, he sees his strength return as if a nerve at the shoulder, more than anything, just like living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and fixes in the shoulder,
and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
then I count on it turning back into the body, as I see it.
I was very surprised how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen that they had well transferred the pain from one place to another, but I did not know how to treat it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins and because of that it seemed to me that her ventilation was constrained;
and I did not appear to be according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins that are responsive.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said. If you place it above and below hastily, and then cover it so that the wind constriction reaches the patient's skin; and cauterize the skin; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the treatment of those who expel wind, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they fall.
The diversity of them is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and notched ones, and rounded ones; and those which have sharp angles, and those which have length, and those where there are fragments; and that which falls into no member if it falls in several ways: either in a principal member it notches,
Here is the translation: When it falls therefore into no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appears: it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply fixed, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps back the artery which is on the brain, Here is the translation: and perhaps it happens without strength of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a pimple, and jumps out also as a bruise of flesh;
and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow so it is not in.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or hits, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose. and by chance the septum moves thus like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and sweating cold, and fainting: he knows then without doubt that death approaches.
And the signs of the wound that never heal are that without flat ulcers bursting from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold region.
And if the wound bursts in the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and throws great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
And if the sausage gut or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound any thing of undigested meat.
And if the gut or belly, and it jumps not a point of wind by the intestine route, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the gut.
And if the gut is in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar members, are safe according to several more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do the same.
It happened to a certain man whose arrow was shot into the root of the nose: I palpated it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and it was without any harm or trouble.
And I drew out an arrow that was shot into the fat of the eye beneath the papier-mâché, and the arrow was removed, and one could not touch it except for the point towards the thigh. and it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow, with an iron point and a light shaft without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And it drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I seized the barbarians, and I subtly drew it out as much as I could, and the Christian was healthy.
And he applied a poultice to the wound at the man's thigh, where it was swollen or bruised, and thought that he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the wound, and probed it, and made a poultice, and had no bad accident.
And I saw the man whose wound was cut or torn, and the wound was sewn up above;
and he delays the arrow within him, and does not change his natural disposition. he finds no harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man, whose arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and he delayed thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And it happens to a vein at the man of Prince's king, which was situated near the nail. and it was slightly declining towards the right side; and it was the vein entirely repposed
I was called to the cure after it had fallen for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and he felt a sharp pain and ache beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow
I put on the affected place a digestive attrahent plaster, because the abscesses do not swell. and it appeared to me that the abscess of the arrow.
and it appeared to me that the abscess of the arrow. I put the cautery of fire in the patient's hands for a long time, and I resolve the wound quickly, and then the patient stays healthy for a long time.
until he feels the arrowhead in his nose; and it does not bother him. I put medicine on the wound corroding with gentle hands for a long time, until it was healed.
and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had lodged in the flesh; then I adjusted at the opening of the wound by that medicine ago, so much that the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it crossed well into the terms within three months,
and then I released if the wound that I touched the tongs, and my hand on one side and the other, and could not extract;
then I did not cease to subtle and ingenious methods of strumments, until I took it out on the tenth day with well-made tongs; according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as much as I trace it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restore it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, if you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the book cannot take everything.
but wise masters compare well a big thing, and on what is present and failing. find new work, and new instrument, at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed unless according to several methods: where through the back of the head or they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumps for it there where it enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and jumps for it many times now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is purged around, and the exit is eased;
and thus if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be so for some days, and the swelling diminishes each day;
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, so pierce everywhere with a subtle forest, as much as the eyes everywhere are enlarged, and then the treatment.
And if the arrow is replaced in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, then seek to extract it entirely. and if you feel it, then draw it to no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot for the narrowness of the wound, and for the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or vein, if it swells as much as the wound is large; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow which hold it,
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow which hold it, if you burn the flesh that is stuck with a dot of pus, look at the muscles to see if you can, and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it; and subtly ensure that you do not break the arrow, but rather extract it more firmly.
And if you cannot at one time, then leave it until the surrounding tissues are purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if you remove blood from him, it makes him counteract, so arrange that which we have said about the treatment in his chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and of the vein, and set in motion how you can safely extract the arrow without danger,
whether it is hot or cold, whether firmly or gently; and put the patient in the position he was in when the arrow fell on him, for it is the greatest help that it can be, and if you cannot, then put him in accordance with what the signs show you;
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears that something of it is in the skin, or the skin is swollen there if one sees or feels it somehow.
Cut down therefore, so that the tongs can take hold, and then extract: if it bursts out now.
And if it is held back in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot exit, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
and if it is the shaft of the arrow, it is, he cuts at the entire shaft;
and if the shaft is short, and you want to administer a cut, if it administers an instrument that cuts; if the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then he makes a cut;
and if the arrow is cut, he cuts the instrument at the entering point, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can. then heal the wound as it covers.
And if the arrow falls in the foot or thigh or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is close, and you can cut above, so you cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, so that the surgery is successful. and the treatment until it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because it has or is head 16.
it is to know: those nodes which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" knots; and the nodes arteries which appear in the temples; and the veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the swollen glands that are on the neck; and the swollen veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the swollen veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is the left side that hurts, and people commonly call it "head vein". and the moiene is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side that hurts, and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is located on the pubic area, and it is that which one bleeds, which appears manifestly on the skin.
And the little vein is the one that is between the thumb and the finger, and if it rains on them.
and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is below the curve of the left thigh, and the second vein called "sophene" which is at the junction of the right thigh; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the junction of the other side.
and on the other leg are three veins below those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient catharrhes, and migraines; and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck to a single vision, as long as the veins appear behind the ears in the two eyes depending on the head: where the hammers strike against your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then raise your hand above the whole vein upwards, and cut and separate the skin and the vein well, two fingers' breadth from the traversed part, and make the blood issue out as much as you see;
Then hold it straight and lift it, until it is healthy;
and I have already said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an old one, and swelling, and accustomed optalmia, and at the course of the watery eyes;
and the quality of the healthy person is thus as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the four veins appear openly; and he feels numbness under his arm, and then signs of incision;
then raise the heart towards the vein above your arm's index finger, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein high up, and the cupping, just as you have done with other veins, and correct the flow of blood according to your need;
then loosen the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
and then form it strongly, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the book begins.
The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic as ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness;
and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the veins appear; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and leave the vein so it is healthy and never again inflamed with a large flame.
Here is the translation:
The health of the 10 veins that are in the 10 limbs helps the eyes, and the forehead, and the reddening, and the orbit in the eye socket, and the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is that the patient stretches his neck twisting in every direction, as before;
then the healthy one, and let the health of the traversed part be a little thick, a little long, a little wide, for there is no spot of flesh.
And if the flesh is subtle, it may break by chance; then make a correction with blood, as much as you have mastery of it, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
The sanity of the vein does not know how to give to the ague, and to sudden faintness, and to facial diseases. as in migraine and redness that comes into the face, and mainly when it is chronic;
and the quality of the vein is such that the patient tightens his neck, then stretches his nose to his left hand; and take the subtle flame far away, and insert it in the labium of the space that is between the nostrils; for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will start flowing now to run;
and do not go too deep in the fontanel, and make the blood flow according to need, then leave it a night, for it is almost completely restored;
The health of the joints helps with the stretching of the ligament, and at the beginning of messeleria, and many illnesses, and epilepsy, and corroding, and herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the health is such that the patient stretches his neck now one way then another, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair,
then let the vein of the loin be opened somewhat widely, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as the master is accustomed to;
then make another opening in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold back the veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle; and let it just until morning, so the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the liver The health of the veins above the liver, if they aid in the accumulation of bad humors in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful gums and interior.
And the quality of health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said; then turn the leaf, and look at these two veins, one of which is on the right leaf and the other on the left. and they are recognized by these signs because they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: look at one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
look at one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if you look at the largest of each part, and you do it in the same way for the two veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
About the health of the tongue underneath The health of the veins that are underneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the narrowness of the throat, and in diseases of the mouth, and in diseases of the eye;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein;
Examine one and then the other, and do not go too deep in the fontanel, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the skin where one usually bleeds are bled in two ways:
where we prick everywhere, the flame burning large, or subtle olive oil if we cut deeply, and it is called "anesil"; and are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame burning is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
And it is necessary to open the full, smooth veins that appear with a lot of blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame-like ulceration:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The purification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the feet, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to make a gentle incision, and to beware of the artery that lies beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be hesitant with the flame, but rather cut as if with a razor.
And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, it is necessary to extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, where you feel in his place the vein in the arm: it appears manifestly; and the cupping at the flaming ankle, as we have said.
And if you want to recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, that you touch the place as much as you recognize the pulse; then signs of the place of the wound, and then stretches out the arm, and cupping at the vein of the flaming ankle;
and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the limb swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid there then.
And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is without an artery: hasten thou then, and put thy finger on it for a long time, then remove thy finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move it until it is healthy.
And if the vein is not stanched, and it fails you, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins; and staunch the vein.
And take a dressing of figs, and bind it, and take one of the emplasters and apply it just next to the other joint;
If the vein is stanched, that's good; if not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
and the stanched veins are not grievously harmed in multiple dispositions by the small size of the wound, and the possibility of good alignment of the arm.
The vein's health is half helped if it draws blood from the top of the head, and from the bottom of the body. because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the vein to be warmed by the nerve that is underneath, and if it does not receive enough nourishment in depth, and it finds the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the veins are irritated, and by chance they cannot heal;
and it is necessary to open the nerve many times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you loosen the strings of the instrument anxiously; and chase the nerve at your power.
And if it has a vein between the muscles, then they make it flow far away.
The bloodletting of the cephalic aids, which attracts blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed in pricking at the olive flame or at the martian flame, for it is the safest of all the veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
Always, it is necessary to seek the lightest hand, and not to hurt anything if it fails the first time, and one starts again. and by chance one inflames the eyes of some men, when it fails the first time, but it does not hurt anything. The quality of the health is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about healing, is that healing is not diminished unless it preserves health.
and to avoid coming illnesses; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are known: namely, cephalic, fasting, and basilic; and one should bloodlet at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear;
and one should bloodlet on the first day or third, after 2 hours or 3 days.
The healthy who is administering to the illnesses has no determined hour, but only when need is of day or night, in all hours and at all tensions;
and it does not become a healthy healer until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit beyond four months until seventh; Nor do they become healthy healers the old who have passed 60 years.
And when some want to be healthy, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary for them to empty the intestines of a lighter clusters; If there is much retained fire, it is necessary that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors that are injurious to the principal members.
Nor does it suit him who is too salty from meats, nor he who is drunk, as long as he is furious or dropsical.
And it is worse for the healthier one after a passionate colic, and vomiting, and deterioration of the stomach, and multiplication of habitual desire in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and this that entirely loses virtue, or by reason of the arm or of the body.
Then refine the humors, if the blood is gross, through meats and through beverages and through medications, if you have the pure power.
Then between the bathing, some thing does not allow it to flow, because of subtling the blood.
and you sting the vein where you prick the third time, as we have said;
and you beware of that day's work, and of point, and of luxury, and of similar things;
and be joyful and happy, and may the healers be more elevated than those who are stung, and may they rub the arm two or three times.
Then tighten the thread above the molar, because when it is too loose or tight, it cannot correct the teeth;
and then rub the joint with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them;
then soften the sinews with a little warm oil, then place his left hand on that vein below the joint a little where it wants to heal; so that the veins do not become inflamed and fail to heal. Here is the translation: If one touches the flame, one withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is of those.
and if one opens the vein, the wound is too constricted, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised about these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: Perhaps the patient will come to abscesses boils; do not enter or bathe, then resume the health as it pleases them.
and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then make a small flow in that perforation to direct the entire flame rightly.
and operate with a little haste, so that the eyes may be inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not resume the health, and put a little bit of oil of oleum on it, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is mixed in this eye the oil that the oleum.
and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same makes a triangle and arch of veins, when one places it on the limb; if one subtly feels the vein and separates it when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy except for that time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and place on the limb a sponge moistened with water and oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days without any black or greenish color, then it does not harm him. and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of chamomile, master, or similar.
And many times there appears an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft place at the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance. Beware that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance it cuts short without artifice; but the master makes a plaster to harden the place, then cures with another cure, until it is healthy.
And draw from each person blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it is subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is suitable for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and their flames are large;
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is more suitable to bleed him little by little, and he should be bled in a transverse cut, not in a puncture.
and this manner of health is saved from deterioration of blood and gathering of nerve, and is worth more than the health that gives length and width.
And to one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a mild drink made from juice of green apples; if he is exhausted, then draw three or four times the blood.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then offer before the health a mild drink made from syrup of muscat, or from aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if he palpitates in health, after the issuance of much blood, it is necessary that he take broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and you must use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if you want to anoint his arm, and heal it another time, then it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bleeding, that he be anointed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And who wants to anoint his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong pulse, then anoint at the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or at the ninth hour.
And who wants to heal another part, then one must anoint on the second day or the third.
Here is the translation: then you examine all the signs of health, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come into his limbs. and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and it is not suitable when you want to release the arm, and make the blood flow a second time, and the perforation is closed, so that you press strongly on; not if it is curved, so that he extends the arm hastily, for that would be bad;
but let it be until it heals the second time; or you prick at the point of the flame, as much as the blood that is congealed at the outlet of the vein flows out. and put it on the small pox of oil, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not tighten it too much, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to draw out the blood a second time, let it be in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the healthiness is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, until the veins become red.
then be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthy part now from across, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the perforations be wide, and let it be well healed near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, do not reapply the hand in hot water, for they put it more in winter than in summer;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Stretch out the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen, if you see it; and if the vein is across, and if you take it all around, do not cause any grief;
and do not go too deeply in, for the nerves are beneath, very close to the flesh,
and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and cannot be opened.
And when you have drawn out the blood as much as you need, then put oil on the vein and sew it hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
The health of the left hand is worth it to the disease of the wrist, and do all thus as I have told you about the right.
The health of the spleen is worth it to all the diseases that are below the body, as well as diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is that the patient's disease bursts out in hot fever, and breaks out on the vein as much as it can. and lay it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many ways.
sound the donor where the larger vein is, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
And if you sound above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the vein of traversing also as in coupling; and let the flames be gentle.
And if the sans cannot issue from it, put the foot in water, and let the vein be well purged.
And if the surgeons fail the first time, they start again from above a little, because the joint is salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make a similar suture on the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic leg is at the junction of the thigh, and its surgery is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its surgery is that the patient goes between good or bad, and extracts above the thigh .iii. two in twisting,
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then you will know in all ways that you can, and by crossing over. and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood is wise, and it is much relied upon by many men.
and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood is wise, and it is much relied upon by many men. And if you do not find it, then there is no rule for those who open or give at the foot of the toe, and towards the small finger, and beware of the tendons.
and make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and the strapping; it is now healthy.
The wounds of a bloodsucker.
Bloodletting instruments are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
And this bloodletting without pricking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and others in the sides of the neck; and the swelling beneath the chin; and the swelling of the shoulders; and the swelling on the knees; and the swellings in the arms; and the swellings of the legs; and the cupping glasses of the .ij. veins; and the cupping does not draw a point of blood, except for the small scattered veins that are in the flesh,
and because of this one does not become afraid of it, as one does when making a vein incision; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all by fire, nor does it sense fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, as long as the body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, if we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each tense;
because there are those who, when they have the task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the patient's head;
and if there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spew blood; and if there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it's in the midst of the month, we command them to wait after three hours of the day.
The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it's not necessary that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this waiting is in the place of the health of the head,
and it's not necessary for those who are of cold complexion in use, or who have a catarrh, because this does them great harm;
and for this reason it is not suitable to use a cautery on someone who has cold diseases.
And those who are often sick, they become oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of oblivion.
Cupping on the neck is in place of the healthy head and the basilica, and therefore it is suitable for the stretching of the foot. and to a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and to a bruise, and to replenishment;
and it is necessary to poultice, for if it holds too firmly, thus causing an inclination or stomach pain or heart ache.
The winds as it is the ribs of the neck if they make the pains of the head, and obtunding and migrating, and in the constriction, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not touch the artery, and does not see the flowing of blood.
The winds beneath the chin if they make a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
Here is the translation:
The cauterizations of the joints are worth as much as three good veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many deep wounds, for the flesh is naked of skin, and knows about the underlying nerves and arteries.
The cupping which is on the back is worth as much as emorroids from the foundation, and as maladies underneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of a certain size, so that it has mastery of well treating; and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and relieve ancient pains of the loins, and of the thigh, and of the bladder, and recall the flowers; and are in the place of .ij. soporifics, and of .ij. chirps, and always they reinvigorate the body after long use, and bring forth pus in many dispositions.
Here is the translation:
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize three times: the first time to subtly clear the way for the large blood flow.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood bit by bit, then we suffice with only one application.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we recommence often; and if the wound is deep, we cauterize in depth, and the goal is that the blood flow should be perceived suddenly.
and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have stubborn pores, that you open the veins with oily and dissolving remedies. If it is in this state, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and the similar.
And if one has a tender and large pores skin, it is not necessary to put oil.
but it is necessary to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And he who has much moisture, if he rises from aisyli, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have gross superfluities rise from old wine, or water of elder, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not necessary to be healthier from cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventilation.
and it is necessary that he be warned when he needs to be uncovered and when he is uncovered. And beware of those who are healthy but choleric, and whose blood is too agitated and inflamed; it is necessary that he take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and avoid small peas, and meat from a castrated animal, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes syrup of honey, and wine with a pleasant smell, which is between old and new, and mixes a little, and mixes a little pinches and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day when he will be ventilated, if he ought to drink more than eat;
and it is good to give to some men three or four drachms of triacle or muscat before ventilation, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not good for those who are hot to drink it.
Here is the translation:
and do not perform it unless by attrition of blood from member to member, as we apply them to the affected limbs when they are unhealthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply cupping glasses on the belly and on the bowels to diminish the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one applies it to the liver and spleen when there is retained viscosity,
and these ventoses are administered void of blood to suck so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes they are emptied of watery tedium.
as in bad illnesses where one sweats, and in such a way that one fills the ventose with warm watery liquid, or water where it has been cooked with herbs having covered it.
The shape of the ventose administered to fire is thus:
And it has two fingers' width and half a palm in depth, and it has or is surrounded by the middle of a small hole, thus like a push to inject a needle.
and let it be of iron, soft beforehand so that it does not burn the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to put a bandage in compression,
and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
And one must then apply this cupping device to the limb:
take the candle of wax or the liment, and put it in the cupping device across the vein that is in the cupping device, so that the clarity should be at the bottom of the cupping device so it does not burn the patient;
and then apply it to the limb, and let it be on the part that we have mentioned, so that when one sees, if the vapour goes, and remove the cupping device;
and take hold of the limb as before, and restart it frequently, if you are a master.
In the application of cupping which is administered in disease of the lungs, at every acute stage, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of blood, and is placed on the limb only slightly.
and that's the method:
Without them being administered unless in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and cheeks, and similar ones. and in their stripping of flesh, as if they were dead or numb, and similar things;
and the quality of the wound is such that when you touch without sensation, which are in tender, sweet, and fine nerves, if you grasp them;
and put a knot in a tender spot, so that they become familiar, and have nothing in their belly; and then be cured of vein and swelling, then rub the limb so that it becomes red, and put on the bandages;
and when they are flat, and dry, it is the time to apply a cupping glass, for that is what is most valuable afterwards.
If not, raise the lever of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the healthy veins are too far apart according to the course of the sinews, so much .i. wrap in a cold water cloth, and put on, until the vein is constricted;
and if the vein is multiple, apply a vitriol poultice, or warts, and similar things, until it is constricted;
where you apply on the limb many peeled feathers, and let them adhere to the limb, it will staunch now;
and if you have more material at hand, take other applications.
And if the applications do not want to be taken, rub the limb with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sauce issues from it. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere;
and when you see that they are falling, powder on a little of aloes wood and of dry broom, or of cinder, if they will now cling.
Here is the beginning of the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this chapter, which did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
and for this reason is estranged the science in our land, because I never found any good.
and I know nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described for you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wise men place their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when break or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to any, it is necessary that you hasten to sound the patient's part and another, so nothing touches him completely, as weakness of body, or infants, or old men;
or the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold joints, it's known to be cold joints, and diet of bird and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat rough and fatty meat, and do not fill oneself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no fear of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government as he has used it.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make big nourishment, or they have viscosity, as if fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pancake of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For a suitable nourishment represents more and comforts the break most.
And know that the broken bones of the old and the decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but it is not so, reset the broken bone with large tendons that are stiff and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as it was before; and do not touch any part of its work, and for this reason it needs to be nourished with thick foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there is a break that goes to the vein, and another while agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Because there is a break that goes to the vein, and another while agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing. And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks at all into a small notch.
And in each manner it has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
and it is known that the break of the bone is by means of which the joints are twisted, and opens well by force, and sounds at the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small breakage. If it does not seem to you that you move the hand, but place medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold steady now subtly.
And know that the breakage which goes into the joint, and are the disjoined parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life;
and if boils appear, let them alone for a day or so until the boils settle down; then set them evenly in the mouth so you can lift gently and easily, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations of those where there are fragments; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it's an elbow or a foot, or a hand, or a small limb, or strings, or a string and a hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disjoined, you reset them by all means possible, adding them in their places in the mouth as you can, and be careful that through your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if you straighten it beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as they do who come with their work of abscessed heat and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is at rest, chastise well the patient that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so well-assured that it does not feel any pain. Because when he feels no pain, it is not at all points, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he does not feel any pain.
Because when he feels no pain, it is not at all points, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he does not feel any pain. and guard that it be set straight, so that twists do not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Because there are small members, like arms and fingers and similar ones: it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle wrapping.
and those that are large, like hips and legs: it is necessary to envelop with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large member, and hold steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness.
then place light stoppings, 3 or 4, according to the member, and hold the hand a little on the entire bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break then slips out a little.
and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage, and turn it back onto the broken limb again.
then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it in place moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first rule above;
then put between the swollen ligaments of linen or drapery, so that it is all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then place above something soothing for the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and leaves it thus for several days;
then hold above your stitches, and let them be of a moderate size, about the length of a large cane or a stick made from a fir tree, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the stake which one puts on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it is necessary for the member of smaller or greater size;
then hold steady on the stakes as you did at the first treatment, then tie above with a smooth thread, just as in the first treatment on the fracture;
the more constricted it is, the less so; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of soft flax;
For the filament is thick, as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted threads, and it's a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it's too subtle, and it doesn't matter that there is less space between each star.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the stars after tightening in their healthy places, put underneath them cotton pads or linen cloth, so that it does not become black.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the cartilage is broken, I will tell you the treatment for it afterwards.
And know that it does not matter to tighten the stars all at once on the broken limbs on the first day. Because when the limb is large, it does not fit to put these forceps except after 5 or 8 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that suddenly occurs;
and see here the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that holds itself as by the walls of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg white, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plasterer restoring the fracture in many dispositions, and similarly for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plasterer restoring the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take Z abrasives and ladani and enule and asa fetida and gum arabic and mugwort, in the amount of 10; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of 5; alechil 8; and make into powder, and mix with egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plasterer, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Another manner of plasterer that is beneficial for twisting: take mugwort and vismalve, in the amount of 10; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of 8; acacia 6; bolic armenic 10, and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and apply it.
Another way to treat joints and their bones is to soothe the pain that comes suddenly, and to reduce the size of the bone, and the breakage: take a new linen cloth, and the softness in oil and in warm water, and put it on the spot. This plaster does not restore at all, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removing the pains.
Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy papyrus leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to make a plaster for restoring bone breakages and for alleviating the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, fine flour, each a part; and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is warmed up, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another way to make a plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balaustrum, melilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each a part; and crush, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Here is the translation:
And it seems that one should apply to the broken limb, to restore it, dry and slightly warm things, as we have said, with myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things.
Another way of applying that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and hazel twigs, or pens of birds, and visnaga, and equalize them, and the brooms, and make an application on the affected area.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is his bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the affected area, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hurry up, and loosen it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of seawater, moistened, and dip it in water, and lift up the affected area, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or moist compress, softened with water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, until you are certain of a hot abscess;
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then recommence the subtle treatment, and a little bit of poultice, and do not strain it so strongly as before; and treat subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling are all gone, and you have mastery of poultice and bandage, then recommence it, as you did previously in equal measure.
And if the limb does not respond to what we have said, do not dislocate it further for 3 days or 4 days or 5 days or 6 days; and never leave it .20. days, according to what one sees, until the breakage is corrected, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh towards;
then the patient is restrained more than at first, and the swelling of his flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the patient's blood is drier than it should be, know that nourishment cannot reach. apply the warm water treatment then, every time you dislodge him, and let it be each third day, and ease the bandage a little.
by this treatment then, the nourishment is cut off from the limb, and quickly ends what the foolish mirror shows, that the limb remains twisted: it's bad, and if these are poor treatments, and I do not see anything else but to ease and to open directly.
of various ways of fracture There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct.
For there are fractures made by percussion of a sword, and the neck of the bone breaks all the way to the joint which is beneath the bone, as if it were crushed or shattered; and therefore this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Where the sword cuts through the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is embedded percussion, or splitting, or breaking of the neck of the stone, or falling on stones, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and causes a piece of bone to enter downwards, and it is like the veins of the warm-bathers when they strike against the warm-baths; thus between the bones within.
And those who have underlying moist bones, such as the head of a child;
and there are all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislocated, as it is here; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks by the traction on them, and the inquiry into their tenderness, and by the rotten flesh that is on.
The similarity of the hair-like fracture is known by this: when one discovers the bone and rubs against it, then the black break appears.
In the treatment of the break, beware of these accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and feverish ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see an apparent accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the nave (navel) comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane beneath the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary to divide the divided part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the head of the afflicted nave, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound more softly than you can.
and if the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a swelling appears, he is helped by what is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with warm poultices soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the swelling appears calmed, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to open around the bone, and it is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut at the tight cutting before, and this is the form:
And then I make another cut, a larger one than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of diverse cuts, some tight and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it requires that you pierce around, so you can minister gently with tapers, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the entire test, and must have above a point or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each comes into its place in the width of the bone, if you have tapers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tapers.
The quality of piercing around the bone is that you place a taper on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another part a little afterwards, and do so throughout, then cut into the spaces of the bone which are between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone to your hand, or with one of the instruments that you have, such as pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it requires that you prepare the instrument which is remaining from the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it requires that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors.
and if he delays nothing of the small bones, no nails, if they set lightly on the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is that which Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then you will put beneath the head of this lance-like incision, from which it is the form:
And do not cut from one part, and the part is pointed in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you carefully cut around the entire bone, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath.
Here is the translation:
And if the break of the bone does not pierce up to the membrane, and the bone is covered only superficially above, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales from the subtle raspier that you must have in different quantities, to make each place more convenient, according to the work and shape of the break.
If you grind before with large raspier, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like breaks and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you adjust the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily responded to by one who has placed their study in this art.
And if the wound is discovered, it is necessary that you take a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and the softness in oil rose, and place it on the wound. Then take another drapil doubled in two or three, and wrap it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first drapil; and make it lighter than you can, so you do not bother the wound, then apply above another lien, and do not hold it too firmly until it holds the wound sufficiently.
and leave it thus a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is alleviated, then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of veices, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and apply again medicines without sharp biting.
and beware that the wound be again clean, that you do not leave the swelling, nor leave it to assemble a boil, for when a boil assembles on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when you place on the wound something biting, it necroses above.
Take heed therefore, lest some bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if there is no fire that comes from the medicine that one has applied, which has such virtue, then it is necessary to take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue them together in a cloth, and put it on the wound. then heal in many ways of cures that are necessary, so that he may be healthy.
Know that no time are broken the three parts of the nail above, or one by the sole, because they are three bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the three parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your small finger or pertuses of the nail, and make equal this breakage within your finger index, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be straightened to its place, it is necessary that you set it evenly at the head of a slightly large radius.
And if the break is of two parts, you must remake another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then boils at the head of the nail tend to form a cluster, and the break is in one part.
Where you apply heat elsewhere, the fracture is; and let the tendons be as large as they fill the holes of the nose.
And they say that one should moisten the tendons in burr, and change every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with a concoction of egg whites and powder of mill; then let the tendon, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes apply heat where the eyes of the eggs are in place of tendons, and if there is a soft drapery around, and it holds the fracture, and soothes the patient within; or do what you have seen.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a pouch of dyachelon.
And if abscesses come, apply an emplaster made of flour of six ingredients and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light poultices on top, and do not tie it too tightly;
and if the broken bone is small, and it is broken into little pieces, extract the fragments with suitable instruments for that, then sew up the fissure, and cure things that are causing bitter pain there, and immediately, as with suitable emplasters and ointments for that;
and if there is no dent in the bone with a new wound, apply the treatment of tents, and I put canes of plaster, until it be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is broken from below, and there is no wound on the surface, and the break is underneath, so much so that it is not broken in two, except where it is held together by a small piece of bone, if one examines it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently feel the break, and hold it in place with the other hand from underneath, and make it even.
And if the break of the jawbone is separated in two, it is necessary that you administer extension from both sides, so much so that it becomes even.
And if the teeth are moved out of place, or broken, you should strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a well-made, firm staple, or a piece of even, long and wide leather according to the jawbone, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see the figure changing, dislocate it on the third day, and then put it back in place as it was changed; and apply a poultice made from flour of the mill with abundant water or flour of six months, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are suitable, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
And if abscesses appear, treat them according to what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, remove the useless part of the bone that is broken; if you subtly remove the extraneous parts with suitable instruments to that.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a flame according to the need.
And when you have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put suitable dressings on it, to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of the violence The violence breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with wound.
And the operations are when the break is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken violence; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have to master the extension, then place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold steady and lift the force, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the defect, because it comes in a wrong way, then it is necessary that the patient leans back on his shoulder, and place under the shoulder a little pillow, and push the ministers' shoulder down, so that the bone of the fracture is lifted.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you find broken debris, it is necessary that you sew up; and pull the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, take one of the incisors you have; but place under the forcele this instrument, to ward off the infection.
and it seems a spoon, and it is not a surprise, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have .ij. joints, as you see, and let one be large, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, if you fill the wound with dressing and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if you soften them with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and apply it on top.
The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of powder of soft millet and of egg white, and you apply light bandages, and you put a splint underneath, if you have mastery over it; then take a very wide band of a palm's length, then put a double layer of dressing on the bandages and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band remains suspended; and apply the steel to the broken bone, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy skin, and beneath the sick skin; and the setting of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the broken bone firmly, and you clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, if you reward each day, and when the binding loosens, if it restrains;
and make the patient sit on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the joint, to raise the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until 20 days.
then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs to be changed, and hold it and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in 28 days at most, and in less for some men.
of the break of the shoulder
Although the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, it does not need to be moved, and one should not attempt to set it in place by force; if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millet with a lot of egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the splint is bent in any part of the shoulder, adjust it with linen threads, so that the splint is aligned; and then bind it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day; and all the times it becomes loose, adjust it, and put the splint in its correct position, and ease the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number of days is accomplished, then remove it, and be sure, for it is not good to leave it on lightly.
And if a piece of bone projects forward, and not beneath the heart, thus they make an incision, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease a hot abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines beneath, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks agility, and totters, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and the sensation is not good.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplasters and bandages above the subtle layer of salt, or another lighter dressing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and tighten it strongly, and rewrap each hour the bandage, and if it becomes dislocated, then tighten it; and if it is about to slip, due to corrosion or putrefaction that comes from the blood, or pain or abscess, hasten to loosen it, and remove the emplaster, and address what has come in the ways of cures; then reapply the emplaster, and tighten it until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the ribs
It happens that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large ones after the back, and at the end within, and they do not feel it except through this because they are slippery; and one feels it well by questioning as one should.
And the remedies are that you make equal the fracture, as it is fitting. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain and numbness, just as if they were pierced, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits a great abundance of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the belly, to soften the fracture at the beginning.
We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come, if they have not arrived yet. And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
And they said that one should not put ventouses on the limb, to suck out the matter, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the superfluities from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
And they direct that one must cover the limb of a wounded leg with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the treatment equal all around, then it will be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot suffer through the opening which touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break into the broken rib area, and it is necessary to place underneath an instrument to ward off the blood; and then one must cut into the bone, and extract lightly, and then close the edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then place drapplings moistened in rose oil on them, and place on the limb; and treat meanwhile the limb of those who need to be treated for an abscess, and apply soothing remedies on the ribcage where it is needed, until they are healthy.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and also at the spine of the back. And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel. Know that it is mortally ill in many dispositions, and if they change and feel well when one holds them firmly and steadily, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so you apply a cure.
And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if take care that the feet are softened, and if the accidents are in his hands, and on the back there is swelling and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated onto their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated onto their back and they want to sit, then they cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most light.
And the cure is that you treat it if there is a hot abscess, if put on the spine oil of rose or oil of Mayew, so that it is appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone disarticulates, it is necessary to cover on the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. levers of the wound, so that it is large, into a bandage, then apply the ointment of ignition, heating the flesh, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you put your pouch on your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand at your power, then put the emplaster and the staple on, so that you have mastery; then hold tight, and if there is a disarticulated bone, make an incision, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Although the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it does, then there is not a small amount of diminution at the head; and it makes a hollow long, and declines to the partition, and comes to the patient's pain in the limb, and point, and inflames what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand up, so that you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is at the head only, then match equal to that fracture, so that it is in a natural shape.
And if the fracture is hollow long, or it declines to the inside, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of that fracture may be apparent. And when you have set it even, place on the poultice, then place on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the ligament is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if apostemes (abscesses) come, do not touch them, until the abscesses are appeased, and place on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The joints are those which are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full flat iron, according to this form:
And lay the joints in a straight line, and they are elevated high, and sit the patient on a seat; then put his broken arm on the iron, until it comes to the joint, and have in the middle of a curved iron, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors to the breakage equally with their hands together, until the breakage returns as it should.
And the other method is that you bind the patient to his stool, and tie his hand to his neck, then instruct the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold the ligament underneath the breakage, and on the breakage, and each of the ministers extends to their part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put the ligament in the middle underneath the joint, and the other towards the elbow, underneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to put the ligament lightly, without labor, until the breakage is equal on the limb, and on the elbow; then put the breakage equally, as it should, and hold it steady, so that abscesses do not come.
And if apostemes wounds come, do not hold back until the seventh day, and apply a soft ointment in a gentle manner with rose oil, so that the apostemes wounds are appeased; then hold steady, and the way of holding is to put the dressing on the breakage, then assemble the arm at the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the cloth, and hold steady on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, so nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use these instruments, and place on the breakage a larger and stronger instrument than the others, and have between each instrument two fingers of space, and let each instrument be as large as it passes the breakage in two parts; then hold steady on the instruments, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, more strongly and less in dislocating.
And if you see the alignment of the instruments, and the holding, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the aposteme wound, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each two days, the bandage, lest it become inflamed and come into the proper place, or the nerves are not able to come into the limb because it is too constricted. If you dress it, as we have said.
Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that connects to the shoulder; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
When the small fosciles are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
And if it's the large foscile, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or to the linen, and another minister above. And then you put the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disunion that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then put it back together and the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breakage of a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses appear, apply a dressing; take a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and place the cloth subtly, so that the abscesses are appeased. And then remove the wax, and put on the plaster of powder from the mill with abundant water, then put on the staples, and let the staple of the breakage be a little stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have twenty staples or arms in various positions: whether the breakage is in one of the bones, or in two; and hold more onto the breakage than other parts, and often less in approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And bind the limb and the lien afterwards for some days. And if some bad accidents happen to the limb, as we have previously said happens to the limb, it is necessary that you irrigate the limb with warm water, so that the irritation is appeased; and let the limb not be overly constricted. And then recommence the strapping, and if the lien is softened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, adjust it accordingly.
And if you take care that the numbness does not come to the limb, because it is too stiff, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it be thus for some days, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold steady.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days or so, when he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers that have had few fractures, and it does not come but to bend many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient be crossed, and stands upright before him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and puts them in their proper places, so they are well joined; and puts the plaster and the poultices, so that abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the injury; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the palm of the hand near the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken plant; and then bind with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as big as the plant of the hand, and bind, if it is necessary.
And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and dry the linen between the two.
And if the break comes to any of the fingers, it is a pouch, put it in its place, as it is necessary; and bind with the plant, and see if you can put a small straight splint to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, put it in its place, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie all together in a holder, which is worth nothing, or you put on a splint, as a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and beware what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration is that one ties above the breakage, and another below. And the patient puts his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part; and it's when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bands should be towards the thigh, and the other below the breakage. And also if it's close to the knee, and then the band should be above the knee, and the extension downwards; then put the mirror-image bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the band, so that abscesses do not come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the treatment is done in such manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture. Bind it tightly with a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then twist the leg so that the talons reach the root of the nail, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist around the leg and the thigh the bandage, then place these on the fracture, and put a staple on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft drapings to tighten equally; then start to bind strongly two or three turns around the fracture; and as you go further above the fracture, there is less tightness; then take .ij. heads of thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie .iij. staples that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you reach the foot; and the binding, so it does not move from its place, then let it be, so no abscess or inflammation occurs.
And if it happens, then disjoin it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, then it is necessary to cut them away, so it can be; and if it cannot be, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new treatment; and the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
And often the thigh is broken in this way when you put staples, as in the joint and arm; however, in the restoration done in this manner, it does not bother the patient.
And know that the pulse is restored at the same hour, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
of the gutter of the knee
Know that in the gutter of the knee there is almost a break, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and has an open wound, and feels wounded, and this feels very good.
And the restoration is when one puts together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it can be; then put on the plaster, and you put a round stave, if you have mastery of it, and hold it steady as it ought to be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breaks, such as hot abscesses and similar things; so put on each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "straight" and the other is called "forked"; and there is a similar fracture as it occurs in the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the operations are all the same.
And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg becomes twisted in all parts.
And if the subtle bone is fractured, it twists forward.
Here is the translation:
And when you have completed your work, take nine threads of flax that overlap the leg on one side and the other, and are two fingers long from the knee up to the shin; then wrap them in nine layers above and below, and tie them in the middle, and at this time do not let the leg decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one will forget the nine threads long on the leg, and it is of flax, and you put them on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a cast on the fracture where there is a wound; and every day move the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; as long as one cures until they are healthy.
of the fracture of the bone in the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and sometimes two pieces, and there are not more than four or five dispositions.
And if it happens that the ankle bone breaks, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on the joint where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place; then apply a plaster cast and stoups above, and under the belly of the foot a small table at .ij. plain levels, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken bones, set them right, as we have said about the fingers; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot of the table that I mentioned, and hold it firmly; and if there are three or four, or more, broken bones, set each one with a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the foot under the table; and let it be standing on top of the table, away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
of the break of the bone in the thumb
Here is the translation:
And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, if they restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and use, and intent my book. For the break signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration: then give.
In the twig, when it is broken, take a girdle of egg and bind the twig; then wrap drapels around, and leave it two or three days, and it will be healthy soon.
of break with wound
It is necessary for him who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, as in the case of the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be healthy now, so that the healings that we have said testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, if you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the bruise at the same hour, or on that day, lest abscesses form and do not come.
And if abscesses form and come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered chest, then it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extensions.
And if the extensions are not apparent to put in place with your hands, then you must reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has .vij. two or .viij. eight inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary to grasp .iii. three or iiij. four, according to whether there is more need for it in each treatment of fracture; and let it be rough and a little thick, so it does not slip away from compression on the limb during your work, and let it be thus beforehand, and thicker by half an inch ahead, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and the bout is once, as long as it regains, and are equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it requires that you grasp the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then grasp with an instrument suitable for that, whether incisor or saw, to your power; then reassemble what is remaining in the bone of asperties and minor scars.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so much that it is in its place, then apply a black wine dressing, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wounded area except oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times they have made this mistake, and have caused death or corrosion to occur sometimes; and let the bandages be more gentle and softer than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it requires not to put these on; but wrap around, in the place of these, hard dressings, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, either a day or two days, in order to soothe the wound, remove what you had put on everything, and apply gentle ointments to soothe wounds, as we have said, such as ointment tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you anoint the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it be sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs be bandaged in such a way that the swelling goes down lightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather becomes swollen again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the wound, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he said in his chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and opens onto the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it; but let it be until it putrefies; perhaps it will fall apart after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
the abscesses which come upon the swelling
We often come after the health of the bruise, especially when it is near the joint, and the ugly thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance one cannot make the limb do its natural functions.
Take heed when the nose is fresh: if you administer medicines in a stinging manner, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine or abundant water or with oil; and put them on the spot in poultices, and hold it well, and do not remove it for many days; and then remove it, and start another, until the nodules are eliminated; or you hold onto a piece of well-made plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it eliminates all inflammation from the limbs; and if the nodule is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape above, and make the superfluous apparent; or take it to some surgeon, until it is eliminated, and cure it until it is healthy.
When the break of the bone is restored, and afterwards the members are weak and subtle, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not come the nourishments to the member; or because of multitude of aggravations; or because of too great movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, thus it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the wound often closes quickly, until the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural figure.
because of a twisted member after the injury
When the member is twisted after the restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the member is ugly, it does not perform its natural function: so do not believe those fools who say that one should break the member anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and these operations are blamed, and great evils come from them, and perhaps death; however, if the nodations and torture are fresh, then it is necessary to apply warm water, or mollifying herbs are applied, as for example leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilote, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, as if you have done well, and take the mucus of vismalve, and mix it with grease of geline or oil of sisament, and apply the plaster; or take greasy figs, and crush them with flour of colon, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
And sometimes the node is removed by constantly and continuously rubbing with damp hands. And so the movement should be gently exercised on each limb every hour.
And if the twisted part is enveloped and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, in subtle cutting gently; and to put caution and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be brought back into alignment.
For if it is delayed, the joints swell, and by chance if it is reset to its place; because it does not suit to move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains.
In any way, when this happens, make the patient healthier, then leave it, until the apostemes (abscesses) are pacified; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each limb as it will be in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
of the jaws
Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with words.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to a better disposition through several remedies.
And if it is entire and complete, you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in this manner that the ministers touch the head of the patient, and place their fingers as a poignet on one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and let the other finger be deft, to put even; and instruct the patient to relax his jaws, and move them in every part.
And let the fingers set evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if it concerns the two jaws together, use hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed without softening, then place a moistened cloth made of oil rose and wax on it, and bind it lightly with many ligatures.
and the patient should sleep on his back, and his arms be steady between two cushionsed seats, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth to chew and swallow, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be put in place at one hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and accustomed pain come, and perhaps a solution of belly wind, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign; and many times he who has had it dies, in eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge from the thick part of the bone, and in the continuation of it and of the foot, and it is dislodged sometimes at the defect, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is towards the side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is sometimes dislocated, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and then the same is reset the head of the shoulder blade, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the bone; and the second is at the part of the hip; and sometimes it is dislocated at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the bone, especially to those who have little flesh, because to those who have little flesh, it suddenly becomes swollen; to those who have enough flesh, it swells at the points, and returns to the points.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and the shoulder is affected by a hot abscess, and it seems dislocated by this.
It is necessary then that you examine them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the socket, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the socket touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an ulcer; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements.
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly on the toucher;
and this manner of dislocation is not forced to reset, when it is new, or if the infant is sick.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient upwards, then place their fingers underneath the axilla, and lift the joint upwards strongly to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, then put it in place; if it will be hastened.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister shall use mollifying and soothing remedies, such as a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and shall be ministered.
then let the patient be seated on his back, and place underneath the shoulder a stick of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors by their talons on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the good hand of the patient.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see it reset in this manner.
and it is that you make present a man who is larger than the patient; and he stands straight towards the costal, and puts his shoulder underneath the patient's shoulder, and lifts it up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another minister treats the good hand of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then hang with him some heavy object, and the dislocation returns now.
And one resets it in another way: and it is as if one plants a long stake in the ground, so that the head is also supported like a pillar, and is neither too large nor too small. then it should be placed beneath the patient, but let there be soft drapery above, and the patient should be standing far from the post; then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a stake of two feet in length and three fingers in width, which has its head bent to enter obliquely beneath the seat, according to this form.
then place the stake beneath the head of the post, so that the post does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the seat of the patient; and extend one arm on the post from the length, and attach the shoulder to the post, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now return in place.
And when it is in, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that you place under the axilla a sphere of equal linen, then apply the poultice made from powdered millstone, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then hold it under the axilla firmly, and turn the bandage on the poultice, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that you massage little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is healthy.
And if the joint is weakened by moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in this chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the shoulders, or behind, if it is caused by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another treatment; and cures until he is healthy.
And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and late in movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the neck
You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, because one sees it well and feels it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the injured limb with the healthy one, then it can be seen openly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that abscesses do not develop, for if abscesses develop, it would be grievous to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to his two hands; and his arms should be expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the injured limb, above and below, and adjust the joint to its small pieces together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strengthens from the root of the palm the injured limb which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, strongly stretch it out; and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the two ministers, so it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer of cloth long and wide.
and when the mirror holds the joint in his hand, if it oils with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully bend the joint, until it returns to its form.
and when it is in its place, put a dry plaster on with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, start again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if it is swollen after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make them enter into a bath. and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bladder back on, and then enter into a bath; and thus do two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see, put on a warm, moist cloth with butter, and hold steady; if it returns to its natural state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easy, more than the other joints Anyway, it must be reset to its place hastily, at the same time that it is dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or that an abscess does not form there.
And the remedies are that you put the ailing hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of the hand, and the doctor puts them equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it regains its shape.
However, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in its place; then put the patient's hand with the palm down on a table at extension and at rest. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the doctor puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it now returns to its place, that is good.
If not, then one should extract the superfluous flesh gently, and let it be so, without recommencing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further because as long as the hand is numb, and cannot grasp anything at all: then it is clear that the nerves are damaged, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for this except to extract by cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then extract and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in different parts, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the belly;
then the fingers are straightened, and the dislocation is pushed back into its sockets as much as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and let it be for a few hours, and then make it equal to that hour; and do not bind it, as we have said, and loosen it from the joint, and make it move, and rebind it; and do this frequently, until it is straight,
and thus do it, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it just as you have done before, so that it may be healthy; and thus do it, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations burst out suddenly without consent, and cannot be held back, and many times some member is softened, or the hips or the two arms or joints.
And many times the sciatic nerve is moved to four places; the one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is that you rewind where the gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no cure or healing of the entire body.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures were announced by grand words, where there is no great profit in all.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the worst before, no one is healthy;
and also that which comes straight to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for the ones that properly come to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a straight line, and have a strap beneath him, so he does not slip;
then fix the stick to the head on the ground firmly, and another to the feet, and tie a bandage beneath the patient's hips, and another to the thighs, and to the knees, and to the ankles;
and the minister knows the bonds, one at the head and others at the feet, among the twelve joints;
and they should be well fastened, the joint as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine strongly, until it is straightened.
And if it does not straighten by this cure, take a table of three long arms, and place it beneath the patient, and the patient should be on their side, and put the head of the table beneath the patient, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it is straightened to its place; and if you see, do it at the turntable which turns with the hand.
And it is that you place two fingers on the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet, two other fingers, and between each finger, above and below, a thumb-space of a span;
and in each finger a hole, where the circle turns, and the fingers are firmly on the ground, so they do not move; and between each two fingers is one turning finger, because the ligament turns, and in two turnings, two small fingers of a span, to turn the circle;
and then the ligament that is among the bones at the circle towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other circle, and each of the ministers turns their circle to the entire ligament, and the masters put the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is straightened, then put on the emplaustre of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the estoupes, and then the staple of a tablet of two inches of a span, which grips the joint of the gibosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle treatment of nourishment, so that it may be healthy;
and if something comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the steel that we mentioned before; and never do they administer it with a piece of lead,
and never does the appearance come in the rear of the spinal vertebrae, and one believes it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have presumptuousness: for fear of bringing about death.
of the dislocations of the thigh
You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations simply, not as with other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to three parties: within and without, and forward and backward; and more within are the haunches, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocations is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the ailing knee than the healthy one, and the ailing one cannot bend its knee to the fire; and it is the limb that is weakened by the hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of the one to whom it comes to fail, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of the one who has gone before, it is that they straighten their leg according to the fulfillment; however, they do not bend their knee without pain, and if they want to urinate, they cannot go forward, and retain their urine, and swell the ankle, and when they walk, they pass over the heel.
And the signs of the one who has it in the back are that they cannot stretch their knee, nor bend, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is out of place beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no effective cure; and it does not seem that they have a presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it seems that you should apply a strong minister, and strongly stretch the leg with two hands, or with one lien that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he touches his hands beneath his haunches, then tightens with a soft thread on the thigh; and another pulls the top of the thread;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pelvis, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the thigh, and the joint that is beneath the groin, then stretch the thread upwards towards the groin, and towards the strong force;
Then take another minister by the arm, and embrace the large joint of the hip of the patient, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong and soft bandage on the two heels, and on the two knees, and so the injured leg is extended two inches more than the other.
Then let it be suspended from the top of a beam, and let it be one inch off the ground; then command a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister hang with the patient, who embraces the hip in its former shape, for the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at its former shape, then it is good for the patient, just as we have said in the one who has a withered limb, and straighten the bandage properly on the injured leg, and also on the foot.
Then put the fire tongs, one at the head and another at the feet, then place the tongs between the hips of the patient in the form. and have moist draperys placed around, so that it does not blind the patient, then stretch out each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal in his hand to the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press in this way as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, you must stretch out the affected leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the mirror on the painful area above the affected limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the thigh, it does not fit to stretch the patient downward, nor lift them up from the ground, instead it fits that it be just as if the hip joint were dislocated upward, as we have said about lying down on .ij. hips; and be on his face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table;
and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put on the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip joint does not move;
and rest for 2 or 3 days, then remove the dressing, and put on the plaster above; and if you see that they are even, bind it as before, and leave it for 2 days; then remove it, and let it heal completely, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward, forward, and backward; and it does not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as much as they can, and place your back against their face, and put your foot against their feet.
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee in a circular shape; and another minister stretches out his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has his leg at his thigh lightly.
and put the plaster on top, and adjust the leg to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for two or three days, then remove it; and do not disturb the patient's trouble anymore, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not at all, administer stretching strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is inflamed, and it swells before the part where it is dislocated.
The reminiscence is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is swollen slightly.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit straight, and tighten it firmly by the leg, above the ankle.
Then prick the foot with your right hand, and then with the left. Do it twice, then hold it high up, and beautifully hold the foot high up.
and do it twice, as we have said, by holding and pricking the foot; if it returns to its place, that's good; if not, restart the work, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strap firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap the blankets around him, so that he does not move the injured part.
then tie the bandages around the thigh, and another bandage extends from the foot to his hands or to the strap, so that it is supported on the neck of the foot. then extend each minister equally, and the steps should be again between the hips of the patient to retain the patient when one examines them;
then put the mirrors equally at the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns quickly.
And when it is at a point, put the plaster and staples above, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the veins that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are inflamed, hold them; then release it on the third day or fourth, and delay going to see the patient for four days. and if it goes before this limit, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses arise from it, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two
When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them gently without force, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of your toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat bed or on a straight table, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is equal, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a table at the head, then hold firmly, and let it be still for a few hours, then release it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and have long experience of it, and be compassionate and merciful and slow, not hard.
and take comfort at the beginning of soothing abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope for health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscesses which are in the way may disappear.
and when the limb is in its place, then administer soothing abscesses, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of desiccated herbs.
and with the dislocation to breakage, and you will not be surprised, if the bones, and do what we have said about simple diseases;
and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen.
