Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from top to bottom, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fathers except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
It seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the ferrumens of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our times, is the art of medicine elongated. And it behooves him who undertakes to learn in the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and of the moving and resting veins.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and little with the work; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm men; thus I have seen many times more of those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Because I see a foolish doctor who cuts into an abscess or a lump on a woman's neck, and cuts the arteries of the neck; because so much blood flows out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a old man's bladder, and the stone was large; if he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the old man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they touched him he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage there was a wound; and the doctors, out of ignorance, held the breakage over the wound as if by strong ligature, and did not leave the wound to heal, and they left it thus; and they commanded that he should not move it; and meanwhile it happened that the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and release his leg; and when I saw it dislocated, he was in pain and did not feel any pain.
But the entire corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost completely lost.
And I saw another case where a abscess was forming, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of its sovereignty.
For cancer, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, young son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: this is to know, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in conscience, and undertake your maladies lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and leave the diseases that bring grief and sanitation; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad disease, lest you be called foolish people."
I have divided this treatise according to twelve chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and on the forms of instruments, and on the iron rods for cautery, and all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and on cupping glasses and wounds, and on the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and on the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and on the forms of instruments.
Here is the translation:
I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses; and from this they speak to the wise ones, and agree with them; and I hide few words, for I reduce their length.
I say that fire cautery aids universally for every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some devised none and said that fire cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not effective for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite, that fire cautery makes great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men. When you examine the body of the man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body frozen.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times through experiment.
And all ways, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicinal burning.
For the fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member by a little name.
The burning medicines pass from one member to another in alleviating, and bring to the afflicted member relief from painful suffering; and thus often cure the sick person.
The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make that, if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I withhold the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they choose carefully.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries which occur are often cured by the aid of cautery; and similarly, the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasty ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the member.
And do not think, dear son, as the foolish doctor; for in the disease that is healthy from cautery there is no return; and he says so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine by the hastiness of its value, and by the virtue of its work and its authority.
And it is possible that the disease worsens at some point according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluous things are assembled in him by the acquisition of food and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered at the right time or there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries are dense for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but this happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in some disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth. Then it appears well that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than iron, and did not say it was because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and said that the eyes of the cautery do not make putridity, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and gold cauteries are worth more than iron, as they loudly declared.
And however when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is quickly cooled; and if one heats it too much, they create an obstacle at the fire; and thus there is enough of hindrance.
And for this reason we do not use iron cautery that we have made appear in our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just below, because the way is easier to find.
for fire cautery
These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there they are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of songs and pain of teeth and throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold if it is like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine, solutive and mondifying the head, either two or three times, according to whether the virtues and ease and the habituation of the patient can suffer; and then do it again on the head of the patient.
And then make them sit cross-legged between your hands, and put their hands on the soles of their feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
And put the cautery fire on the affected area, marked with ink, and do it by descending and straining your hand little by little while rotating; then lift your hand slowly, and turn the area so you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little of silk, and put in soft and loose cotton underneath, and put on the affected area, and leave it for three days; afterwards put on a warm compress in a wrapping; and leave it until the swelling is gone; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And they said, the ancients, that when you leave a wound open for a longer time, it purges more; and therefore it helps to move.
And they said that one of these should let the cautery burn part of the bone, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and it will be cured.
And they said that one should let the cautery burn above, and thrust so strongly that one abates from the bone as large as .i. the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux because the humors issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew it up.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some homes where there is a path of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and it seems to me that when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healthy and moderate for me, and of this use I often assemble a healthy salut.
of the old pain at the head
When the entire head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, and it does not work.
Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that one, a little, as we said above.
After making the cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make a cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is in this way that one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those on which one makes the cautery on the middle of the head, and this is the form:
for fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with mondifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases are done, but none of these help: then you do cautery according to several methods, namely of medicine agar and fire.
The cautery of medicine agar is that you take a dose of alum, and remove the crust and recover it; then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the dose of alum beneath the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then untie it and treat further with the dose of oil, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put on a cotton pad smeared with balm so that it sticks in place.
After the treatment of ointment, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that it does not work with any of the combined medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on combined medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery from where it is in the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a claw or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the skin of the heart is cauterized; and lift your hand so the artery is not harmed, which is defective, and decorates abundant blood.
Afterwards, put cotton in the wound of the vein, and place it on the spot for three days; then I put moistened cotton in a poultice, and afterwards cure the spot of ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to harm the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of the migraine
Here is the translation:
And if you see that these cauterizers do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the top as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cauterizer that we have said in this chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizer that has .ij. cuts; and this cauterizer is better than the previous one and more helpful.
from the pain of the ears due to cold.
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has tried solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cauterizer which is called "points", because it is its form:
After making points all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij. where the pain holds in both, and you slope a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the bite; and it has .x. points around each ear; after curing the place until it is healthy.
of the torment of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with a flow, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this type of torture that moves with a flow of fluids and evacuations from the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery above the head of the ear a little beneath the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the blood is burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
And it is the similarity of the cutting that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cut be a little larger; after curing the patient as I have said before, until they are healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not profit at all, and the patient has no fever, then you make three fire cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the place that is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last fire cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be treated thus as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness, you must give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, take the whole head of the patient, and place on the occiput the plaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the book of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is thus sane, it is good; and if he is not, you make three fire cauterizations from the head down to the neck, leaving a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat the wound as the others, and if you have seen it become swollen, and the patient is suffering, you make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two others on the two horns, and treat until he is sane; and it is the cautery that is called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of years and of what we have said before; afterwards, take the head of the patient, then make a cautery on the head and on each horn, and on the back and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is strong, make three cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is reached, and lift your hand; afterwards, treat until it is healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics must not use fire cautery unless it is phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is greatly suffering and unable to bear medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew soothing food to calm the brain often with good meats; afterwards take the head in the middle, and perform fire cautery as we said before, and perform fire cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, perform fire cautery as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the fire cautery be gentle according to the method I said.
If the patient is an infant, perform subtle fire cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excess or corrupt and gross fluids, then perform fire cautery with such fire cauteries as we said for one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining excess fluids leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will calm their brain, according to what is said before in the division.
After the head of the patient has been repositioned; after making a well-made circle, as if it were a crown, place it on the head; and let the patient be cross-legged, and be held firmly from all sides; after presenting the linen, take measures to avoid old berbescio; and heat it with fire tempered in this way, so that they may not suffer the pain; after wetting the circle thoroughly within the head, and let it cool down; and do this for each patient once a week with another good government, until they are healthy.
Where you see that the cautery is made by making many points on the entire cautery. This method of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then place cotton wool in a poultice with grease from geese.
of the warmth of the eyes When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe many times on an empty stomach.
After the command to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery on the head, and apply .ij. cauteries to the temples if the descents of the awe are in .ij. eyes assembled, or if they are in one; and touch all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issue, then staunch it with a little power as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery how you will hold it steady; and no one makes a cautery or cut beneath the .ij. bones behind.
because of the course of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear in the head's deformity; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold humors, then I do the cautery that I said at the beginning of the awe descending into the eyes: .i. cautery on the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or cutting beneath the .ij. bones; and if it is more necessary, then one should carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
here is the translation:
When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit him, then give a drink to the patient; afterwards raise his head, and make him undergo fire cautery or gentle olive oil cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the three veins, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery so you do not touch it. And it is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive". For it is the shape:
And if you see that it makes three cauteries on the three veins as long as the little hairs are; and do not let your hand stop until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
where hair grows to a point on the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pustules, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the foil of a dead man, and it is the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk scales on the eye, then heat the cautery according to its form.
Here is the translation:
And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same spot, as you did previously; and if the hairs are fallen out, cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The cauterizers of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as they can be; then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living coals, one half ounce each, and crush them well together; and do it quickly, so it does not cool down, then spread on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and apply to the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, then you must operate on one, and also anoint similarly; and put beneath the eye a soft cotton ointment in the form of an egg; and the head of the patient should be healthy and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, for he feels burning as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the burning sensation has passed, lift the skin of the eye, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted as if it had been lifted by the constraining force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then reapply the medicine on the same spot where the medicine did not take hold, until your operations are even, and your eyes are in balance; then put soft cotton ointment in a blistering manner until the bitter humors are purged, after curing the eye of the ailment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if you are a master that you take great care of your work with great care so that no point of the medicine touches the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the one who is softened by the proper paper, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the double-edged mirror:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and thus their constructions; and do not mistakenly reply to the right path for him who is the student of this art.
on the cure of fistula by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you cauterize them according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position; and hold the extremities of their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor nod its head; afterwards apply moist cotton in a stream of warm water or juice of persillium on the spot; afterwards heat the cauterization tool which is thus: and it is shaped like a pen made of wood, assembled so that the cauterization tool is thus; if you see, if it is appointed from one part of the head to another, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but in any case, this which is shaped thus is worth more for your work.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and they make a quantity of a .Z. of poultice; and hold your hand or a firm cane, and the patient does not move at all, so the poultices applied do not run to their oil; and it is necessary to put on the patient's oil a cotton wool swab in a stream of water or in a bath: the poultice if it is the art of fistula, and the healthy one by marvelously sanitizing.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pungent applications to the nostril, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is necessary in its own proper flow.
from cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "pox", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks of the skull that we have spoken about in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery collar according to this form:
And put it hastily in those cracks until it reaches just at the font; after treating the skull of wax until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it has made pus and is swollen and becomes fistulous; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after boiling or piercing the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron rod reaches the font of it, and where the back of the skull; and do it once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the skull and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
two movements of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then place the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery in such a way that you put a chain over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards remove your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with warm saliva, and hold it for an hour and strongly fumigate.
And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain of teeth comes from cold, or it has cold or vein, and the cures of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Cautery of borax is such that you take borax of a vein, and the tip in a spoon of iron or copper; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil it in borax water, and put it on the aching tooth immediately and hold it as long as it cools down; and do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and borax water are cold, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron rod so the fibers reach the gum of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take a small iron or copper rod, and it should be thick so the fibers do not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, so that it forms a crust afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold it with your hand as long as the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be gone the same day or the next day. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good borax water in the impression of this cautery, and then roots firmly; and this is the form of this cautery:
When the scalp ulcers are from flux and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery iron from there, and it will come into form, and has two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and apply the hot cautery once over the abscess, or as many times as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on a moist cotton dressing so that the discharge is eliminated; after curing, treat the wound with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
When the moistures descend upon the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolvent medicines; after, apply cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but rather a little. After, apply another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and this cautery is called "clavile" from which we have the form before us; and cure the wound as we have said before, until it is healthy.
of the swelling When all the diseases of the chest are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever or shivering, and it is an old disease, then you make two cauteries on the strong part in their void; and another cautery between two marmots; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form that was mentioned before.
And if you see, make a cautery by pricking all of the cautery that is called "poins" because the form is thus before in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just to ..., or somewhere within. After healing the limb according to what was said before, and let the cauteries be at three veins according to this form:
And because they are more delicate, therefore you make three of them in a copy.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After soothing the patient on his back and on his side; after lifting the heart which is within the titillated area as two of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has .ij. nerves douqueil it is in this form:
and cauterize the heart as much as it penetrates to the side, and thus would be the figure of the cautery with three cauteries; and for this reason, cautery is made with the cautery that has .iij. nerves, because the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has .iij. nerves:
And at no time is it placed on this .i. nerve because there are eight cauteries.
After applying fire cautery, burn the hairs with a flame; then have the patient rest, and do not stretch their limbs for too long until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is reinforced, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the cautery of fullers-in
The ancient ones said that one must do fullers-in cauteries of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cautery thus. Cauterize between the forceps and the neck, and do small cauteries descending a little into the part that is beneath the beard; and do cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little; and do a cautery in the foot, and another above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one as thus. One does not press with their hand, but rather makes an aperture, just like when smelling.
Here is the translation:
of the worst
When you treat the disease of the worst from what we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they usually resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
One of the methods is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the worst, according to the figure of the cautery of the fire that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all of the cautery, and let the patient be conscious on his back;
and another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has three nodes, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the worst, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations which you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Here is the translation:
of dropsy
Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, unless it is done in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have stated in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you perform three cauteries around the bowel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in a place near the chest; and let the cauteries be very close to the skin of the heart.
Afterwards, let the cautery be opened for a short time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will come together with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a club, which we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously described.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cauterer without turning. And do not enter too deeply, lest you should disturb the citrine water, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Afterwards, do the same on both legs, making two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterizations be from top to bottom, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing, so that the water escapes; afterwards, cure with the other cures that we have said.
of the massage
Here is the translation:
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them undergo fire cautery on the finger, and perform fire cautery on each part, and small fire cauteries on the stomach below the navel, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you perform fire cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all divided below the almond-shaped and triangularly, and perform fire cautery below the navel. Two should be done.
And if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then perform a large fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire clavicle cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating the limb so that it is healthy.
of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
When you cut into the fleshiness which is named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems suitable, and then apply it fully to the affected part of the "thelul" cut; and leave so much space with your hand that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of swollen limbs benefits while they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected part, it will provide more significant aid.
of a badly healed wound
When the patient cannot suffer touching or manipulation, which we will discuss in its place, a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Here is the translation:
of the disease of the kidneys When pain of the kidneys comes from cold, and from great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman's womb, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other to the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in a thousand places, they will have three cauteries in a line, and will do more great aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is affected and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the upper part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as our thumb; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have a smaller need; and let the clavicle cautery be according to the form mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: then it is necessary to apply three cauteries around the belly, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries beneath the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the moist viscous fluids descend to the hip bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together; and it is found that the places of departure are visible, so it is necessary to apply three cauteries around the hip bone in a circle, and mark before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present for you, make three cauteries of the large olivary ones, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until they are healthy.
of the pain in the thigh When pain comes in the thigh, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After making the cautery; and the manner of making the cautery is according to three methods: that is to know ensemble medicines burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the thigh in this form, and make a good profoundness and greatness, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olivary; never do they make a cautery in the middle on top of the thigh, because there are three according to this form:
And if you see that the cautery is applied to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the curvature should be burned.
And it is the manner in which one performs on a sciatic, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, make .ij. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little on the left side; and let the cauteries be cutellaire, and let the spaces around the curvature be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers of the foot or nearly there, make the cautery where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called "points".
And if the mastery is, make them do more; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make them perform cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were perceived as corrupted all the way to the feet. Afterwards a abdominal abscess from which he got death.
And if the pain is in two parties assembled, make cautery on one and the other, in this manner.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of the pain two fingers
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or too great an evacuation, or from similar matter being cold and spread out, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after that to empty the patient of filthy pills or similar things, which one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the cautery claw nail following this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted spine when they stand up, and fear; and you find it in the lower back and in the appearance that comes on the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you want to cure it, then cauterize with the cautery according to this form.
If the cautery should pierce each part of the spine equally. And if you want to, then cauterize around the spine with the poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the place so it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer cautery in gibbosity which is in spasm of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mountain of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-like according to this form.
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point that they call "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee, two or three cauteries for each part, at every olive-shaped cautery; and if you have more skill, do more, but do not hold your hand firmer than necessary, as long as the fire of the cauter is burning.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we described in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in both, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the sides or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge fluxes, it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the rupture of the spleen
When rupture comes to the loins, and the intestines descend into the flanks and it is newly formed, then you should see that when you want to cure it, it does not harm anyone that day; and that it uses things that loosen the belly, so that the fiends come out of their belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at every sign that should be similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, instruct him to make a well-made poultice, and for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great replenishment of drinking and eating, and of too high spirit; and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will describe the treatment of surgery in his chapter. of the wound of the belly
When wounds come in other bellies and are cognizant, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make him 10 cauteries from the cautery according to their quantity, and be careful with the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at 8 angles according to this form.
But first mark the place of the incision and make a line according to the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand inside all the cauterized clavicle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more tender.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes in no member, or from falling or striking, and that pain lasts long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torcions and its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it's good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it should change in the member that is proximate, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient be healthy.
of messelry
The messels are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the malady that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see that it is to be cauterized, take heed that the malady is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not let it descend or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not infect the whole patient, then you do .v. cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head anew, and another towards the forehead at the end of the veins; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the nape; and let it be so much that your hand reaches to the bone, and so long as the scabs issue forth as if the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cautery on the mouse according to what is before.
And if the mess is scattered all over; and it appears manifestly, so it is necessary that you apply cauterization to these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and one cauterization on each knee, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and three cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the last vertebrae calcifying, so you do not burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the thumb, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you cauterize, the more you aid, and it profits; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already almost entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the iron instruments. After healing the limb with flour and honey and other treatments until it becomes healthy.
of inflammation
When swelling comes into a limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, but it does not heal, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then cure it with ointments until it is healthy. And sometimes one makes a cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed; and never intervene unless one is knowledgeable about the limbs and issues of moving nerves in the body.
about ulcers
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with flour of fenugreek and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healthy.
The treatment of chancre by cautery
When chancre comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cautery at the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the tumor. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the tumor; and always this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and more rightful is that it be cauteryized around, at the cautery called "circule", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the inflammation which cannot heal
When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it takes time to heal or because of the superfluous matter that it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of his temperament; and you want to hasten healing: then cauteryize thoroughly with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards, leave it thus. For it will hasten healing.
And if you want to pierce the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with the form of which it is made:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery burns the heart, and it should be such that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the treatment is alleviated. After the treatment so that he is perfectly sane.
the treatment by fire through iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a decay of the limb, because it decays the limbs just like fire dries out green wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer from cautery with fire, then scorch the small and large cauteries thoroughly, according to what is suitable for the person or the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply cauterized oils with fire so that the burns from fire are removed, and all corruption. After the treatment of wounds that breed charcoal.  And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this decay has often been cured by medicine applied with fire cautery; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
of pores that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great faulty thing that blocks the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It's to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery iron like a pen made of vaulted iron, and make it from good iron according to measure so it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and have subtle margins; afterwards put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it starts to rot; then make a poultice of crushed savages with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the foot of ointment, anointing so it is healthy.
Here is the translation:
the cure for trembling hands
When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cautery; then the trembling will cease, and the health will hasten to recover from the cold disease.
of painful pustules
At no time appear by default the bad bodies, or painful pustules, that come from gross corrupt matters. if it is necessary at first when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of fire, of which the point is taken with fire, or of root of aristologe long, or of lenticular cautery. And at no time are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are dislodged the superfluous things from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and does not issue anymore; then apply fire cauteries more or less small and large as they are all red; then take, I., or big or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so long as the blood is stanched.
And if it happens that you remove your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not stop doing one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not hit the nerve which is delicate, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stemmed except in one of the three ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed above which have power to stem blood; and let it be tied and held firmly in place.
Whoever administers the stanching of the blood by tightly binding with strips or placing things around, or other similar things, does not profit if it is not done nearly enough.
And if it happens to no one and there is no miry medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly hold until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still with a cold compress often so that it may be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make an inquiry beforehand about what one needs of cauteries and medicines.
Here is the translation:
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the previous cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who aggravate their illness, they die quickly due to the severity of their disease, and the greatness of their malice; and one should fear this. And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is deceitful. It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather take greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not be fooled but be wise about what you are certain of, and about what you can have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I have divided from head to feet, so that you find it easier to understand what you will need to master.
from the head full of water
It is known that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too strongly; and sometimes it happens due to a response that one does not know.
And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen it hastens death; and therefore it seems to me that it is worth abandoning the work on some treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head was so swollen each day that he could not hold it up; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it would be death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as we need, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head overflowing from each part, and the water springs out when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not responded to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After holding back the folds of drapery and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be straightened, and give the patient dried and seasoned food in moderation, so that the limb may be comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and do it according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and take care to remove blood, so that the patient may die from the bad flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of the vein
When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cautery with fire, which one uses to burn the affected arteries.
It is necessary, then, to cauterize the affected veins, so that the patient's head is relieved; after scrubbing the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient's neck is stretched out completely; then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are somewhat bent; then mark the veins at their roots, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument, as far as the vein reaches to the bone, and it should be done by stretching out the patient's head widely.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as two fingers' width at the traverse.
And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
And if the artery does not open to sensation, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flow so it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains upon the bone point of an abscess, if it seems that apostemes come from it, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of migration
When old migration comes, and acute pain, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all this does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and the cauterizations, as we have recounted.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attaches to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is a little restored where some homes are too cold; and if it is restored, then hold the patient's neck with some drapels, then rub the skin of some rough drap, and warm the skin with hot water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula made in this form:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Because fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: therefore it is of great help against moisture. Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vein with much cotton and places them on well-made tents; and when they are removed, if you are treated with dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healthy; and if you do not have a cord for the artery as you operate, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood does not stagnate; and if you do not have this present, if you put your finger on the vein until the blood congeals, and raise the vein of cold water until the blood ceases, and is held steady as necessary; and what is more moderate and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cautery the vein of this trenchant fire, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid staying too long on the sore. For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth. And you should have between the two knives, one of thick space, and then when you have signed on the edges of the two veins, and you put the burning iron so much that it comes just to the bone, and covers the vein in two places; and they should be separated between the two hands because it is not suitable for this cautery from start to finish; and this is the form of cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are on the tender skin of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit from a cure of medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel an uneven walk as if from tremors; and if they are worn out and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
And they called it the "conquered cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be thus, two inches deep into the forehead downwards just to the nose, and the others two inches costal by the papers above, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are two inches costal by the papers above; and remove your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and let each wound have the quantity of two ounces at the joint crossing.
From the incision that is to be made at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the cartilage that is between the two fissures to the entire siphac that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
if you put in the first fissure the instrument called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and that's its shape: And place the cutting edge towards the clear cartilage at the bone, and the dull edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mean fissure. And collect all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as much as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another part in the mean fissure up to the other defect; and then extract the blood equally, and express the flesh for the taken blood; then put in each fissure a piece of old cotton, and put on molled drapery with wine and oil and ash, and beware that apostemes do not come; and on the third day, loosen the lien, and apply great abundance of hot water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures that one uses for wounds, until it is healthy.
of the eyes
When a patient has a familiar coughing fit, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision is clouded, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front it hurts, and the patient is stunned; then know by these signs that those matters and this catharsis do not come from many veins, and the mother's cure is what it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one equally large. And begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then remove it between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and tighten with linen thread; then cover above with warm drapings soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to form hot; when it is opened, you must rub the bone so that scars begin to form, then apply treatments that excite char.
In this manner: take three parts of flowers of chamomile, and three parts of colocynth, and make an emplaster; and apply it to these wounds to excite char throughout.
of the inflammation of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of these four things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing like iron; or seed, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not adjust to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, distill a little droplet of violet oil or sesamum oil, then perform extraction; and make the ear emit a flow of condensation, and stuff the nostrils when the emission comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and clear the ear from above. Many times it is cured by this treatment; and if it does not cure, perform extraction with subtle pincers, from which the shape is:
If it jumps out with pincers, that's good; if not, perform extraction with subtle onion-shaped double hooks; and if it doesn't come out by that, make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or pierce into the ear strongly, and stuff what is around the cane with wax so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out in the form we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, take glue from where you take the ears, and put some instrument on point to do this, and put a little cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if she does not succeed in all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus, that an abscess falls from the vein, and spasm; and the manner of the incision is that you first make a healthy wound on the head, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape out according to your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healthy. And if it's a grain that is inside and swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a subtle spatula in this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus like a thorn and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body that one can feel, then ease the extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if no worms appear, remove them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is its form.
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out all the wax; do this often until all the worms are seen. And if they do not come out, stop up the candle with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come forth as we have said, ease the distillations that the old men have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from what is its form as you see.
And it should be of silver or copper, narrow below and wide above, with small holes to distill; and to press within the distillation, an instrument of well-made copper for this, and if you see take a scraper and wrap it in cotton at the point of arrival; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand moderately so that the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels it within, and it should be distillations a little warm at the fire, as one distills it in the ear; and take care that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born with no holes in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or of flesh newly formed inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes go deep into the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole is nearly closed, and one sees them well.
That which goes deep inside, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, it is fitting that you put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, then the work has all this spatium of which it is the form.
And let it be smooth and even in front and behind, all plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opilation is of new flesh or growth of the ear, then you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the opilations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and gently shave around the area with fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put a tent according to the size of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the affected area.
Do not cease for a day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and apply the ointment in aqueous rose, and sprinkle powdered vitriol broiet; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another ointmented tent made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is gone; then continue to cure until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, soak a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bloody discharge which are treating the distillations.
of the flesh of the papyrei (possibly referring to a type of skin lesion or wound)
Here is the translation:
And if they are without a covering, then the lenticular cautery is subtly burned, and the cautery operator afterwards incises vainly; and many times they repair, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are scorched and do not regrow.
of the crust
Many times things appear in papers of the eyes that seem crusty in their form and hardness, and for this reason this malady is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the operations are such: take warning if the grandine changes from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; make a large incision, then lightly scrape each part, and take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing a little of the paper, do not grievously harm the patient; and if the fissure is great, assemble it with a bandage, and cure until it be healthy; and if it's small, do not use force, for the ointments restore it quickly and enrich.
And if the grandine is descending into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not harm; and when the grandine is covered, anoint the oily salve, and cure the place of that which enriches as long as the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
There is a fat which is engendered in the membranes of the eyes above, and this happens more in children than in old people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have morning catarrh, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on them, and are their membranes under their eyebrows moist which the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinia that appears in the eye. And when you press your fingers on it and feel the exinia entering within.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a cloth of linen, and sets up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinia in each part, then places it on them; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinia is assembled within the circle; then makes a small incision in the moisture with a sharp instrument, and does not make it larger than the wound made at the opening of a vein; and makes the skin deep enough that you reach the exinia; and in many dispositions comes exinia from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Draw out then a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the debridement, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and take care not to insert into the incision, that you do not reach the whole spatula just up to the eye, that you do not bleed.
And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, add a little to the wound lightly so it opens; then hold steady as we have said, then wrap in soft and cool cloth, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break their own skin and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is delayed. Then treat until they are healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then treat with poultices soothingly until they are healthy.
of hairs of papers
When in papers hairs are born misplaced other than by nature, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and cause various kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to .iii. ways: either by fire cautery together with fire, or by medicine applied according to whether it is before or a chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick an entire thread above; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull the thread above the entire paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, all the spatula coating, from the great lobe to the small; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then draw on the paper a figure of an inch, if like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper that is divided into sections.
And if you have a task that requires a great deal of paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make all the spatula coating on the lines that you have drawn, from the great lobe to the small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then prick the onion in one of the angles of the heart, and scrape it all; then assemble the lips at a stitching with a thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the eyelids all things sticking together, if you see fit to do so; and if not, have no cure, then leave the stitching and threads for three days or two; then cure the wound without stitching things that are dry and constricting, because the paper revives suddenly from the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is putrid (as the ancients directed), and it is a work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you draw on the paper a figure that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three pricks of the razor according to the form that is here.
then apply this ointment which soothes the small equal forces according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the bandages, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread beneath the large artery, and the second thread beneath the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your two hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin upon which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a gentle ointment and similar soothing applications.
and it often happens that the hairs of the skin are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture on one side and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the skin and make it firm within according to what I have said, and then make artificial sores by art, and subtle threads as long as the skin and the width of the spatula is; and apply as many heads of threads where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what soothes the skin of the eye, and extract the artificial sores from the formed parts; and leave them thus for some days, and the skin which will be strained, mortified, and purified, until it will fall off by itself.
If it delays, if the scalp has a strong hold, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer pluck the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the hunt another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the two ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it be exposed to the sun so that the operations are clarified, for it is a subtle and minor operation, then stick the needle into the entire hunt at the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as much as you can draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put in the hunt that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out entirely at the hunt in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the hunt down below to all the thread that you had arranged, so that the hunt comes out entirely from the perforation above and that you see it through the vision of the eye; then pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for .ij. hours or .iij., so that the hair takes root in its place and grows again; and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with a long natural hair, and let it be elevated with the one you leave, so that it is elongated and then released.
from the corruption of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes into the eye, it has two modes: one natural and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
And the manner of operating on it is that you open the sore, and separate the lips of it, and put inside threads of flax, and lay it so it may be healthy; and it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but working with mollifying things, as fenugreic; and the rose-water or aleatic and linseed oil being cooled, and ointments of dyapilon founded on none of the oils, and enveloping a tent, and the treatment of this.
And the treasure of this treatment is that you take heed not to let it settle back into its original form; and these operations that we have spoken of are only temporary remedies for this disease, so that it does not return to its original form.
of the flesh which comes in the eye
This disease which is disfigured and truly named "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make the thread pass through the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread appears in the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a large spatula.
And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is convenient, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the papyrus, and make two cuts or seams within the papyrus; and let the heads of the two cuts be at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make them into an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is just like the figure of a letter which has no "j" shape; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are thus disfigured, from what follows the papyrus, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure it with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tinctures, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from cuts or seams or cautery, it is convenient that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is presented here; then separate between the two leaves of a tente, as I have said; and one must do the surgery according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to understand everything so that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need of surgery and remedies in more numerous dispositions.
you command of the blistering
When this blistering has taken hold of the hands of men in such a way that the skin on top is swollen with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor beneath the skin, and lift it high; and take pinces, so that you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too dull, lest the patient suffer from the spatula being too sharp or bleeding oil; and make your incision, where you scrape off the assembled skin lightly, so that the skin regains its natural form; and it is healthy throughout, and never again becomes inflamed or painful, and raises the water gently, and of collarette; then put between the skin and the oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of egg whites; and after three days use gentle collarette and soothing things until it is healthy.
of the corner of the eye
Know that the corner of the eye is in two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but resembles a white, congealed moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and cuts it with pinces, it cannot be omitted; and both similarities begin from the great artery, and increase little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens their eyes; and holds the parchment with one hand, then coils the finger as pincers of small double curvature, and extends it above; then takes a needle, and inserts a horsehair or cowhair or beef thread, strong and firm; and doubles the point of the needle slightly and inserts it into the finger, and pierces through the entire needle, and holds the finger with a thread and extends it above, and removes all the hair from the side of the finger that touches the thumb and the nail just to the head, then cuts off the remaining part at the root of the arm, subtly and with small forces, and lets the natural skin or arm be, so that by incision no harm comes to the accustomed body; and never does the finger stay bent, nor at the thread, as we have said; then removes it from all subtle parts, this is the form:
And be careful that the subtle part does not touch the tender skin and break it, and that the thumb is not pierced; and after the incision, put a little of warm broth into the oil, and make a poultice from litargyrum, and let it stay until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured as much as possible so that it becomes healthy.
And if the finger is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, many times a cure is made with medicines of this type of finger; and they are born as I have recounted in the division, and if you see them coupled, then open the oil of the patient, and take the subtle part lightly according to this form:
And raise the finger subtly, and if you see that it diminishes to a point and the reason is pressing, then distill from your mouth into the collier oil made of litargire and doucoliere rouge and broiet, and stop up to the other hour; then recommence the other work according to this same method, until it be entirely restored.
If nothing in the oil is contrary to you, as if an abscess bursts, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it be healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it be healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh is soft in the oil at night by great annoyance, then suspend it from the onion, and cut off a part but not entirely, so that no vein of tears comes; then distill into the red collier oil made of litargire.
of the flesh that grows on the prune
Here is the translation:
And when the incision is complete and all flesh has been removed, apply the oil of broiet or distillate of red colier and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton on the wound with a few drops of water, so that it be assured of hot abscess; and if nothing remains, and the blood flows excessively, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make several wounds in the eye by this resemblance.
But always it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering that work.
from the veins of the eyes
These are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away from the sight its work and afflict the eye for two years. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which the vein is, if it is strong, and there is no other disease besides this vein; then coil in such a manner: instruct the patient to put their head on your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let the subtle double veins be according to this form.
And let there be a nine-day delay in degrees according to this form:
Then subtly heat those subtle veins, and evacuate the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins being removed from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye at the points of the eyelids, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not copy the veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to correct what is corrupted by the bad slime.
And if you cannot heat all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is alleviated and is assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is before until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and medicine according to what I said before, and it is not healthy, if there is an abscess in it that you open on the aposteme, where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take all the instrument of what is its form; and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made into a chief with an iron instrument, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form.
And put it on the bone with the corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is released; and do this several times, then restore the bone with exciting medicines.
If the bone is swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowels is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not improve and is not apostematous, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the perforated nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with bitter medicines, and when it is uncovered, take .i. forest according to this form, and let the iron be at 3 angles, and the wood should be softened until it reaches the chief as you see here.
Then he puts it on the patient's arm where the messenger is, and holds his hand away from the eye, a little, then turns to the entire forest until he feels the bone and the patient senses it by this, that the veins come into his nose if he holds his hand on his nose; and then applies the dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh becomes tender and hardened, thus goes the matter to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the discharge from the eye
When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose, nor any diminution, then you must read the patient; then anoint them, then apply cupping glasses or a heated iron to suck out, then put on the eye .i. making a poultice of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and apply bandages and drapings; and the way of the drapings is that you take fairly soft drapings, and double each one in .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then strain with a hard bandage in the form of a circle, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye strained day and night, and if it is well-bound, then you must tighten it very much; then remove the poultice after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, that's good; if not, then reapply the poultice and drapings and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
of the rupture of a woven fabric ulcer
When the rupture occurs in the web-like skin, then it opens up, and a flux of resin-like matter appears, which is astonishing to behold; then if you see the copious flow, the treatments are such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected part just above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the affected limb; and make them pierce, leaving the first needle according to its disposition; then take hold of the limb with the double thread and tie it around the web-like skin, holding it well, then remove the needle and place it on the moist eye in abundance of dew; and let it be until the threads combine with the skin, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and often the wound is restrained by a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends into the eyes, and enters there at once; then hold it steady until it is healthy.
from the socket of the eye
Here is the translation:
the veins of the eye
We have seen the resemblance of veins in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce; if you operate according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, facing the light from the sun, and hold the healthy eye steady and very firmly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left, or in your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument at the crown by the thickness of a thread in that white spot of the eye on the lesser part of the eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and twist your hand until it pierces into the white spot of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the depth of the measure of the space which is from the prune tree up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you see the opening in that paper through the clarity of the woven fabric, then put the instrument just where the vein is, then press it one way after another. If the vein descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting a little, and if the vein rises a second way, put the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not mount, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the vein a little of that gemstone, and remove from there the eye within. Then put aside for a while the eye that is clouded or troubled with oil of rose and in abundance of egg, and bind it with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our kind, put on common broiet with an abundance of egg.
And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is this:
And pierce then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep in front, but make it subtle, then put the maggots, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient as if they are sleeping, while they sleep on their back in a dark place; and be free from all movements, and take light food, and do not move their head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to their disposition until the third day; then unbind them in the same dark house, and test their vision, and make them see no things, and then put them back in their bed until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the time of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, because the water rises hastily.
The abscesses which come, you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address that which soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on its frame .i. orilliet to cover any day, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made a fire cautery with maggots, which draws out water, but I never saw any of them in our land, nor did I ever read about them in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them walk in darkness; and they should be properly aligned:
And the head of the bones of this same subtlety, and the last in four equal angles.
of the flesh over the nose
Never born or nose flesh joined diversely, because there are none that seem scorpions at the end of feet; and if it has flesh of fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In this way of those soft fleshes which is not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion to those flehes, and burn them with fire; then hold what you can sustain in a subtle spatula on one side, until you know that this flesh is completely ostee.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and without overwhelming it, or abscessed swelling, drain it as needed; and if it's malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stagnant and all the flesh is destroyed, then pour out the pus and the watery fluid.
If the nose does not open, and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as needed, know that there is new flesh in the upper bone, although the instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary that you take .i. a thread of linen a little thick, and be careful with our hands, and have between each notch of space .i. an inch or less; and put the patient's head in the thread of his nose as it can breathe, and treat in a fragrant manner until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth; and many times children do so in schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as we are with the thread. Do this until you know that the notch has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before; do this .iij. days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nose a cane of lead for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where they distill oils and medicines in the nose.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a cane, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a close cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the flesh above the nose
Many times a disease grows on the skin above the nose which is called "telul", and it increases and becomes large, so that it appears as a visible thing to behold; and for this reason you must apply a cautery or burning medicine at the beginning, and remove all hair, then put the cautery or medicine on top; and if you delay applying it until it becomes large, take heed if it is hard, of dark color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can apply it all over, if you heal the patient and remove their fear, and cure the skin with dry and restraining things.
when the nose is cauterized and burned
Be aware that when solutions of continuation come in one of these cartilaginous growths, it profits little, for in some homes. It is necessary then to make a cut where it has happened to none, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then add the .ij. leaves to a dressing, then cure until it is healthy; and if the leaves are already dislocated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrub all parts of their skin so they heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and restrain, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense bruised; and put on the powders a piece of strong or another soothing plaster, and let it sit until it heals by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of treatment is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have within their lips an abscess hard, resembling a grain of corn, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and divide into each node, and take them with pincers and cover in each part; then apply the remedy after the incision of vitriol ointment, until the wound is stained; and then leave it to heal, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
of the decay of the gums
Many times it happens on the gums that are affected, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them in place with bandages, and apply a dressing to their root, and let the blood or fluid flow; then put vitriol powder or other drying and desiccative powders; and if that character returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cover it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return again after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
of abscesses
Sometimes they gather at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are wide and spread out; and sometimes the black, citrine, and greenish teeth are corrupted, as the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary that you hold the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws be in your care, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus deal with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, until they are eliminated; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then recommence to rework on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for reworking, according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasps that one uses to remove teeth have other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you, well-prepared.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay to handle it as soon as you can, for this should not be done quickly; for it is a very high substance just up to then, so one has no excuse to remove it hastily. Here is the translation:
After extracting the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently push it into each part lightly, and remove it as you have done before. And if the tooth is perceived and gnawed, it is necessary to fill it with pellets; where the holes are; and if you hold it subtly in the grooves, so that it does not break while holding it; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and re-injure the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pain than the first time. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have related; but they come to an end through the occurrence of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or through the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is decayed, you rinse the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, you apply the place with vitriol broiet; and if it does not work, you cauterize.
The forms of the instruments, which one uses to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so that they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the tray, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be toothed to hold in place.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the tray, it is necessary that you put on the moist cotton cloth in a burrow. One day or two days, until the roots are softened, then you apply the clamps which are called "algefri", of which the head seems to be like a beak; and let them be made thus, as if they were a file, and that is their shape.
And if the roots do not wish to issue forth from all these clamps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
And it be far and large so that it does not break mine, and if the root jumps through that, it is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter:
And if one aids with this instrument that has many grooves, from which the form is:
and other iron tools that are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
And it be these instruments far so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are certain diseases where the ancients did not teach at all about the diversity of instruments; and it breaks no doubt in the cartilage or in the other bones, or it putrefies, if they search for these instruments that they need, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, from which the form is: And be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but it can hold and shut; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body shape, and its form is ugly, and especially in small women, if it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot align or file: then take the root; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron agitated in water:
And take the file little by little in your hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file, then file a part as it is the shape:
and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and file the tooth little by little in your hands daily gently, so that it does not move until it cuts; then plane in the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when they bite strongly
when the front teeth bite strongly, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on them so they chew, and you treat them with constricting medicines, and that does not work; if they need to be restrained with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold one does not move at all; and let the middle thread not be too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and double it between the healthy teeth, then put the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so they do not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then cut the heads from the thread with a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy teeth, and set them so they do not obstruct the tongue; and then leave them like that as long as they can stay, and if they come apart, or the gold thread breaks, hold it together with another thread; if it stays in place and serves thus throughout its entire length, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the healthy teeth, and the bad ones, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, set it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not interfere with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the shape of a tooth from an ivory tusk, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it together as we have said, and let it stay and serve thus for a long time.
of burning the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes it is the ligament that comes from under the tongue by nature, which grows in this way; or by accidental injury of a wound; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head steady, and lift the tongue; then burn the nervous ligament of the large one, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is toughness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you apply the onion and burn the large ligament; and take care that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the clear rose water and vinegar, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and tie the patient each night, so they cannot swallow. And if a flow of blood comes, apply a vitriol ointment on the wound; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see that the color is foul or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a white color, and there is moisture, apply an onion, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not stop with your operation, apply vitriol ointment until it is staunched, then return to your operation as much as you need; then lift the clear water and vinegar, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the throat
Here is the translation:
You should press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the handle, and make a hole above more than you can; and make no noise with the tiles together, then cover the instrument, because it is the shape, that seems like forces; and always the head are curved, and one end to another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or tin:
And if you do not have this instrument handy, then cover it with tannacles, because it is the shape:
And be cutting from one part, and naming the other part; and when you have covered one of the handles, then cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and warm and soothing, and if blood flows, then gargle the patient with warm water, or apply crushed pomgranate seeds that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then cure until it is healthy; and no other abscesses occur in the throat except for the .ij. handles, if you cover them thus like the .ij. handles, I mean.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, which was a small abscess; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed .ij. roots through the .ij. holes of the nose. I hastened to do something, and placed an onion in one hole, then made a hole above, and extracted a large amount of pus; then I did the same on the other side of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I placed the onion in these abscesses, and covered part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and refilled the hole that I had emptied, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it and placed a tube inside her throat: thus the crossing was delayed; and I parted from those regions, and knew only that God did something about it after me.
of the vein
When the vein is beneath, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called a "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme swelling is calmed, and it is subtle; then you must cut it. And the one which is assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of a reddish color or black, then you must make the incision there. For there is great danger for the patient.
Here is the translation:
This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put ash in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in it have an instrument that cuts according to this manner: And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads should be inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapour rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, it often recedes, until the eye dries out, and take care that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do it further than at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a feather's down into the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the feather's down does not let the vapour pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether, safe.
Many times it happens that a fish bone or a fish spine gets stuck in the throat, or something else; so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly; and what does not appear and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and attach the thread to the sponge, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then extract further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument with a hook according to this form:
And let the curved instruments be at the top of the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest it all comes back, nor push the bone inward; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because it is better or the thing is easier; if you push from below, where it draws the entire instrument equally, as long as it is drawn.
from the hollow of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the throat, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit at all, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the hollow, draw it out completely with a small hook, or subtle tongs that are suitable for this. And if it is not successful, take a curled hair, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then insert or move the curled hair with an iron instrument, and make it happen often. And if the patient complains of water all day, then take full sight of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it swallow in its own time, and move it with his own hand often; and if you soon feel that the hollow feels the water, then pour.
And if it does not pour out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with absinthium at the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the uve; do this many times, for it will soon flow freely. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cover in the middle, and in that pierced hole let there be the head of the instrument; then you throw out the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue forth, but comes up to the hollow; and the hollow will flow now, and if it does not pour out, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that it flows freely through this governance.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, resembles curved tenailles entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
the surgeons of abscesses
Many abscesses are similar, according to what the memory brings here afterwards in this book, and they diverge in perforation and in size; and it is in three ways: one is in its own appearance itself, and because of the moisture it holds. And the second way is through the eyes or those that are on the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its fulfillment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crude, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are on joints. For when abscesses come from joints, and you leave them until they are porous within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is on a principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is mild, it will harm the principal member; or if it is on the foundation, you should pierce it so that it becomes mild; and it is not necessary to pierce a crude abscess without complete digestion, unless it is on the foundation, which does not become porous within, and becomes swollen, and a fistula forms; and one cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and double debate and settlement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and so the perforation is throughout the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
In these cases, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worthwhile that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, then the body will be filled with a great deal of putrid matter; and by chance they will harden the lips and the depths of the abscess. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the length of the body, according to the size of the member that has need of it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
of wounds
Where wounds come from small abscesses, and there are ways of ours that are in tiles, just like the joint of a thigh, and many have similarities. There is fat and flesh where moisture accumulates, just like in pustules; and if there is flesh that is hard and piercing to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not contradict it. And the work of the surgical operation is that you examine everything .i. instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes later, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then clean thoroughly under the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving behind the skin that contained that moisture, for it returns immediately if one leaves it; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in vinegar and in wine, and in applying the dressing, and leave it until the next day; and this corrects what has been delayed at night. And then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay at night; then treat the wound with ointment in a suitable way, so that it may be healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. fat, then cut according to this form, under the length; and remove the outer skin, and scrape off from all parts, and put all your cure into forcing out what is in the vessel where it lies; and if the artery contradicts you, then do what I have told you afterwards. And thus do with the abscess if it is piercing, and from the touch and from treating as I have told you.
And the surgical operation on a piercing abscess and moisture, is more gentle, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or wounds where there is no moisture, and from these .i. abscesses that I cut into the head of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a rotten stone, rough and whitish, and could not break it; and if one had made a hole in it, one would have done as much harm as to a stone. In other abscesses coming from the head, because those that come from the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, the operation must be done within three days at most, depending on the patient, to avoid swelling; and the treatment should be done as it is necessary.
of the scalp ulcers
Many times these ulcers occur on the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groin, and never on other parts of the body, and they are numerous, and they are interconnected with each other. And each ulcer is properly situated in its own place, just like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and some that are malignant and do not want to obey health. In this case where you see good disposition on the touch, and it seems like the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not airy as nerves from the neck nor in the artery nor in the conduit, and is not deep; so you must cut through above, and scrape off each part, and stretch out the two lips of the heart as oncinces, if you are a master, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and proceed little by little, and be careful that you do not cut into the nerve or the vein, and do not let the spatula fall, so it does not slip, and do not go too far, so you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not let you operate, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work, so that you complete it; then inquire about your finger's indication if there remain small ulcers, if you cut them out and treat them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the ulcer, do not think that you should cut into that ulcer at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harming; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut out the entire ulcer, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no further superfluousness due to the size of the ulcer. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and treat it forcefully, and sew as we have said. Those ulcers that hold superfluousness, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce thus like before mentioned, depending on the situation, then apply ointment and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well treated, cure it with ointment in a warm manner, so that it becomes healthy.
of bruising
The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it's the scripture of their words.
For those who have bruising, it is necessary that the cut of the throat which is called "epiglote" be examined; and one should not help by this alone, because all the veins and the purging of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaws. When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the loss which comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it deep within three circles or a small incision across, between the three circles or by the quantity of the deep incision through the siphac, not in the cartilage.
and if it is necessary to cut at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough to be removed.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then cut the heart as far as it reaches the uvula; and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the siphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the uvula's flesh that falls apart due to the broken ligament, and by the loss of voice.
and let the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with sweet care, and sew everything beneath the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Avoid doing this just as much as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the defect lacks the wing. Then cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and therefore command the old man to let the open wound be so long as the evil of the disease is past, and it is past in 3 days or in 4 days. And then they command to cauterize the wound and cure, until it was cured;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinew of the forearm;
and I was called for by the curator, and I found him nearly dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered with a vein or a pipe, except for the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
and I had nothing against the young woman except that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
because I know that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural does not have any obstacle.
And the accident is in two manners, one of which is similar to a fat tumor that comes from us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate with fiery fervor except in the one that is small, and it proves and searches everything intrinsically. if you find it thus, as if it were a fat tumor, and it does not penetrate to any vein, if it is cut, if we cut ourselves, and it draws all its cofinement, if there is a point in it. and examine everything thoroughly, and heal it thus, so that it may be perfectly healthy.
of us
There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is necessary that I declare all the differences that exist between them and us.
I say that the patient is feverish and trembling, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putridity is accomplished; then the fever and heat are restored.
With the ninth node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a certain syrup, which is its own juice and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus as a jaundice, and becomes large.
and they are according to their appearances, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire into all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of the nails is that you take or touch the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the heart, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this that it knows how to force.
If the running moisture is short, whatever its color may be, thus make it so as I have said about other abscesses.
and after the entromissoire no moisture comes, know that it is fat, thus make it so in a cross, and take it as pincers, and lightly scrape each part and ward off the cloth where it lies that you may draw it healthy with the nail.
and if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it by pieces so that nothing remains there.
For if he remains nothing, thus returns to us many times;
and if he remains a little, and the wound does not grieve him, thus apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing abscess remedies hot, and heal other wounds as much as he is healthy;
and if it is great to us, thus cut the lips of the wound, and heal those that injure flesh.
and if the vein is swollen against the contrary or other, thus hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol broken, and let it stay three or four days, as long as the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which is remained from the above.
Here is the translation:
and are like the needles with which one cuts the abscesses, and are of citrus iron, or silver, or copper, and those that are yellow are worth more than black lead for encircling the ulcers of fistula;
and are in three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three ulcers of three manners also;
and if there are lancets that have three ulcers, and are of three manners; and if there are lancets that have two ulcers, and lancets with a single ulcer only, and are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
The head of these is sharpened to those who make them cutting, and there are those who do not cut more than one part, from which they scrape the nails, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve.
and of these introjected instruments are the lancets placed in handles, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of the abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see.
and one does not use them more than in the clear flesh, as in thighs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places.
and one often makes another small instrument similar to a fisting scourge, according to this form, with which one stains blood:
and one places it sometimes at the healthy spot that joins the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes one encounters according to this great form:
Sometimes they swell the breasts of some men when their corruption begins, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
and they become worn and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if one knows how to treat them according to this form of these lines up to .g.: Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicine of incision in the form of a cross, then bring together the lips of the wound to suture, and treat until it is healthy.
and the flesh falls away below, and is amazed by its greatness as if it were women, if they make in the same sutures above, through similar fissures; because one holds onto the other at the end of one and of the other, so that the larger line includes the smaller according to this form, from this line B to line G; then scrape off the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil. and let it be until it consumes the residue and the fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the seats
These abscesses that come from under the seats are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Here is the translation: And when the entire boil that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply gentle pressure to make it healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is open, apply cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses come, and it also happens that the inflamed vein becomes an abscess.
and if one recognizes it thus, as it is through the artery, then the abscesses are long in depth; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangulation; and when it is through the vein, then it appears as a deformed foreign body;
and it is foolish to hide this abscess, and similarly when it is under the seats and in the corners and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to remove the iron cure, and the one who is at the head must remove it also, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever, they make a incision above the skin of the loin.
It is necessary then to remove the iron cure, and the one who is at the head must remove it also, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever, they make a incision above the skin of the loin. Then open the incision nicely, and separate beautifully the artery of the veins, so that it is discovered.
Then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then locate the place which is between the two ligatures of an intramuscular one, so that the blood flows out of it, and be freed from the abscess.
Then apply the treatment that heals by degrees, so that the ligature holds fast. then heal those of dislocation coming to those, as long as they are healthy;
and if the abscess is because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess throughout all the skin, then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, if you draw it from the other side; then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind one of the two parts with a thread, as the two heads of the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, so rebury another needle everywhere, the whole aposteme at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four directions;
then cut the aposteme so that the superficies emerge, then cut the superficies of two courses and let what is linked remain;
then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of tents and bandages until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the nostrils
Here is the translation:
And it often happens to the joints and the two toes where there are joints, and it's a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of dead flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when one extracts a piece of bone, the patient feels pain, and it's not like the depth of the body, but beneath the skin;
and it must be well examined from all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and one who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: by chance they would contract;
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin soft at the suture. If the abscess is small, you hold it with tongs, and cut into its root;
and if it is large, you support it with an onion, and scrape, then oste and assemble the wound to the suture, and heal until it is healthy.
the large hanging pouches Never has it happened in the belly and not in another part of the body, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it is a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw a man who had an ulcer on his belly that was more similar to a fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and it had little roots, and it was already cracked open, and it was corroding from excessive moisture.
I touched them and found in one sixteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the works of the incision show that you examine if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist and with subtle roots;
if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when the surgeon comes, there are often too great effusions of blood, and if the wound does not heal, then hasten to give a secondary cautery;
and if you see the patient is fainting and afraid of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread of wool, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it sixteen days;
and then restrain, and do not cease from straining the thread of the probe until it feels the joint; and it works by itself without labor; and if the roots are large, then you should not be afraid to cope with the middle of the belly, but you can well cope with half of it.
then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not touch the ulcer that is of bad color and little sense and laid bare regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre afterwards.
when the swelling is hot
If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or crack of the skin, and it is on the stomach and in some of the veins, just as it has happened in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of flatulence;
and if it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the vein, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers, it swells up, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the navel; then he should sit comfortably between your hands, then go within to the place that you have signed to all the spine. then stop the majority of the abscess above all the large ulcer;
then open the majority of the abscess extended above the nail, and you should indicate with your finger, and examine the intestine; If you take hold of the patient's thigh, if you dislocate it, and insert the intestine through the hole in the belly.
and if you take hold of the bowel, if you take it to the navel, and cut off the excess flesh;
and if the artery does you harm, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and insert nine strong threads, and insert the nine needles inward so that you have made a cross-shaped incision;
then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb rest until it purifies, and cut away the dead flesh by itself; when you apply the cup when it is subtly heated and purified, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
when you apply the cup when it is subtly heated and purified, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave around the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be healed, and bind the limb.
because of an ulcer
We have spoken in the division about the symptoms of ulcers, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment with iron; and we say that the ulcer is inflamed in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in the limb or where it can be touched if it is like an ulcer which is in the flesh, and in the skin, and in similar limbs, and one must completely remove it when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I do not know how to heal anyone; nor did anyone ever heal before me.
Here is the translation:
of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is inflamed suddenly; and one should not touch fire in these .ij. similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy called "inflamed" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as tumors and solution of wind and similar things; if you do not touch fire, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient has strong virtue, and they have no other disease except dropsy alone, and it is not too young nor too old, then you should work thus. Lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly inwards, bending the water to the lowest part of the pis, then take the spatula-like instrument according to this form: And let it be trenching .ij. parts at a point, and in no way should it be so entrans that it cannot come up to the intestine when one administers it thus, and it does not block it.
Then look if the dropsy is inclined towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision thus from the bowel .iij. straight down below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then let your incision be on the left side of the bowel .iij.; and if it is due to the spleen, then let it be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient's juices flow into the weak place except through the incision that the superfluous ones do not run to that weak spot.
Here is the translation:
at the top is the almond, if so when the instruments come to the water, then descend now onto the instrument; take away there the half or the third part, because if you remove more than it does not fit in that hour, by chance the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he becomes numb, or he approaches death;
but take away according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and their pulses; then touch the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the cord which stops up the passage that is on the syphon, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take away from the water a small quantity;
do it no day, and guard against making a fool of it as long as it does not remain but a little water. And if you doubt on the patient, and you leave much water, if the cure of the burial or dry heat, and by very sweet or bath and in the sun, and take care to drink; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
from the stopping of the flow Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
And the manner of the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, afterwards the head of the rod and the handle are aligned as the length of a pen, if it pierces in the middle, as it should; and beware of the flow of blood that often comes, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of what bleeds, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
the pustules on the rod Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a bad appearance of flesh; and in them there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a subtle onion, and cut and clean all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure the ointment carefully until it is healthy. And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, so you must apply cauterization. When you have cut it, and if the cyst is on the rod, and has part in the skin and part outside, so you must remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is softened, then cure what is outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the head of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into his rod and groin; so you must clean all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the scrapings of pomgranate seeds and veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, one should apply the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries aid in eight dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood and at corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must insert or conduct a tube into the rod, and pierce the patient through; and when the skin is rough at the head of the rod which has not been circumcised, either from a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it with a .i. instrument curved, so that the threads are disentangled, and the head of the rod is freed on all parts;
And if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you must scrape it with a .i. spatula around the head of the rod and the skin; then disengage it gently between .ij., and place .i. subtle drapery of linen on the moist spot in cold water, so that it does not become rough again.
of circumcision
Here is the translation:
I say that the ancients did not teach circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greater part of my masters and wise men who performed circumcision in the name of Dal, and with great force, and all at once; if it happened that they cut through two veins, and by chance if one touched on this one above and stayed below.
Now the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mundification that comes from Dal it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mundification of the ankle by chance the iron slips, and corrodes the vein, and many times they do not have mastery of mundification and I have seen it.
From the mundification that is done with great force on all the thread of filament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapery of glue made from a mixture of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with oil of rose and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment until it is healthy.
The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be twisted and should be cutting, and the heads should be as large as the equally measured main.
The error of the mundification is when the cords inside are cut at the incision; then it is necessary that you stretch to your finger, so that the veins make an abscess; and the equal measure, and if you cannot hold with your finger, then take the measure, and then bind.
And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and gently remove the scab; then bind as you can, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm at all.
Here is the translation:
the retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of a bowel, or of a new wound, or of similar things, that we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not evacuated, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, so it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part of the back, and strain the patient's effort as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine is evacuated.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", which has this form: and it should be made of subtle silver, lightweight, like a bird's feather; and it should be the length of a palm and a half, and it should be subtle at the top.
And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the lancet or razor, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and remove the superfluity of the lancet and insert it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist olive oil and water.
Then put the syringe lightly into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod above towards the bulb; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the voided thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conduits or it goes astray; then stretch the thread throughout the entire lancet little by little, and the urine follows the lancet, then it is evacuated, and make the urine flow.
and reintroduce the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and alleviate the patient.
of the diseases of the bladder
When blood or pus comes into the bladder, or where it is gathered, and you see distilling sharp waters and medicines, thus make all the instruments which are called "forceps", and this is their shape:
It is closed, and if there are three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leeches suck because the medicine should be such that it stops well the flow of urine without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and purged when necessary.
and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, put the head of the irrigator in the moisture, and pull out the flow that is inside; if you draw out the moisture with the irrigator, and then strongly re-insert the flow inside; if the moisture enters, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the shape of a subtle syringe with which one irrigates the bladder: it is thus.
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below, at the .i. breast or the ligaments ache; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see clog the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the shape of a double thread, and heat .i. pocket that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that the moisture has just arrived at the bladder;
and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles .i. dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction of assembled medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidneys as rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cutting edge; and in the bladder, and in the rod; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Here is the translation:
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a clyster, because all the filth that is in the intestines must be removed. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move to the back of the bed, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it often falls from the high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the urine flows downward entirely; then seek and touch inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut into the stone. And if it does not yield to the touch of everything, put your right index finger of your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and insert it into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, press it against the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you saw fit to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand hold the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cut is made; then he inserts the spatula, of which this is the shape:
And make between this which is between the hip and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and both sides are equal or fundament, and let the cutting be so that it is wide by default, and inside is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
by chance the press if both sides which are on the fundament, so that it does not feel heavy work; and know that there is some part of the stone where it has angles, and edges: if it is rough to come out; and if it has a part which is under, similar to a pebble, and round, whose issue is light.
At that point where it has angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract with the tenaculas which are like a file on top, so as to remove the stone without breaking it; or you place underneath the subtle curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if the sense is deceived, then extract with vitriol.
and if there are more than one stone, then place the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract it, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, then you must make a bigger incision, and create a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes out again because the wounds cannot close; but in any case, make an effort to extract, or to break up the tenaculas, as long as you extract it piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, if you fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put over it a dressing of soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resolve the patient back onto their bed, and do not untie the bandage just yet for three days.
And when you untie it, if it arises very well the place of oil and water, then treat with ointment of diafinicon and ointment basilicon, until it is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and so retain the urine, which is known in such a manner that without sound with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and rot;
then lift the wound with water and honey and silk, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the sores that you cure, that you tie the joints, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is led by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot exit; if you heal what I say thus, that you cut frequently, it is excused from the cutting through this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Here is the translation:
Then take the thread and insert it beneath the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron rod in your hand on the stone little by little, until you can perceive the stone from another part; if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the penis. If it breaks thus, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then put the filigree beneath the stone and another above, then make the rod straight in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract the flux, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
of the stones of women
It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to conceal herself, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well how to perform in this art with hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, because it requires a deeper cut, and great fear has to do with it.
And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and hold the true faith on, and if you do not find one, then ask for a subtle gaze; and she presents a well-known remedy in the life of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone;
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to feel her bottom or foundation and examine the stone; and if she finds it, if it presses beneath her finger, and recommend that she presses her finger or with the patient, and squeeze and press her left hand firmly on the bladder in form.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves gradually from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft confluence, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let the size be at first small.
then put the rule in the size, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so that the stone can issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges. if you know the similarities to know the issue.
And if the blood does not come out, then put on the vitriol broth, and hold it for an hour so that the blood is stained; then return to your work, until the stone comes forth, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as tools to help you in your operation.
and if he lacks sense, it is from the artery that is cut, so put powder on the wound and hold back the tentacles and bandages, and do not recommence this, and let the skin heal and do not touch it again, lest the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are quiet, so return to your work, until the skin is strong.
of carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white syfac, which is beneath the skin of the joints, that contains the vein; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the vein, if one thinks it is another vein; and it is the skin of the joint between the white syfac that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
And the generation of this limb is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it is expanded into that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, because if it's white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, .i. a short time like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and because of that one thinks it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sifac, he feels it well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should test all the inward parts thoroughly, because its form is thus before. According to what comes after the inward parts, judge of what is within.
According to what comes after the inward parts, judge of what is within. And when we treat them with iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should be placed on his back, on a high thing, and much drapery should be put beneath him.
then he should sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs near the joints.
Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut into the skin of the joints within the length of an inch until you reach the white spot where you pricked, and make your incision straight in dividing the skin of the joints up to the subtle scar that will form.
Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and remove all the fluid, and then apply your onguents, and the white spot will be above; and do not touch the joint's core, but only the white spot; cut out all or piece by piece the subtle costal tissue of it, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
and if the fluid flows out in abundance, then reset it to its place when you have completed the evacuation of the fluid from the white spot; then assemble the two leaves of the joint's core into a suture, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to lift the vessels that are suspended, doubting the corruption of blood; then cut into the joint at all the suspended places, and remove the fluid, and treat it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part just as you did the first joint, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a moist ointment of rose oil.
and put on another moist dressing with wine and oil, and put on the two compresses, and put over them doubled drapels, and bind it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Then take two drapels, and fill them with lint dressing according to this likeness, and they are assembled by sewing into the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the shoulder; and the other two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the rest of the structure in the loop of the arm.
and no time is the medicine of this cautery of fire in the height of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery instrument, and cut the skin of the compresses, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the aqueous humor is uncovered.
If you take fire cautery according to this form, and pierce the skin thus in an inch, and scratch it with this subtle burning cautery method.
And take the cup in all the ways that you can, as long as you scratch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of the removal of blood, and make worse the operations of the tailor.
and do not do anything that makes it worse, whether an abscess bursts or removal of blood or something else, if you heal what makes it worse, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horribleness, then hasten perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the water is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remainder of the pus, then treat it until the wound is healthy.
and let the white cloth not allow the pus to exit through the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you apply a pen or instrument with which one treats the pus of dropsy cases, whose shape is seen before; and enlarges the wound, and knows that the pus returns, and is assembled after 22 months or an entire year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in more than one disposition, because it seems to me that many things are worth leaving.
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to a head, and likewise to the seams; and it is by many cases.
It is known through excessive sharpness and anguish, which is spread to the seams, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance there are painful abscesses, green and red in color, and sometimes they come from a nerve, or from an inflamed vein.
When it is from a nerve, it is recognized by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press on it with your fingers. and do not think that you should touch it.
That which is made from an inflamed vein is recognized by its disposition and the expression of tenderness to the touch of the fingers.
and one can well perform the cutting on this similarity, and on the other scars; and it is that you cut the cord of the joints, then place the egg whites above, and remove the white crust from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already mixed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you remove the egg, and cut it.
and if it is attached to the crust, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you remove all that tension, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the back is behind, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the vein, as we have said.
And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of millet oil and rose oil and wine, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the thighs
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like wrapping resembling a pustule, with the softening of the thighs, and the patient must be gently moved when they walk;
and the treatment of this illness is well prepared just as much as previously,
and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a elevated chair, then apply the suspensor to the joints below the two thighs, to all the vessels that are near the verge, and prick the masters, and stretch them out strongly;
then cut to the spatula-like instrument, broadly traversing the area where the vessels are, until they are discovered;
and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vessel where the vein was seen, and then tie it again to the other vessel; Then they take the cupped hands directly, according to the length of the body, and in extracting the corrupting moisture;
Then heal the wound as others do, or inject a poultice, so that no vessel bursts which nourishes one of the intestines;
For by this, there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels; So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
from the treatment of the Syphacia's disease The symptoms of this disease are through the cut that comes from Syphacia's disease, or the extension onto the belly in the part of the groin, because the intestine descends from that treatment to one of the hips;
and this treatment is from Syphacia's disease, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes arise: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a fall, or from lifting a heavy weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is an extension of Syphacia's disease, are that it comes on slowly and gradually, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal up to the fontanelle, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and it is due to the issue with the intestine and the body's weakness from the swelling of the intestine.
And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained there, and causes great suffering pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, fear is born, because they think they will escape.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to insert their finger into the wound to feel with their hand inside if they can re-enter. then be supported on their neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the joints from top to bottom. then put inside the lips of the wound uncinated according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
Then scrape the skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the white skin that is beneath is uncovered on all parts;
then put your finger index in the one that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white skin that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second skin,
and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the skin near the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and dislodge what is behind the ligament;
and if you find that the intestine is wrapped in points or white skin, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
Here is the translation: Then they gather them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and in lying down the symphysis, which we have said is beneath the skin of the joints, with a strong bond of .ij. parts; Then they envelop the heads of the veins, and lay them in a formed bond of .ij. parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them cannot enter into them, lest an abscess grows there; and put the bandage according to the first long .ij. inches of that, and after these .ij. bandages leave the symphysis which is beneath the skin of the joints a great width of an inch;
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg produces; then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as long as the vein runs, and the bud, as we have said before;
then anoint the affected limb with oil, and apply a poultice, and anoint the ligament as we have said. And sometimes it is cauterized with a white wax that we have mentioned, after the incision, due to fear of blood flowing out.
For this happens often, and leaves the ligament as long as it chooses for itself; and if it delays in healing, so be it raised with warm water, and apply what we have said, until it heals.
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of fleshy hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done in the same way as the case of the shoulder which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you bind the veins, after cutting lightly underneath.
then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess of those who have a tumor, until the veins are clear; and treat it in the way we have said, so that it may be healthy.
Here is the translation:
and always if it stays too long at this point, so believe the wound or swelling, as much as the intestines descend;
and this happens through the extension of the swollen area which is like a abscess, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and inflamed the joints and opened them;
and the treatment is by fire cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is made with iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then cup the hand of the swollen area according to the quantity of two fingers;
And then extract the skin that is beneath the skin which is swollen, then take the rod and place it above the apparent skin of the swelling.
and press on the perforation of the belly, then cut the apparent swellings of the swelling above the head of the rod, and cut one and the other.
then extract the head of the rod, and do not touch any part of the swelling that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the obstruction of the intestines.
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the threads, if it is wounded and heals the wound, so that it may be healthy.
The syphac is constrained, and has no appearance in the treatment, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is difficult to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and to cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy, and heals the thread.
of the punishment
I know that punishments are established in our law, and for this reason I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to do so except in .ij. manners: one of which is that the masters respond when asked, and heal; and the other, because we often need help from punishments of certain beasts to aid us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say therefore that punishments are made according to .ij. manners: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in warm water, so long as the thigh is mollified and pendant; then take it in hand, so long as it is reset and you no longer feel it. Of the punishment of size: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each hole with a .i. plug, when you have well scorched them; and leave none of the subtle flesh that is under the vessels; and this manner of punishment is more moderate than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction something often remains by chance on the thighs, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Of hemorroids
Hemorrhoids are in two manners as follows: one is when they occur between the buttocks, just like the figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes they obstruct the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and they have them on the pubic area, just like a rod with buttocks.  And the cure for men and women is that you treat the affected areas entirely, and the treatment is like for other wounds; in the second manner, for those whose urine flows back through the skin of the buttocks, there is no cure.
of the tendonitis
Tendonitis is an affected area on the natural part, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment. It's necessary to remove the excess of the tendonitis from your hand or fingers, and treat it lightly; and don't put too much pressure, lest blood flows in, then treat with another treatment until it's healthy; and there's another sore that appears at the mouth of the marrow, and swells, and by chance it bursts forth, and is similar to a cowe, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". It's necessary to treat it, just like we said for tendonitis, and the treatment until it's healthy.
of a rash
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation:
of the abscesses of the chest
Many types of abscesses come to the chest, such as cancer and pierous abscesses and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak of the hot abscess that comes to the chest, which is not among the abscesses that take hold of the bowel; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe how the abscess is agitated at its beginning, and full of choler and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a low seat, and have two small seats or he leans against his back and assembles his feet in a way to form a right angle with the leg; and his thighs are expanded, and puts his arms under his knees, and ties them well with a linen thread; then suck up the pus from the right side, and introduce the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the chest, so that afterwards it takes form; and it is necessary when you have introduced this instrument to fix the ruler first in order to know the depth of the chest, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go further inward than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the chest with draplets, so that the instruments do not grieve him; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand mol, it is necessary to cover at the top, on the spatula of the lit; and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary that you put ten moillies of oil rose, or green oil; and put the tent under the wound at the depth of the chest, and put by way of the chest and the patient's nettle in water or malves being cured; then cure afterwards for two days of ointment coming to this, so that it is healthy; and no time lift the chest and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and aristologe long being cured; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is repeated in the chest, it is necessary that you guard against burning with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
of the swelling
Here is the translation:
If the infant comes to its chief by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and raise her nature of oil or fenugreic being cooked, and then put the bath between her two little spatula-like fingers which form its shape: and bind the second one, and cover her finger as much as the moisture that is in accordance with the running flow; and press the womb of the woman until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clysterize the woman with a musculary injection of fenugrec oil; then make her take and expel with consent, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus now the infant is born.And if the two hands are strong, then you must gently guide them little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet high; then remove the chair from the ground, and support the woman so she does not fall at the descent; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then cover the hands on the counter which is placed beforehand, and extract the child, and reset equally.
from the issue of the infant upon its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, then you must support it high up. and then he turns a little by little, so that it is even;
then take the feet and stretch them a little by little.
When it is adjusted just to the knees, if he commands to grasp, and makes them stretch with consent; if it turns out well, God wills it.
And if it does not stay as we have said, if it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lighter.
And if it does not stay as we have said, take a mixture of alta, oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar. and put it on the natural place of the woman within and remove this joint, Then make the patient sit in water up to their ribs;
and when it is softened underneath, have them gird with myrrh, and apply it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make them sit on a chair, then make them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and gently press their belly, for they will soon be relieved. from the issue of the child upon its knees When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hands there little by little;
of the delivery of the child who comes with a hand out widely during it is necessary to guide it back with the hand: if one cannot guide it back, then make the woman get up and walk;
If it cannot walk, make them sit on a bed, and bend their legs in shape;
then anoint the muscle that I have touched;
and if it does not improve, make them sit on a chair, then study how to move the hand back; and guide the infant according to its natural shape, and make it straighten up, and instruct that it takes hold as much as the veins can be strong.
from the exit of the child upon its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back I think that you should take his hand, then turn it little by little, and lift the water lightly;
and when it is aligned, place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move little by little;
and when you have done this, make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold of it; and make him straighten up. in this same manner to all the secondary
in this same manner to all the secondary When it comes forth in this manner to all the secondary, if you cut the secondary at your finger, as long as the moisture is evacuated.
and the veins appear on his face and neck, if you cut from the bud, so it is not retained, and kills the veins.
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it is fitting, and command the woman that she not take it again.
of the dislocation of the twins (or twin joints) Know that twin joints are often born many times, and sometimes not at all, two or three; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens little. They are strange things, and do not live, if they have little name;
I know this, that it should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the bundle;
and none of them issue naturally like all those under us, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and do it thoroughly and lightly what it does. and do it thus as it brings health to the patient. of many children
of many children Many times they are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, and are all formed into a child's shape by the measurement of the glorious wisdom.
and it is fitting that the healthy one knows all this, for by chance similar things have happened to him; thus he does according to what he thinks is fitting.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and there is no accident or she has fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be inclined downwards, and her thighs raised;
and the minister touches the thigh of the patient, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not slide down towards the end of the bed;
then rub the mouth of the marrow with moist oils of walnut and of fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and muskiness. then put them in the marrow lightly, then wants it to be set where it puts the onions that are suitable for that.
and take care that the veins are prepared so that they descend onto their head; If you touch the patient's eyes or his neck or his mouth or his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
and if the descent is upon his feet, touch them or prick them and at the same time the sides of his waist;
and it is necessary to hold the needle in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend his whole hand lightly, and prick the needle into none of those places that we have mentioned, until he comes to the voided thing;
then make an encounter with another onion, or the third where you are in this profession, so that the extractions should be even;
and then it is set in motion equally from one side and the other, to make the muscles issue, and so that the nails hold for a long time, if this is the form.
And if it remains in one part, oil the bail with some of its fingers, and apply them to that part, and treat the other part.
and if it does not remain in place, put this nail or higher up, and do this until it is all fully seated.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be reset because of the straining. it is necessary that you wrap it with a cloth, so long as it is entirely covered;
then put the bandage at the joint of the foot or heel, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and similarly for the feet.
And if the head of the child's arm is large and it is twisted at the joint, or it has an acute gathered head, it is necessary that you put the spinal splint between your two, and make the head and extract the acute. where you apply the instrument called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus it is necessary to make them into a great natural head; and then treat the bones as if they were tendons,
and the head jumps for and holds to the forceps, if it is broken, so much that the moisture which is or comes out for;
and if she cannot exit, then you cut by sections at the muscle where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
And if the swelling is on its feet, then the attraction is light, and the administration to the mouth of the morrow is lighter.
And if it is strained in the belly or at the chest, then you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and apply heat to the belly or the piss, as long as the moisture that is there corrodes;
and if the other members are affected, and the head remains, if you thrust your hand into the front of the marrow, and draw it just to the mouth of the marrow; then you thrust a lancet or two, and draw them forth;
and if the skin of the thigh is contracted by a hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be treated, then it needs to be treated with moist and greasy things; and the treatment is with emplasters, and thus in watery softening and moistening treatments.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it evenly, then treat it as we have said in the case of a living infant;
and one must not have power if the treatment is carried out piece by piece, and do not leave anything of the secondary.
And when you have done this, remind him of what we said about apostemes that come in the marrow;
and if blood comes out, it should be placed in a warm poultice, and remind him of other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the dead one. After long tension, the veins came to a head in the body, and swelled so much that they opened, and began to great suffering.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long tension, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a strong plaster of attraction, and it drew out a bone, and after some days others. I was greatly astonished, because I saw that the belly had no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound and manipulated the bone, until the woman was in a better state; and I felt the woman's pulse at once, and immediately applied a little poultice on the wound;
and I didn't forget this chapter because of that, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
you should restore the marrow to its place
Here comes the form of the presser, which you will find in the books; and in the twelve turning heads of the twelve ligaments. However, the horns should be more subtle on the retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the shaft be one digit in width, and the margin of the trees should be thus, and from a palm and a half in length; and in the midst of the limbs let there be adjustments of this same fist, which should be fastened on one and the other, about half a palm's length or a little more;
and that adjustment is placed in the mouth of the hammer to open when one turns the limbs corners.
Another form, in its more subtle and lighter likeness, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the clamps; and have the limbs adjusted, as you see, a palm's length long, and two fingers wide;
and when you want to open the marrow of the entire instrument, thus make the woman sit on a litter, her feet pendant and legs overturned, then put the two adjustments adjusted together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then open your hand to the entire instrument, just as you have done with equal tenons, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the bile does what it wants.
These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have them paired, so much the more hasty is the opening, and the higher the homes are according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument if you have not prepared it, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at birth, then you must instruct the patient to hold their wing, and then make them stretch out their condition, and hold their hands to their mouth and nostrils. and let it burst forth by itself, that is good.
If it does not, take the pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the disease, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or put in water over the fire; then place a cane or pierced pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh,
and let it burn as much as the vapors come from within the marrow; then it is strengthened, as we have said. If the second (joint) is quickly dislocated. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not become feverish, then instruct the patient to move their left hand in the oil of sesame or in the muscle of the thigh, and then put it in its natural place.
and seek the second (joint); and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marrow does not break at the extraction. but it is necessary to move lightly to the right and to the left, and then to treat; if it comes and becomes dislocated again.
And if the mouth of the thigh is constricted, we have said the treatment of sternuation, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not from all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into error in treating;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then cleanse it with ointment of four herbs;
if the patient is purged and restored, and fever will come; but always, when it persists so bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Here is the translation:
The shape of the instrument with which one treats the woman held by the retention of flowers and of the secondine is this:
And it is to be seen similarly to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tinder until it is burnt, and begin with another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not received a thorough examination, thus it has been stifled by subtle symptoms. it is necessary then to apply a poultice that it penetrates the subtle symptoms with its finger, and does not touch the spatula-like ague, and covers the location so it does not touch it.
then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not restore, then put or apply a poultice of pounded herbs, and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes these sudden swellings of wound or abscess come; you should cover that swelling suddenly: if it is cured, if we have spoken about the treatment of a stab wound.
of the fistula at the bottom foundation Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and it is worse when they come from beneath the deep foundation, or in the space of the two parties,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and encounters moist heat or subtle white or thin swelling,
and often these fistula patients are; and are known by the fact that they have indigestion or flatulence when the patient makes indigestion, and sometimes they break wind suddenly.
And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they extend just to the joint of the hip, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the fistula patient by the foundation, and not by the external appearance. and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if he has tortuousness, if you put a subtle probe of a horsehair, or a horse hair, as long as you feel the probe or the hair on your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from bad pertussive digestion nor windiness nor vermin, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate further; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is adjacent to the bladder or adjacent to the urinary duct, if the urine flows out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, then the tendon comes just up to the place. if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain inside, then it is that it stops immediately, and no medicine is effective suddenly by anointing.
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through work, and the foolish doctors who intervene are worthless.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his knees, and has his knees bent towards his belly; then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent goes.
If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger there,
if you then feel that the tent has penetrated; and be discovered where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is perforating; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One should totally avoid that one can heal some, but it happens rarely.
and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before. and the whole hot thing in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know that these cauterized wounds are scorched, which resemble a bird's feather.
and then the treatment of many wounds in a burr, as long as that flesh becomes firm, then the treatment of jointment by making the flesh sound and binding.
If he is thus healthy, it’s good. If you see him, otherwise he cannot be healthy;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger that is at the bottom, and place a thick covering of flesh or skin between your finger and the holding, and you see the fistula at the one who teaches the covering of the finger; if you touch the beginning of the fistula, and push ahead before holding, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
and the holding will be delivered, and it will fall apart; then I will show you those withered fingers that resemble a bird's claw, and none of them will remain.
And if you feel faint, and shorten between you and the vein, then cautery of fire or medication of water.
For the fire cautery assembles these things: it is to know, the burning of these joined flesh, and the drying of blood and the reduction of moisture.
then the treatment of many wounds in mud or in rough cloth, as long as the wounds ooze pus, and they make the flesh raw in the pus.
then treat the wound of the joints suddenly with dry herbs, and these are the dry medications.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes near the font of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire into that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the string or the syphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut near the font, or if you can place tente and cure as before.
and do not go too much in depth, that you do not touch the tenderness which holds the foundation, and come to the gestures by the voluntary sense. then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy, or you disengage that covering and the wound then that it is touched at the foundation, or by tension or by another pointed instrument; then I will show you that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study how to restore the wound, and to maintain the fistula in the part that is opposite the foundation: if it is lighter for the patient.
And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tension into the fistula, and it is where the costal bone meets the foundation beneath the skin above. if you take a tension perceived at the head in this form: And I push the twisted thread into it, and push the tension on the whole thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is penetrating in the margin of the wound's foundation, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, so that you touch your finger or foundation;
and draw the thread through the flesh, and assemble the edges of the wound together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for a day or two;
and restrain it no more than once, until the thread holds together those flesh parts that are between two, and heals;
then treat the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
Here is the translation:
Because it is not suitable to make a copper cautery for the patient unless in extreme cases, and then the treatment, as we have said, until they are healthy.
The shape of the spine is spinous where one makes a fistula, it is much more agile than one, partial and piercing. and on the other hand not, because one does not know if one should not operate, as you see here:
Here is the translation: and if there are one or more, they are lacking foundation and at the bottom of the foundation; but those that are lacking have little moisture,
and yet they have a bit of citrine water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a bedchamber, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear; if you hasten, and hold it as in tenails, or you hold it on your finger, then cover it in its roots;
and if they cannot hold them back with their gums, take them to the drapil, or to a cushion, or to a piece of camlet; and stretch them to your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure with other cures until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient of piercing and bitter cluster with a gentle flow, so that it may issue openly;
when the patient feels pain, and their veins are far from good foundation, then it is a light cure; and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or with pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you treat the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and pass it through a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too loose; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave one pore to correct the excessive flow of blood;
Then place on the foundation a drapil moilliet in oil rose or in cerote, and place on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let it be until they heal, and when they are healed, if the cures of ointment and other cures, until they are healthy.
you should scrape the veins or foundation Many times there is scraping of veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary to put at the tip of a spatula or on one's fingernail the scorching above, which does not allow it to get moist. then heal as long as it is swollen thus as it is necessary.
and if it cannot be soothed, then recommence the rubbing more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much and is scarred. then heal as long as it is healthy.
swear an oath A formice is a small, false appearance beneath the body, and it goes much deeper inside.
and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it as if dead from fear, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a vein of a wing of an eagle, or a strong wing of a vulture, and place that vein on the fear, so that the circles encompass the fear entirely around. then turn your hand to the whole cane as you grasp everything entirely around the arm, and put it in the foreground, and scrape the arm of its roots.
And if you see, make it in the form of a cane of iron or copper, and be subtle underneath and pulling above.
do not pierce, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, then cauterize the arm, as it is before or in chapter of cautery.
of the form of a cluster Never do we make aclyster of silver or copper, or of tin foil or maillet; and never do we use these small and large instruments, according to those that are entrusted to them.
These then, which are used in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
The shape of the small and large aclyster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this method:
and there is a separation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has on one side .ij. perforations, and on the other .i.
and it be the belly or womb where one places medicines of a bladder of beast or parchment, and it be pierced all around with small openings,
and have between each opening a space of a thumb's width, then put in these openings strong thread of twisted thread or cord, and assemble the belly as if it were a bag; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clusterize; and that's the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cluster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then put it in lightly;
Then the surgeon instructs his ministers to join their hands together, so that they are entirely visible, then extracts the scalpel, and lifts the patient's legs to the bench,
and if he takes his medicine wisely, as much as he can; and if he sleeps a night away, it is more great aid.
And if you give him a clyster for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to issue forth, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or abscess, then let the clyster be as subtle as possible, like for a child.
and it is the form of the subtle clyster upon which the skin should be held back:
of wounds
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the manual and medical treatments, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting with a sword or a knife, or with a lance or a stick or an arrow, or similar things;
where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound is situated on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is a fracture of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is great, and you doubt the abscess's levity: if you make it healthier by the cephalic remedy meanwhile as it comes from blood of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the naval part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to recover, let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
and apply to the wound, abscesses that come, cotton moistened in rose oil or in wine steeped.
and if there is no abscess, apply to the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little later.
and if he has been injured, place him on some pillows, so that he may be comfortable.
And if the wound is large, such as a sword or similar wounds, and the lips cannot be assembled by tension, so assemble them by stitching, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it is deep, and only holds on by a little, then cover it; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore the hard skin in place of leather. and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as boiled and roasted meat, also like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a skin wound, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut around the entire wound, and apply force, then treat it.
and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, then seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it off with a thread. and if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in such a way that the wound heals quickly.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; living chalk three parts, and powder subtly, and fill in the wound, and hold it firmly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and let it not become unbound, so it does not inflame; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
And at no time does one make a poultice of hot water solely, when one has not heated the blood of the dragon's scales, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved the wound, meanwhile in this state, then do not put any of this powder.
but apply them to certain digestive remedies, or poultices made of wheat flour and water and honey, so that it throws away the pus; then heal through other treatments until he is healthy.
And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then I would use subtle pinches;
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
from the wound of the dolorous neck
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and the dolorous head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are injured.
If it's the nerves, if there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the nerve substance is cold, and its connection with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in warm water, and other mines according to this manner, and apply moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with bands, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick it or below the level;
and if the artery is cut, and a flow of blood comes, then it is opened, and the ligature, and the cautery, which is their profession;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the ribs, and the conduits are guarded, because the flesh goes, if you cut the rib on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then strain it gradually, and leave it for some days, then cure it with ointments and unguents until it is healthy;
and if he has made an impression on the bone, thus the wound; and if he has pieces of bone, thus the broken fragments you can remove, and those that you cannot have, thus let them be until the wound heals; and let it be disinfected and aligned with the outlet;
and if the wound is fresh, thus powder on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment follows as I have said in this chapter.
of the wound from a spear or dagger
If it is a blow from a spear or dagger, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has taken on a putrid condition, because you will know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a ligature that does not penetrate deeply. and look at the body, and observe the patient; but I put an attractive ointment, and apply it several times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put much cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound several days, two, or three, or more; if it does not come from a spasm, nor evil tremors of the heart that are signs of bad alignment; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is healed. Heal then the wounds with applications and other treatments, so that they may be healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and becomes an ulcer, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is done as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, either on the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, so examine the wound, and remove the false fibers if they are detached. and if they are not detached, let the wound putrefy, then ease the extractions.
and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
because of the disruption of the belly
The disruptions of the belly are great and frequent and small;
from the great wound often the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, which prevents the intrusion of aus;
and the stitching is more painful, and often it is better to have a small wound than a large one;
because one puts back together the inner parts, so that they are not repeatedly dislocated. because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return to their place,
and because it is necessary to soothe the wounded belly, because one must reset the intestine to its place, like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is in three ways:
the common stitches have an incision in the stitches of the belly,
and the stitches for other wounds of the body and these proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more suitable with the stitches of the belly, and I will describe each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestines are outside, and this thing is to reset, it is by one of the two manners: by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is frozen, warm it up in such a manner: Here is the translation: where you burn with a hot iron and cautery and branding, and scorch the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and many times they make these veins retreat, and it is wonderful that one heals by removing the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation departing, then anoint the intestine with hot or cold water and evil humors are cured, because by this it is aligned the entrance to little of thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument with which one collects the humors;
and the first treatment is to soften what is hardened; that we should not cut without great necessity there is;
and it's the instruments for the wound:
if you cut deeply into the curvature and do not dig further, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural shape in its own place, Here is the translation:
When the wound is large, and it is on the part below the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and it is in the part below the belly,
and thus the rupture of the wind in one of the lower parties if you set it in a way that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus you must minister to what I say about great wounds and injuries.
Small wounds put this in order that it appears to you,
then hold it between your hands, I minister piteously which draws the whole route to his hand, and bring the lips together; and this is the common manner of stitches,
and this is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound, an inch of space, and I fix a needle or where it has a strong thread; and pierce the skin with the skin of the siphos,
then stretch a double thread within the needle of the vein, because then gather the nine heads of the wound healing,
and then let the two fingers of space, and fix another needle; then let the thread of fire thus as you did the first needle, and do not cease from doing this according to what you have mastered with the needles, until all the wound is restrained;
and be the needles subtle, between fine and coarse, because the subtle needles take in all the flesh, and those too large cannot enter well: for it is necessary that they be blunt;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and soft skin,
so that they do not take in and open the wound before the suture;
and then cut the heads of the veins so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and I hold tight or wrap around the heads of the veins to keep them still, and let them be until the wound is sewn up;
and this method of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds, because he suffers from a needle or a puncture wound.
The second pain is common, and it is that you gather the needle-pricked heads of leather and the needle-pricked heads of skin together into a single point or where it has a strong, firm thread; and when you have pierced these heads all together,
and when you have pierced these heads all together, If you reset the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
this stitch follows the bone,
and I sewed up a wound that one had on their hand or belly,
who was wounded by a blow and the wound was more than a palm's breadth large, and it was about twenty palms' breadth of intestine,
and the wound was in the belly. I will return the intestine, then it has been stopped for 23 hours, forthwith.
and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and it was healed, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not heal at all from the ointment, for I was in a place where none was found, nor any medicines; and apply a remedy with more pressure on the wound cotton often many times a day, and the washing of honey water as long as it was healing.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and sew the part that is deficient just up to that inside;
when it has pierced the right heart in the right way, if you have sewn the head of the siphac or coustit or where you have sewn with the needle,
and make him pierce from another part of the inner section up to the point of failure;
and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew them thus as the tanner makes the skins, and that you leave once the seam of one part, and retake from another, until the treatment is fully accomplished.
The second way of treatment, which Galen describes properly,
it is thus like any spring, which naturally assemble the injured parts together. and apply one head to the other head, in such a way:
fix a needle or a head of a mirror close by, and make it pierce the limb slightly. and let the injured heads come together; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through the weak part just up to the inner core. as it is the head of the deep wound;
then make a piercing on one and the other side of the weak part just up to the inner core, in other heads of the deep wound that are on the other side;
and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Here are the translations:
One must cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or have thread in each one;
and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is a more grievous wound than others in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus it seems the artery has moved, if you reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder soothing flesh,
if you reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder soothing flesh, and it seems the artery has moved, if you put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and they pull the thread, and are sewn the suture, and the mirror; then heal the wound as with others, until it be healthy;
and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, much cotton, and remove it twice a day until it be healthy.
Because you do not have another kind of medicine for many types of simple wounds.
and if you doubt that the wound will not affect the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten a light linen cloth with oil of temperate warmth, or with rose oil, and put it between the joints, and beneath the soles;
and if he feels pain or pruritus in his belly, and often happens, if they clysterize with red wine immediately, and meanwhile the pruritus reaches up to the intestine;
and it penetrates within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is by the plaintiveness of the veins that they are, and by the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to their natural disposition.
And if the stitching bursts from the wound, set it back together as in the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turns towards green or black, then you must lay the black place that corrodes the blood which comes from it, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the nail and put the eyes facing the part below the wound until it befits to alleviate the extraction when the wounds heal, and the wounds close.
of the rupture of the swelling
When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, if one cannot restore it to some joints,
because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a spear or a lance;
and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus caused the evacuation and flatulence;
I go to cure according to what I can do, and did not cease from subtle treatment until he was healthy, and the eyes were sound.
And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had no evil in his belly; and there was no point of evil, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a manner: Take firm hold of large clamps, then assemble the lips of the wound. and when the clamp has opened its mouth, then place it on the two lips,
Then apply another fringe afterwards in the same way as before, so that the wound is entirely covered.
and sew up the wound. If the head becomes stuck in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of a beast,
in such manner: take the head of this intestine filament that is very loose, and then attach it to the head of this subtle twisted thread, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper position;
and this manner of cauterizing of frenzy is not otherwise than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal passages, if there is no ingenious remedy, unless subtlety.
of a fistula or where it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called a "fistula". and similarly when it is shaved and made numb.
And a fistula is according to the true notation of a hard and white abscess, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaved like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and numb, and other times dense; sometimes a little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh; it is not outside one of the eight causes:
it is to know, by the small loss of blood or flesh; for his wickedness; for because he has hard skin within, and on the lips, which does not allow any flesh to grow; where there is too much swelling; where the pus is stagnant, and the matter is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; because for that reason the corruption is a kind of pestilence; where by the property in the region it is slow digestion, and slow health, and naturally inflamed; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in this section.
or it is fitting that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, where at the spleen, or at the intestine, or at the bladder, or at some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or at some joint of the hands or of the feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is an ulcer that does not heal until it reaches the place I have described, and you are confident in your treatment, and you examine it carefully, if you take a thread of iron or copper, the ulcer is straight, if it is circular;
and if the ulcer is twisted, seek it out with a subtle thread of lead, for the leads bend back into the twist;
and you should make a fistula at badly perforated places and you cannot search well by feeling. if you touch it with one of the perforations,
for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it suppurates;
then you should examine it with your power, so that you recognize if there is bone or nerve, and it is separated by the fontanelle;
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if the treatment is according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if the treatment is according to what I have told you, and remove the decayed and rotten flesh that are within; and then the treatment until it is healthy
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, it is necessary that you cut open deeply, as much as you can, then I apply gentle poultices in medicine agar, and the buds just at the head of the fistula,
then I apply gentle poultices in medicine agar, and the buds just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is remaining at the bottom;
and then he puts ointments on his wounds, as long as they are healing;
and if it is not healing through this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut around it. If a vein or nerve is not causing grief to principal members, as we have said;
and if his skin is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let it be treated until the decay is completely removed. then heal the things that are wounded so much that they become healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and rents a gap as before, know that you are not at the same level as just now:
if you discover and seek as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to an end; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if it has a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with bandages, if the extraction is done with a suitable instrument for that,
and if there are many bones, so extract them all, do not leave even one;
and if moisture makes you counter, there is no error or fear if it grips and moistens and fleshes, and releases the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them for an hour, then put on the wound a poultice causing purification, and let it be until the pus is purified between the bones,
and then they will have lighter bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the thigh or shin, if you remove so much of the corrupted flesh that the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the body corrupted, it comes just below the bone of the shoulder; if it is necessary to open and cut just up to the corruption, and then to treat until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, if you take an example and help with your work.
It was a young man of around 30 years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and had no way to evacuate by opening;
but the physician, in their foolishness, operated so much that they opened up the abscesses, and in corroding many materials, and it became fistulous, and there were many perforations that all gnawed away the moisture of the body;
and many times I mirrored the cure within ten years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured it, and that which corrodes through the perforations in a large body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
I thrust a tent into one of these perforations, and then I searched all the perforations.
and found that some veins come against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came right up to the bone within;
I watched what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, because it is what I saw.
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not heal.
and then I started again, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and I watched it, and then I examined it, and I thought of healing the limb;
but I do not touch it as much as I grasp around a palm of the bone, and I make the trajectory right on its whole. then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and freed suddenly.
and it is not necessary to restart the work forcibly because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot bear it. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For because of the evacuation of blood it often happens, but it was completely healthy,
For because of the evacuation of blood it often happens, but it was completely healthy, and a hard lump formed in the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in anything, neither in going nor in coming.
and stretch the head, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from underneath, and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see the sore, so that the sore does not spread to the flesh; and put a thin layer of cotton or a tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to probe thus in order to see and feel the corruption, and to probe again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the entire flesh; then put a thin layer of cotton underneath,
and then the decay spreads from one part to another, and is the decay of the length of the corruption, a small piece, as we have said;
and if the decay is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and let the bone or what it contains be from another part;
and if the decay is in the continuity of the joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut off;
and if the decay is in the hand or foot, it is very strong that thing, but you must inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you; and examine it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not contradict you;
and know that the incisors and the veins are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the outlets, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will have mastery of, according to the knowledge of this art, and it bears witness to the ways of illnesses; if you prepare the instrument which you have mastery of, according to what it needs.
for fire The head collapses either because of a cause inside or because of a fever.
and when you have applied the medicine to that corroded place through the treatment with medicines, and it does not improve at all, then you should amputate that limb up to the level where the corrosion comes from. If the patient is weakened by fear of death, or by spite, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
If the patient is weakened by fear of death, or by spite, which is greater, from the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, then it corrodes one limb after another, and takes over the whole body; if you hasten to cope with it,
and it is through the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar things,
the corrosion is at the finger joint, thus the cope, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, thus the cope at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, thus the cope at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and there are no better remedies than the quantity of its virtue;
and you should do it in this way when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it takes hold after another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, it takes hold of the entire foot; and if it rises in the leg, then it takes hold at the joint of the knee;
and it comes above the knee, if there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
and the way to cope or to soothe the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister below one of the ligatures, and another minister above the other ligature, and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures at a spacious interval, so that the bone is uncovered;
Then take the cup or basin, and place a piece of linen, so that the thread does not touch the healthy skin. and let it come to the patient for another wound and abscess ulceration.
And if blood flows out when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily, where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
then let the numb member recover with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healthy;
and I will count as one who had a similar wound:
he had a black spot that seemed to be burned by fire,
and that corrosion came first into his finger through the wound, so that it took over the entire finger;
and when the man sees the decay, if he hastens to cover the foot, and was healthy;
and soon after, the decay returned in his hand, or in the other, and it came to me,
and I applied things that rebounded after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosions;
and he saw that I covered his hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to recover the material; and I doubt also that if he cuts off his hand, it will not die, for the strength of the man was feeble; and he despaired totally, and returned to his land, and he ceased to coop up his hand, and was healthy;
and I have not known any account of those who were better than what one does elsewhere, so that one has mastery.
Never does a abscess come to a head swollen with charcoal, and stays for so long that it makes a large collection of pus. and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus jumps out, and clears the eyes' sight, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as subtle as the delicate sheets of a cloak, and they do not corrode nor just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy",
but since it is so prolonged that it reaches just to the bone in the front, then it is called “fistula”;
and the skin is so thin that you can see the entire course of the vein, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a delicate sheet; and it does not differ due to its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the cluster thus:
look at the sinews which are large, and the abscess that comes from them is of foul odor, then the clustering of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: Here is the translation: as long as the medicine is red, and it becomes as thick as honey;
and then take some of it according to your need, and make it into a thin liquid and into honey, and cleanse the wound with it, and hold the opening steady; and let the medicine stay on for two hours, then wipe it off in a sprinkling manner;
Do this many times, until the breast is exhausted, and the pus is eliminated.
and none of those times is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of vines, and pour water over them,
then strain it, and cleanse with it, until you know that the breast is well purified;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash of cinders if they purify with water and honey or have a little bit of litargyre crushed; where you purify with honey and wine mixed, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the healthy ones strong;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the senses are well purified, if you cleanse what makes the flesh grow in it,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; where you cleanse with certain medications and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatise on ointments;
and if the perforation of the breast is small, and the cane of the lancet cannot enter, if you widen it with a iron a little, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or ointment of balsam, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it so slightly that the cane of the lancet can enter,
and if you pierce where the swelling is above, whether it gathers here or lower than it is. For when the swelling is in depth, do not let it grow again there; and if you cannot cut beneath the skin thus as you see, it appears in such a way that the swelling runs to the lowest place it is,
and if you cannot cover the seat below as if you saw, it appears in such a manner: that the bowel runs more lightly downwards, and leaves nothing of the bowel; and take consolidative medicines to put on the seat,
and stand on the drapery of the loin that covers the whole back; then gather all the strength in the right place of the back, i.e. a little larger than at first, then there is a gentle pressure on the other drapery according to the quantity of the back, and place it on the back of the back to align the bowl, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
and he who is above the pertussis of the breast, often opens by opening the mouth, and knows that which runs from the mouth, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digests, or does not digest;
and take heed of the patient's sensation of pain or name, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the pertussis of the breast, Here is the translation:
and then dislocate it in the morning, or the third day, and when you dislocate the wound, if it changes, I will use another dressing, and renew the binding.
And if the senses are troubled with indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear. And if you feel subtle pains in the short term after long tension, do not despair of health,
because health is approaching. Because there are men who delay the healing of their wounds, and those that do the opposite;
and if the bowel is indigestible, it knows how to overcome the pain after many days, it knows that the breasts do not stray;
and if the breasts delay healing, and are sluggish, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue; as we have mentioned before, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last resort medicine;
Take a treatment of yaufinite, and they make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine in equal substance;
then they confit and use it; and this same mixture makes cooked honey thickened, when yaufinite treatment is not present,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then glues .I. a bandage, and he stops it over the breast, and sometimes he administers to an Aristologist a long time, and roots of the sky-blue, which is as if flour of times and hundred;
and roots of the sky-blue, which is as if flour of times and hundred; and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use; and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then you know that corruption is deep-seated, and it makes an impression on the bone, where the hard limbs are, or the sinews; if you treat a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the finger nail, near the joint of the hand. where you tread, or where by chance you are born with other fingers;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if an abscess comes to the heel, and they run and throw so much that they run over the root of the ankle, and by chance they run it entirely;
and there come the ulcers just to the bone, so that they bring painful hurt, and it is the head of the wide toe, and its color is dark.
When you treat them as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous flesh which remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterizations are great help if the bones are sound, and the finger is healthy;
and if he has an ulcer on his skin, and it begins to point, and the blister, it is necessary that you put the right remedy under the ulcer that points to the skin, and apply pressure from above, and touch the subtle and delicate skin, and put on the remaining skin medicine burning and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut into it, and extract fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
and if you see the decayed tooth, then cut into it, in the same way as it was said before, then treat until it is healthy;
and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must soothe it first; then cut the thorn-like growth that has grown in a crosswise direction across,
and beware that the cutting does not touch the flesh which is beneath the thorn-like growth, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it has happened, then put something on it to soothe it.
The two fingers that are born in the hands of certain men by chance are completely numb, and by chance they have a piece or a bone, and sometimes they have a nail,
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in none of us two fingers. Those who are born with a defect of their finger do not move it, and those who are born at the joint of their finger, perhaps move by chance;
the size of one who is withered is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Here is the translation:
In one who is born or has a hernia in the back, it is necessary that you first take hold of the round flesh just up to the bone. then take hold of the bone at a suitable angle for that, then cure until it is healthy.
The dislocations that come in two ways come from birth, or from sudden injury, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you take hold of the dislocation, and that the bone is reset according to its natural forms. Then place between two warm tents or oil-soaked cloths, so they do not stick together. or you put between two subtle pieces of lead, as long as the joint is stuck, as it is necessary.
They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you apply that sticking as it is necessary.
Of veins
You see gross swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come into many members of the body;
and they especially occur in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry heavy loads, rather than others.
It is necessary therefore that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the sap of the basil.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that they are burned, and another treats the black blood; and another way is to open the vein, and to pull out entirely.
The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg of hot water very strongly, so that the large veins are made subtle. then stretch the leg of the patient down from the hip just to the part below the knee; then cut into the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, with a large incision,
Then he releases and draws the black blood from his hand, from one vein to the other, until as much blood flows out as the virtues of the disease can suffer.
and then he lies down, and orders that he be fed on rich game and black coal;
and recommend the evacuation and the bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
The elevations of it are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, Then put him in a bath, and let the swollen leg be cooled down until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then cover the vein from the loin to the knee, or in the part below the joint;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein of that part, until it appears when one feels it;
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems as if a white cord;
then apply the remedy underneath, so it lifts the skin from the raw flesh, and then place it on the lighter side of the wound.
then cover it in another layer above, with two inches; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then leave it to settle, as you have done, and place it on another ulcer, as you did previously;
then cover with another dressing, or more if you have mastery of it, then leave it, and cover the toe of the foot.
Here is the translation:
and if you cannot pull it back and lift it, then he will stick a needle everywhere, fully, to double the thread strongly. and pull and pull, and he will stick below, he will sew, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it holds. and beware that it does not swell, for if it swells, one cannot pull or lift, and harm comes to the patient.
and when you have fully pulled it back, then put on the wound a dressing of millet flour in wine and rose oil; and treat until he is healthy.
And if his sight is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said. It is necessary that you bend it straight, but do not cover it yet; and treat it as we have said before.
It is necessary that you bend it straight, but do not cover it yet; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron that one uses to cover the sight is curved, and does not cut, so it does not touch the vein.
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the shape.
About civil veins
This vein is in the legs, in hot and dry regions where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and perhaps grows elsewhere besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that lies beneath the skin,
as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, growing between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the veins, and begins to make the vein issue forth, like a root of a plant.
When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to the nail, and the neck,
and let the cloth remain on the leg, and all the times it does not fall off, if you envelop it around the cloth, and the nail; and if it is too long, cut part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is fully exposed; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity or ulceration, and a bad disease;
because it is necessary that it be treated little by little just to the head, and nothing remains there or in the body;
and it is not often that this vein is treated with five or ten pounds of longitude, or of X.; and one hand comes to me, on which it is seated from ten palms in length, and when you take hold of it, if you prick or pierce, and it perforates just to the bottom,
Here is the translation:
And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and it comes from many perforations, and where it jumps many times; cure the wounds thus as we have said before.
From worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cow's disease", because it often affects cows.
and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending, and it feels like a good sensation when going from member to member, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and it bursts forth;
and it is generated by putridity of certain humors, as if they come from worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or the belly;
and one doubts its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot do more than when it goes:
it is necessary then that you read the place above and below with a strong and well-tightened ligature,
then cut above and the tract further, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, If you cauterize with fire above, as long as it dies;
and the greatest harm that he does, if it is that he runs to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or approaching near the eye, hold your eyebrow firmly in place, then cut above, and remove it completely;
and it is suitable to use the patient's purification of bodily medications through dissolving medicines for bad humors,
and beware of rotten meat causing putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence. This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I see what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm.
and soon after, I saw it swell up like a worm at the shoulder, more painful than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place, and fixed itself in the shoulder,
and then a little after, it corrects throughout the whole body, so much that it comes into the other arm;
then it returns again to the body, as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease according to this manner. However, I had seen many that had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I do not understand what he wants, as I saw it in a woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because of this, it seems that the constrained wind appears;
and I did not appear to follow this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it reveals itself as we have said. if the disease lingers above and below hastily, and then presses upon it until that windiness constrains it to its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat those who expel windiness, as with foul pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Arrows.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they stick.
The diversity of theirs is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and notched ones, and smooth ones; and those which have sharp angles, and those which have length, and those where there are fragments; and that which falls onto a member if it falls according to seven ways: or into a principal member it divides,
as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore into a place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear: then it is necessary that you take care of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in more severe conditions; and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply implanted, if it pulls, and cure the wound.
And the symptom of the brain when the arrow head lies there and pierces the bone, and removes the swelling which is on the brain, it is when there is dimness and swooning and vertigo in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perversion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without strength in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and it jumps from the white moist wound resembling a poultice, and it jumps also as if bruised flesh;
and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose. and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and in a black crust of blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Here is the translation:
And the sign of the arrow that does not reach the forearm is that without swelling of ecchymosis bursts from the wound, and the throat becomes swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and feels cold to the touch.
And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it causes great alarm and great pain and breathing; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, perhaps it bursts from the wound with some undigested food matter.
And if the arrowhead remains in the belly, and it bursts into the intestine through a perforated route, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels severe pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joints and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various arrangements. When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do the same.
It happened to one man whose arrowhead fell or was stuck in the root of the nail: I touched it, and pulled on the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was without sensation numbness.
And I pulled on a vein that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the vein was reset, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the bottom of the fist, and it was a large vein of a Turkish bow, altogether I felt lighter without earrings; the game was without sensation, and no bad accidents happened to me.
And apply a poultice to the throat of a patient, and it was an Arabic poultice for the ears:
I shaved the beards, and refined them as much as I applied the poultice, and the patient was healthy.
And I applied a poultice to a man whose belly or stomach was swollen, and I thought he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all; I cut into the arrow, and I extracted it, and I made a hole in the vein, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell out or back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrow remains within him, and does not change its natural positions, nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
And you saw another man who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was swollen.
and he lingered thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And they extracted an arrow from the king's prince's man, which was stuck in his nose, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
I was called to the treatment after it had been fallen for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and he felt a pricking pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I put on the patient a plaster made of attractive and digestive ingredients, because it is not inflamed. and I appear to remove the arrow from the wound.
and I appear to remove the arrow from the wound. I put on the plaster in the morning, and I resolved the wound again, and then the patient remained in bed for a long time.
until he felt the arrow, that is, a day later, in his nose; and he told me so. I apply the cauter to the wound with a corrosive medicine by gentle touch, as long as it was opened.
and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow that had stuck in the flesh; then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it went beyond the limits within three months,
and then scarify if the wound is where I applied the tourniquets, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
then I did not cease from subtilying and engineering in ways of instruments, until I took them; on the next day I had the tourniquets well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may translate it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, if you put your treatment on those things that I do not say, for the books cannot take everything in.
but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those things that are present and failing, find a new work, and a new instrument, for the discernment of strange things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from limbs or they are not fixed unless in seven ways. or through the hole where they enter, or through another part;
and the one that jumps forth from there where it enters, it's an arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
And if it does not heal now, let it be until the flesh is porous throughout, and the issue is cleared.
and if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move a little each day;
and then it heals, and if it does not heal, pierce through to the bottom with a subtle sharp instrument, so that the flesh inside is enlarged, and then draw out.
And if the arrow is embedded in the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, one seeks to remove it entirely. and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the injury is great; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow head what holds it,
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow head what holds it, if there is a piece of flesh that is stuck with a splinter, examine the muscle where you can, and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can draw it out; and you should carefully handle the arrow so that you don't break it, and you handle it more gently.
And if you can't at one time, let it lie until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you do the opposite, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision near the nerve and vein, and take heed how you can safely extract the arrow without danger.
where it is burnt or scarred, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form it was in when the artery cut into the skin. for it is the greatest help that it be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you.
The artery that comes from another part, where it reveals none of its things, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it apparently.
cut then thus, so that the ligatures can take hold, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it.
And if it cannot exit, let it be still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out forcefully;
and if it is stuck to the arrowhead, cut around the entire shaft;
and if the shaft breaks, and you want to administer a remedy, then administer an instrument that cuts. if the tip of the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
and if the arrowhead is hairy, apply it to the instrument with a pointed entrance, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrowhead is touched, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it converges.
And if the arrowhead is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to emerging, and you can touch it, then you touch it;
and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your profession; and treat it until it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and you see the shape here:
And there are many methods: large, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds, 21 in number, because it has eight main ones.
it is to know: two veins which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins; and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing; and there are veins which are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the base of the nose; and the little veins which are at the neck; and the little veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and they want those which are under the tongue.
The veins that one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is called the left side by the common people, and they call it the "vein of the head"; and the mean one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and they call the common people "vein of the heart"; and the royal physician is stationed on the right side, and they call the common people "vein of the belly", and it is above the pubic area, and it is that one which is sacred, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
And the saphena vein is the vein which is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left ankle bone on the left side, and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraines; and the qualities of the wound, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the wound, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then constrict the patient's neck at a single glance, so that the two veins appearing behind the ears in the two lumps depending on the head: where the fingers reach your back, and where you feel the pulse beneath your back, it is a sign of an abscess;
Then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein above. and cut and open the skin and the vein well. You must make two traversing incisions, and cause the blood to flow out until you see it;
then hold it back and let it go, so long as it is healthy;
and I have already said about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Here is the translation: and he is accustomed to, and the habit of constantly shedding tears from his eyes;
and the quality of the healthy person is thus as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and he feels a lump under his arm, and then it signals an abscess;
then lift the heart up onto the vein above your finger's guidance, and insert the lancet beneath, and lift the vein above, and the scalpel, just as you have done in other veins, and make the blood flow according to your need;
then dislodge the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply a cotton pad;
and then form it strongly, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their treatment and their extraction, where the book begins.
The sanity of the forehead vein is worth as much as the sanity of the cephalic as ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and redness.
and the quality is that the diseases twist their neck in torquing, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; Then instruct the patient to remove the collar, and lay the vein so it is healthy and never swollen from a large flame.
However, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp; and the healthy part should be crossed, because the bone is near, and by chance break the flames when they are subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and at the forehead, and at the eyebrow, and at the oriel in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is that the patients strain their neck by twisting it in no ligament, just as before;
then the sound, and let the healthy part of the traverse be a little thick, a little long, a little wide flame, for there is no point of flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then lay it on a cushion, and bind it well.
The healthy part of the vein of the birth if it is worth having a good purge, and a strong forcing, and a sickness of the face, as in migraine and redness that comes into the face, and similarly when it is ancient;
and the quality of the health is such that the patient strains his neck, then he stretches his nose to his left hand. and takes a subtle flame long, and fixes it in the liver in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not let it flow too much in depth, and make the blood flow according to need, then leave it a night, for it is almost completely restored;
The knowledge of the twelve guinders helps with the strengthening of the wing, and at the beginning of messeliness, and for many illnesses, and for impetigo, and for corroding, and for herpes, and similarly;
and the quality of the knowledge is that the patients stretch their neck one way and another, as we have said; and so the masters are established on the head of the patient, and the patients sit on their seat;
then bleed the vein of a finger somewhat widely, then draw out blood moderately, as much as the master is.
then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the veins moderately open. so that the patient does not strangle; and let it just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the livers The health of the veins above the lips is affected by decay in the mouth, and corrosion of gums, and cracks in the lips, and painful swelling and inflammation.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said; then turn the lip, and examine the veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left; and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that they have small black veins: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
About the health of the tongue The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healer is that the patient places their hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein;
examine one and the other, and do not go too deeply in front, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the skin which are commonly wounded are wounded in several ways.
where piercing everywhere, it is a flame burning widely, or a subtle olive oil if it cuts through the skin, and is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame burning widely is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins with flat, broad needles appearing full of gross blood and turmoil; and that's the form of the olive-colored flame:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The clarification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, aids the illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the feet, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to proceed carefully, and he should beware of the artery that lies beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not be piercing the flame, but cutting as if with an anvil.
And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, where you feel in his hand the vein within the arm: it appears manifestly; and the cope at the flame anesil, as we have said.
And if you want to recognize the hand of the wound, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the hand as much as you recognize the pulse; then mark the hand of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and cope with the vein of the flame anesil;
and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the limb swollen, for it is an artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it swell upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery: wait then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be afraid of the pain, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the wound is not treated, and it gets worse, and the medicine does not present itself to you, so cut open the artery, for the head of the retreats; and treat the wound.
And take a bandage of fisting, and bind it, and take one of the joints and place it well just next to the other joint;
If the wound is treated, that's good; if not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
And the treatments are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possession of the good union of the arm.
The bloodletting of a vein is so helpful if it draws blood from the top of the head and below. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the bloodletter to be aware that he should beware of the nerve which is below, and if he pricks too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the health is harmed, and by chance it cannot be healed;
and it is necessary to open many times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you loosen the instrument's sinew with skill; and avoid loosening the nerve at your power.
And if he has a vein between the muscles, then they make it flow far away.
The wisdom of the cephalic (head) helps, because it attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to know how to prick in the olive flame or in the Martian flame, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Here is the translation: and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when one does not do it for the first time, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing, is that healing is not diminished unless it is protected by health,
and to avoid future illnesses; and let the healthy vein be made in one of the four veins that are or are touched: it is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basileptic; and one should bleed in the beginning of taking goods from someone, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 10 days.
The bleeding which is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but only when need is felt, whether by day or night, at all hours and in all tensions;
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus less than four months until the seventh month. Nor do they advise to cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that he purge his intestines with a light clister. if he has much retained filth, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines to the principal members;
One does not heal quickly who is too full of meat, nor who is drunk, as long as they are feverish, or dropsical.
and it worsens on the sick one after a passionate collapse, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiple labors for a woman, and of traveling, of watching and of fasting, and that which destroys all virtue, or by something of the arm or of the body.
then subtle are the humors, if the blood is gross, through meat and through drinks and through medicines, if you have a weak power.
then between or bath, no thing does not deflect, to make the blood subtle.
and you sting with the vein of the foot behind the third, as we have said;
and you beware of that day of work, and of pointing, and of dislocation, and of similar things;
and be joyful and happy, and let the veins be higher than those that are stung, and rub the arm twice or three times;
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sense;
and then he rubs the joint with his hands until the veins swell, and he feels it;
then he anoints the sinew with a little oil from a small flask, then places his left hand on that vein below the joint where it hurts; so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced. For there are veins that flee as if they were strings on the sinew, and if there are such ones that are full of windiness, If when one puts on the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the haste, if the vein is not swollen.
And if the vein is swollen, and the patient's condition worsens, leave it two or three days, and do not bind the arm: by chance we will come across abscesses wounds; do not enter or bathe, then resume the health as it pleases him;
and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then pierce the same perforation at all the right veins;
and open it a little hastily, so that the eyes are not inflamed; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not resume the health, and put a little of warm oil on it, for it alleviates the pain of blood, and is a remedy in this vein where the oil is.
and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same treatment makes threefold and swelling of eyes, when one puts it on the place; if subtly the sense is divided when it is too large.
And if there come big abscesses, which have occurred many times, similarly when it is not healthy unless at that time or the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on the place a sponge moistened with water and in a warm heat, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any black or green discoloration, then it does not harm him. and if you see, put on some kind of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times an abscess and appearance occur at the wound of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the soft place sensitive to the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for perhaps it will cut without an artery; but the master makes a splint to straighten the place, then cures with another cure, until it is healthy.
And let each one draw blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that one should make a larger wound, and the flames should be large.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is more suitable to bleed him little by little, and he should be bled in a transverse cut, not in a puncture.
and this manner of health is saved from decay of blood and gathering of nerve, and is worth more than the health which lasts a long time or a short time.
And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a soft poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is heated, then draw out three or four times the blood.
And if it is of a cold complexion, then anoint before the health with a soft poultice made from syrup of muscat wine, or from aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if it is wounded in health, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drinks broth of beef, and subtle, fragrant syrup.
and use of other things that we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to escape with his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And he who wants to escape with his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong course, if he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, if he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because there is much blood inside the body that is already heated, and it brings about fever; if it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the perforation as far as it reaches the peritoneum. Then you observe all the signs of health, and place your hand on the patient's pulse when they are healthy, so that death does not come into the peritoneum. And this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and it is not necessary to see the arm being dislocated, and to make the blood issue a second time, and the perforation is closed, so that you press firmly upon; if he is curved, he stretches out his arm quickly, for it would be bad;
but let him stretch as long as it takes to heal the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is congealed in the opening of the vein issues forth, and put it on the small piece of silk, and press lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it too much, until the abscess is calmed.
And if a second bleeding is necessary, then let the blood flow from the same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy at the level of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the method of the healthy one is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fistula becomes red;
then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthy one now from across, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the perforations be large, and let them be very close to the joint of the hand, and if they cannot issue forth, then reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow out into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not reset the hand in warm water, for one puts it more into ice than in this state;
and the health of this vein is better than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger of the right hand is good against all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Here is the translation: and if the vein is across, and if you cut it completely, do not grieve anything;
and do not go too deeply in the fontanel, because the nerves are very close to the bare skin,
and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot issue.
And when you have drawn out enough blood as it is necessary, then put on the vein oil and seal it immediately, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
The health of the hand on the left side is worth more than the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
The health of the spleen is worth more than all the diseases that are below the body, like diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain goes away as if in warm water, and bursts forth on the vein so much that it perishes. and he puts it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many ways.
it hurts there where the vein is larger, or at the ankle, which moves more.
And if you hurt above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the vein of traversing as in a cupping motion; and let the flames be gentle.
And if the veins cannot issue out, put the foot in water, and let the vein empty well.
And if the veins fail at first, start again from above a little, for the blood is salty; Do not doubt about nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same with the shin of the other foot equally.
The veins of the sciatic vein are at the thigh of fire, and its vein is worth the pain of the hip, when it's because of hot blood.
And the quality of its vein is that the patient goes between good or bad, and extracts above the thigh .iii. two in twisting,
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you will know in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is worth more that you take care of it, for the joints are sound, and it is much restored to many homes.
and it is worth more that you take care of it, for the joints are sound, and it is much restored to many homes. And if you do not find it, then know that there is no vein that opens or gives two toes, and towards the small finger, and beware of the nerves;
and make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then loosen the bond, and put on cotton and bandage; it is now healthy.
The hairs of a warm poultice
Poultices are made from horns, or from iron, or from glass; and the poulticing is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
And this poulticing that is without pricking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and others in the sides of the neck; and the swelling below the chin; and the swelling of the shoulders; and the swelling on the ribs; and the swellings in the arms; and the swellings of the legs; and the cupping glasses of the jaws; and the cupping does not draw blood, except from small scattered veins that are dispersed in the flesh,
and because of this one does not become accustomed to it, as one does when making a vein healthy; and it is not suitable for it to be administered, nor at all by fire or sense of fire, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to ventilate, or by habituation, we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each season;
because there are those who, when they have the task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
and if there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood; and if there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to wait for three hours of the day.
The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this waiting is in place of the health of the cephalic,
and it is not suitable for one who is of a cold complexion in use, or who has a cathartic, because that causes them great harm;
and because of this it is not suitable for the weak ones who have cold illnesses.
And those who often hurt themselves in this way become numb, and therefore it is suitable to apply the cupping glass a little lower down due to fear of numbness.
The cupping on the neck is in place of the sore head and the basilica, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the pis. and a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and a bruise, and a replenishment;
and it is necessary to caution, for it holds too firmly, if there is an inclination of the stomach or chest.
The windings are like the ribs of the spine if they produce pain in the head, and obliqueness and migration, and in the constriction, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth,
and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to press his hand to put it in place, so he does not touch the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
The windings beneath the chin are like a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
The ventosations of the scapulae are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventosations of the joints are worth as much as those of the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon that he should not make too many incisions in the font, for the veins are nourished by flesh, and know about the underlying nerves and arteries.
The cupping that is on the backside is worth as emollients of deep foundation, and as illnesses beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of aeration, so it has mastery of treating well; and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The cuppings of the legs heal openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth as ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and recall the flowers; and are in place of the .ij. sophists, and of the .ij. cripples, and however they refresh the body after long use, and make paunch come in many dispositions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first empty, and suck strongly at once, and put it hastily, and remove equally, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the roughness of the blood; then firm, and reapply the cuppings, and take warning in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such a hard skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once strongly, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike .ij. times: the first time to make the passage of the thick blood more subtle.
And if the wound is very deep, it must be cauterized a third time; and when we want to draw out a little blood drop by drop, then we suffice with a single application.
And if we want much blood, then we repeat often; and if the wound is deep, then we cauterize deeply, and the termination is that the cure should be perceived suddenly,
and it is suitable for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have obstinate pores, that you open the veins of oily aperture and dissolving. if it is in esteem, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in a warm poultice, of iris, or of cress, or of chamomile, or another similar thing.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if it is one whose skin is tender and has large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on it.
but it is suitable to wash after the infusion of rose water, or cold water, or water of morel, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or another similar thing.
And those who have much moisture, if they raise themselves up with the help of asele, or ague of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have large swellings raise themselves up with a lot of wine, or with ague of elder, or with a decoction of anet or chamomile, or with other similar things.
and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping.
and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped. And beware of those who are choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and moderate foods, and lean meat from a castle, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and moderate food, and moderate lean meats and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day when he feels better, if he ought to drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men three drachms of triacle or muscat before the bleeding, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot and drink it.
The bleeding cups that are placed without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach and the bowel and the kidneys and the loins, for these members do not suffer from being bled in those places.
and do not perform it with force lest you attract blood from member to member, as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place ventoses on the belly and on the hip to make the limb smaller;
and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity,
and these cupping glasses are administered emptied by sucking so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water.
as in bad diseases of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or hot water in which one has cooked herbs suitable for that.
The shape of the cupping glass administered to fire is thus:
And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth in depth, and has or has a small opening at the middle, as if to push an needle through.
and let it be with a gentle touch, soft in front so that it does not bother the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have a small iron rod or a straight iron bar to put a binding bandage around,
and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for old people, and for the lean ones different from the fat ones.
And one must then apply this cupping device to the limb:
take the candle of wax or tallow, and put it in the cupping device at the traverse of the rod which is in the cupping device, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping device so it does not burn the patient;
and then apply it to the limb, and be careful that it is on the part we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapour goes out, and removes the cupping device;
and take hold of the bandage thus beforehand, and reapply it frequently, if you are a master.
In the cupping, which is administered in illness of the lungs, at every acute stage, there is no vein or perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of blood, and is placed on the limb so gently;
and that's the method:
Without veins, they are not administered unless in limbs where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as the lips and cheeks, and similar places; and in the wounds of flesh, as we do with ulcers, and similar things;
and the quality of the ulcer is such that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without putrefaction, if you take them;
and apply an ointment on the tender sweet spot, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their belly; and then be cured of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply to the wounds;
and when they are flat, and shrink, if it is their place or where one can put a cupping glass, one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
If not, then lift the place of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the healthy places are too far after the course of the veins, if it is soiled .i. wrap in a cold water bandage, and put on, until the vein is constricted;
and if the vein is multiple, then put on a broken glass cupping, or galena, and similar things, until it is constricted;
where you apply on the limb many peeled peas, and let them stick to the limb until they adhere to it, then it will staunch now;
and if you have more of this kind, take other swallowtails.
And if the swallowtails do not want to take, rub the limb with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the saneness issues from it. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
and when you see that they fall, sprinkle a little of aloe and of sweet broth, or of cinder, so they will now heal.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this chapter, that they did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
and for this reason the science is foreign to our land, because I never found any good in it;
and I didn't know anything, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two preceding chapters;
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to any, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so nothing hinders you completely, just as weakness of body, or infants, or old men.
or the tension is not too tight, or too cold; and avoid cold joints, it's known that cold joints are frosty, and the flesh of oysters and goats, and do not drink any wine, nor eat too much fatty meat that fills the veins with blood, so you have no doubt of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government that they had used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that bring great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as a thick soup cooked in water, and rice, and bread, and pieces of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and most quickly repairs the break.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well mended or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of small children.
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with big tendons that are reunited and join the limb together, so it enforces as if it were before; and do not touch any part of his work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with thick soups, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: And if there is breaking with a wound, and breaking at all with a small crack.
And in each manner has its engine, and its own instrument proper in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
and it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and opens well by default, and sounds when pressed by hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breaking;
but it can well have twisting, or cracking, or small breaking. It does not matter that you move to the hand, but put on medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold steady subtly now.
And know that the break which goes into the artery, and are the injured parts disjoined, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life;
and if abscesses come to life, it does not leave any day, as long as the abscess is appeased; Here is the translation:
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is dislocated from two or three parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or at your hand it's a small limb, or at two or three cords, or at a cord and at your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are reunited, you reset them by adjusting their positions in their joints as much as you can, and beware that through your work no harm or injury comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if you dress beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come through their work on the abscessed and contracted limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is at the point, you must scold the patient well so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither while turning nor in another way; and take care that the limb is so stabilized that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not at the point, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, it is not at the point, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and shape.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar: if it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle wraps.
and those that are large, such as thigh and leg: if it is necessary to envelop with a large and strong bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire large member, and hold everything in place equally, so that there is no unevenness.
then the inner part is lightly touched, three or four times, according to the member, and hold your hand a little above the entire limb, then go above the break and hold it less, so the break then disengages a little.
and soften the limb a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another limb, and turn inward again above the broken limb;
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above;
then place between the lightly touched limbs either linen or drapery, so that it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, apply something soothing to the abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and leaves it so for some days;
then hold it with these straps, and let it be of the size of a large cane reed, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm branches, and let it be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the strap which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
Then hold steady on the staples as you did at the first treatment, then put a thread underneath, just as you did at the first treatment on the bruise.
The more constricted it is, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a gentle texture.
For if the threads are large, as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted cords, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there should be less than two fingers' width between each staple.
And if the patient is wounded by the staples after the constriction in their healthy areas, then put underneath them swabs of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the bruising, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the cure afterwards.
And note that it does not suit to stretch these broken members on the first day. For when the member is large, it does not suit to put these dressings on before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs suddenly;
and see here the manner of the ancient plasters to restore bruising, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that holds itself as at the mill's wall, and mix it with a lot of egg whites, and put this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common manner of the plaster restoring bruising to many dispositions, and even for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Another way to restore broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to restore bone fractures and to calm the remaining aposteme. Take root of viper's bugloss, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of vieces, each part; crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with coriander moist water, or water, and use it.
Another way to restore, stronger than the first, when hard aposteme comes to limb restoration. Take roots of viper's bugloss, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each part; crush, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it with anything other than cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore, dry and somewhat warm things, like mirrors and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to apply is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and small pieces of broken eggshell, or feathers of a bird, and vinegar, and similarly equalize, and the broths, and make an application on the lie.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten it, and loosen it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter bandage, and a moist sea sponge, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or rose oil poultice, wrapped in a nut, until you are certain of a hot abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little of the poultice, and do not strain it too much as before; and subtly continue until it is healthy.
And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling are entirely removed, and you have need of poultice and bandage, then resume it, as you did previously in equal measure.
And if the limb does not respond to what we have said, do not delay further than three days or four days or five days or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture is evident, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
Then hold back more than at first, and the swelling of his flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the patient's skin is drier than it should be, know that the healing process cannot take place. Raise the dressing of warm water occasionally, every time you uncover it, and let it be each third day, and wash a little of the wound.
By this work, then, the healing process is slowed down in the limb, and it hastens what the foolish doctor does, which makes the limb twist badly: it's evil, and if there are painful operations, I don't see anything else but to let it be and to open it directly.
of various ways of fracture There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
for there are fractures that are made by percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way to the joint which is beneath the bone, just like a hatch or a fissure; and because of this it is called this type of fracture "hatchure".
Where the sword cuts through the bone from above, striking it senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and these .ij. fractures are great or small wounds.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or a split, or a break in the neck bone, or a fall onto stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small crack, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or similar things, and makes a piece of bone enter downwards, and it is like the veins when they burst as they strike against the ribs; thus within the ribcage.
And this happens more to those who have damp or moist bones, like the head of an infant.
and it has all these kinds of breaks which small pieces are dislocated if they are thus; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we know all kinds of breaks through the traction on them, and the inquiry by stretching, and by the corrupt flesh that is on them.
The similar capillary is known through this, that when one discovers the bone, and one rubs above it, then it shows the black break.
In the cure of the break, beware of these accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and palpitation, and fever and ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so that it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the nave comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary to split the affected part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the head of the suffering patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can.
and the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a painful abscess, he is helped by those who need it, and it is necessary that you fill the hole with soft, moistened cloths in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the painful abscess is calmed, and be assured of the flow of blood; then start to cut around the bone, and it is done in several ways of work: one way is that you cut closely in front, and this is the form;
And then you make another incision, a larger one than the first.
And the second way is that you have several diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it thus, so that you administer small hammer blows with tar, not too deeply so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone, and must have a margin or circle above it, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more of them, if each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, if you have administered hammer blows for all tests; and this is the form of the four manners of administering hammer blows:
The quality of hammer blows to pierce around the broken bone is that you place a tar-covered hammer blow on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the hammer blow elsewhere a little later, and do so throughout, then make incisions in the space of the bone which is between the wounds, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments you have, such as forceps; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which is delayed from the bone to all other similar instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more refined and more subtle than the other incisors;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no numbness of scales, if they lightly touch the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is that which Galen said, which is more wise; and he praised it greatly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this incisional instrument, which is its form:
And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is below;
If it is stuck to the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one does not feel well and feels fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach the membrane, and the bone is coated so much by above, and there are small pieces, thus it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to scrape off the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
If you start with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing so until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like structures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its adjustment; and this is something that is not readily available to one who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soften it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and soften it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first dressing; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another layer, and do not bind it further until it holds the wound sufficiently;
and let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is appeased, then disperse it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and farina of veal, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and administer again medicines without sharpness or biting;
and beware that the wound is not too clean, so you do not leave it open, nor leave it to assemble in a bulb, for when the bulb assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one places something biting on the wound, it necroses from above.
Take warning then, lest some bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if nothing better comes from the medicine that one has applied, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glueing a dressing, and put it on the swollen place. then heal by means of cures that are suitable, until he is healthy.
Know that the three parts of the nail are broken above, or one part by the joint, because they are bones; and that which is beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the injured parties is broken, it is necessary that you apply your small finger or thumb to the birth of the nail, and make equal the fracture according to your natural finger index, and at the pouch by deficiency, until the nail regains its natural shape. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the nail, and cannot be reached by the fingers to the joint, it is necessary that you place it equal at the head of a thick rod a little large.
And if the fracture is of two parts, you remake another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, then you can.
Here is the translation:
Where you apply cautery to another part, the break is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
And they say that one should soften the tents in burr, and change every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites, and powder of millet; then leave the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes apply on or near the eyes of an eagle in place of tents, and if there is a soft drapery inside, and hold the break, and soothe the patient within; or do as you have seen.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you mix cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a little pouch of diaquilone.
And if abscesses do not come, then apply an emplaster made from flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind the skin too tightly.
and if the break in the skin is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then remove as much of the extraneous things as possible from that, then sew up the gash, and treat the injuries with charming remedies, and suddenly, just like emplasters and ointments suitable for that.
and if there is no depth in the skin wound, then treat it with tents, and I put strips of plaster, so that it may be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of pain beforehand, and the break is downward only somewhat, and it is not broken in two, unless a knob forms inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently feel the break inside, and hold it with the other hand from behind, and set it straight.
And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
And if the teeth are displaced, or broken, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and place it on the broken jawbone, and put on a double bandage; and put on the bandage a large, well-made staple, or a piece of leather equally long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the figure changes, so dislocate it on the third day, and then set back in place what is changing; and put a poultice on, made from the powder of soft wheat with plenty of egg or flour of six-month-old wheat, after you have removed the crust; and put on a light poultice, and if the poultices are altered, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight weeks.
And if abscesses or wounds come, you should minister to them what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove the null piece of bone that was broken; if you subtly remove the extraneous fragments with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with a flame according to its necessity.
And when you have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put thereon suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of the strength The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, if one holds the shoulder which feels the strength broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form may be as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you have mastery of extending further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold steady the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you make equal the fracture, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot draw the head of the forceps to the forefront, because it comes in obliquely, then it is necessary that the patient gaze upwards on their shoulder; and put under the shoulder a little oreiller, and push the ministers' shoulder down, so that the bone of the forceps is lifted.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken in pieces, then it is necessary that you bind them together; and draw forth the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot be joined by any excessiveness, then take one of the incision instruments that you have; but put under the forceps this instrument, to protect the affected area.
and shape it like a spoon, and it is not a device, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have .ij. joints, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, just like the routing of the wound that you made when you drew forth the bones.
and when you are unsure of a hot abscess, so touch the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, so fill the wound with drapels and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, so soften with a drapnel in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and apply it on top.
The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of powder from soft millet and egg white, and apply light staples, and place a splint underneath, if you have mastery over it; then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put a double drapnel on the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle steel strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage stays in place; and apply the star to the breakage, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy flesh, and underneath the ailing flesh; and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the breakage firmly, and you clearly see that the star does not move above the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the tendons are relaxed, if you restrain it;
and make the patient sit on his back, and put a small pillow under the shoulder blade, to lift the joint high; if you adjust the break of the fracture by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until 20 days.
then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs to be changed, and hold it steady and leave it like that until it is restored; and it is restored in 28 days at most, and in less for some people.
of the fracture of the shoulder
Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and you cannot set it right except by touch; if you arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millet with plenty of water, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle strap, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the strap is not aligned with any part of the shoulder, use a strip of linen to adjust it, so that the strap is evenly adjusted; and then tie it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the ligature every day; and all the times it becomes loose, tighten it, and adjust the strap if it is out of place, and comfort the patient on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be certain, for it is not a thing that sets itself right lightly.
And if a piece of bone projects forward, and not below the heart, if it is dislocated upwards, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the violent force to appease an acute abscess.
of the breaking of the thigh
The thigh is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and totters, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to put everything in order as it should be; then put on plasters and stoups of subtle saltwater, or another lighter fustigation, and wrap it in a drapery, and tie it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the rounded dressing around the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour with the bandage, and if it becomes loose, then hold it fast; and if you need to remove it, because of corrosion or purulence that comes from the flesh, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and remove it, and dress the wound, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the dressing, and hold it fast until it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
It happens that the breaking of the ribs only occurs in the large ones at the back, and at the inner head, and does not bend except for the reason that they are slippery; and one feels it well during the examination of the two.
And the restorers are such that you make equal the breaking, as it is necessary. And then put the plaster, and hold it with a strap, so you have mastery of it.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, and puncture, just like a pleurisy, because the bone touches the membrane; and it reaches to points, and all and vomits greatly, spewing out blood, and it is a grievous illness, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that they should be given windy foods which inflate the stomach, in order to soften the fracture by blowing.
We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come, if they have not arrived. And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
And some of them said that one should put ventouses on the limb, to suck out the putrid matter, and it seems like a reason; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the surplus fluids from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
And they instruct to cover the limb of a bruised thigh with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make equal the width within, then let it be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot suffer through the bone which points to the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to split open the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to ward off the blood; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then place on drapelled moilliez in hot roset oil, and put on the limb; and cure while treating the limb of those who need to be treated for an abscess, and let it be sovins under the rib where it is necessary, until they are healthy.
of the breakage of the neck
Sometimes a breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will burst; and also it has a vertebra in the back. And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel. You know that they are mortally ill in many dispositions, and if they move well and feel good when you hold them steady, you know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so you apply a cure.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if take heed that the feet are softened, and if the accidents which are in the hands, and on the back suddenly swell up and eject without will; and when one has ejected without will onto their belly, then suddenly ejects without will. And when it is ejected onto their back and they want to sit down, then cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain in its cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most light.
And the cure is that you prepare if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of roses or oil of Mayew's egg, so that it is appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone dislocates, it is necessary to cover on the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, to a bandage, then apply the ointment for healing the flesh, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on your pouch, then put the plaster and stick it on, so that you have mastery over it; then restrain it, and if a bone has dislocated, apply there, and remove it, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Because the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it is, there is not a little diminishment in the head; and makes a long dole, and declines into parts, and comes to the patient's pain at the limb, and points out, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand on it, so that you are above the fracture; and know what kind of break and shape of it; and if the break is only at the head, set it evenly with that break, so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is a long one, or it declines inward, make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be apparent. And when you have set it straight, place it on the splint, then put it on a stick of wood or cork, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the splint beneath the ribs, until the limb is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if boils come, do not touch them, until the boils are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The joints are those which are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full handful of mossy gravel, in this form:
And place the joints in high places, and sit the patient on his seat; then you throw a broken branch on the forest, until it reaches the hollow, and has a curved shape of wood, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downward; then put your mirrors to the broken part evenly with your hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
And the other method is that you bind the patient to his stool, and tie his hand to his neck, then instruct the ministers that one should hold what is on the break with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the joints, and each extends to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the joint underneath the break, and on the break, and each of the ministers extends to their part. And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put the joint in a gentle way under the seat, and another towards the elbow, underneath the break; and also if the break is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to put the joint lightly, without labor, so that the break is even on the joint, and on the elbow; then put the break even, as it should be, and hold steady, lest abscesses come.
And if apostemes (abscesses) come, do not hold back until seven days, and put a soft ointment on the affected area with oil of roses, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place a bandage on the break, then assemble the arm at the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put a wrapping, and hold steady on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, so nothing bothers it, unless the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width of space between each splint, and let each splint be as big as it passes over the break; then hold steady on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on setting bones, more strongly and less loosely.
And if you see the alignment of the splints, and the holding, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess heat, let it be tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each seventeen days the bandage, so that it does not become inflamed and come to the proper place, or the nerves do not become numb from the member because it is too constricted. If it is suitable, as we have said.
Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that joins the shoulder; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and put it in place.
And if it's the large foscile, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations as an arm at the part below his hand, or at the linen, and another ministration at the other above. And then put it in its proper place, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no dislodged piece that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and the bone, as we have said before.
And with the breaking of a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And at the beginning of the restoration, apply poultices to apostemes chaus, if necessary; make a dressing from cerote made of oil and rose water and white lead, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and place the dressing subtly, so that the apostemes chaus may be appeased. And then remove the cerote, and put on an emplastrum of powder from the mill with abundant egg white, then put on the staples, and let the staple of the breakage be a little stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have five or six staples or arms in different positions: either the breakage is in one of the bones, or in .ij.; and hold more firmly onto the breakage than other parts, and tighten less as you go further away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And reward the limb and the ligament afterwards for several days. And if some evil accidents happen to the limb, as if a pruritus comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb with warm water, so that the pruritus may be appeased; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then recommence the strapping, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, address them.
And if you take a ward, the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too stiff, so it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it stay there for some days, until the numbness goes away, and then hold steady.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days. Or in the meantime, then he puts his hands on his neck, and makes his neck even, and guards against movement and degeneration, and sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said before, there have been few fractures, and it does not come but with repeated sprains.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary for the patient to sit crossed, and sit straight in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministres the broken bones, and put them even with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and put the plaster and the bandages, lest abscesses come, then I put a staple according to the quantity of the humor; and let it be enveloped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken plant; and then bind with a long bandage, and let the staple be of soft thread as big as the plant of the hand, and bind, if it is necessary.
And if the break is in the fracture, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is overlapped and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the thread between the two.
And if the break comes to one of the two, it is the pouches, set it even, as it is necessary; and bind with the plant, and see if you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in the other two, as in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or tie them together in a holder, that holds, or put on a staple, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and heal what comes, as I have said.
of the broken cuix
The bone of the hip is often broken, and one sees it well when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is done by tying above the breakage, and another below. And the patient puts his face downwards, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part; and it is when the breakage is within the bone.
And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bands is towards the poignail, and the other bands below the breakage. And also if it is close to the knee, then the bands are above the knee, and then the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equal to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the band, so that apostemes do not come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the remedy is done in such manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture .i. a doubled bandage in .ij. or .iij., and remove the superfluous material, then twist the leg so the ankles come to the root of the nail, and put .i. a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist around the leg and the thigh the bandage, then place it on the fracture thus, and place a star-shaped device on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to tighten evenly; then begin to bind firmly .iij. turns or .iiij. around the fracture; and as you go further up from the fracture, and less is the constriction; then take .ij. heads of thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and loosen .iij. devices that are above, then return to below at the head of the thread, until you reach the foot; and the constriction, so it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so no abscess or inflammation occurs again.
And if it happens, disassemble it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are grasping, it is necessary to extract, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to break the bone, and make a cut; and the treatment thus, as we have said, until it is healthy.
And no time is the thigh broken in such a way that one puts devices thus, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not close with the patient's illness.
And know that the pulse is restored to its strength, either a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
of the wrinkle of the knee
Know that in the wrinkle of the knee there is little breakage, but it often splits. And if it breaks, it's just a crack, or a perforation, and has all kinds of wounds, and feels wounded, and this senses well.
And the restoration is such that one puts together equally what is round to its two, so that it may be assembled as much as possible; then put on the plaster, and I put a round steel, if you have mastery of it, and hold it as it is necessary, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breaks, such as hot abscesses and other similar things; if one puts to each accident what is necessary for it, so that it may be healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, where one is called by right "non-muscles", and the other is called "fibula"; and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one sees it well; and turn around. Then apply extension, and set it evenly, and lay the bones in order; but however, it is necessary that the breakage be gentle, and there are several pieces, so that the extension is lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that surround the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two linen bandages above and below, and lay them in the middle, so that the leg does not decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good; and nobody should hinder the length of the leg, which is wooden, and one puts the leg to prevent movement, and properly makes a cast on the breakage or wound; and remove each day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if you cure until it is healthy.
of the breakage of the bones in the foot
At the ankle, there is no breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and the two poxes, and it does not happen except in several more positions.
And if it happens that you have broken bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, so put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the shin, where the bones are lifted, then press them together until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and padding above, and put under the belly of the foot a small tube at two inches from the plain, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
And if there are some of the fingers broken, set them right, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that tube I mentioned, and hold it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, set each finger straight with a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the tube under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, just as we have said; and attend to each accident as it requires.
of the fracture of the finger bone
When the bone of the female nature is fractured, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline her towards the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with the natural cotton, and put a large amount as much as the sto; then lift the woman, and raise the back little by little, and thus jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for 20 days or so: if the fracture will be restored, and you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a string at the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the string strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will thus return the fracture; then fill with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the finger of man or woman is fractured, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into my book. For the fracture signifies more than one disposition for the right path of restoration: then give it.
On the twig, when it is broken, take an eye of a goat and put it on the twig; then wrap a dressing around, and leave it 20 days or so, and it will be healthy soon.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set right now, so that the healthiness that we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is healthy, if you apply a vitriol remedy, and you have no other option, then start to restore the break at that same hour, or on that day, lest abscesses or ulcers come.
And if abscesses or ulcers come, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
And if the broken bone appears uncovered on the skin of the chest, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, at slight extension.
And if the extensions are not suitable for putting in your hands, then reset with this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror to take 3 or 4, according to what is needed for each cure of fracture; and let it be strong and a little thick, so it does not bend with compression on the limb during your work, and let it be angled beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards.
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and the bolt once, as long as it holds, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for that, or incision or sewing, according to your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone from asperties and minor scars.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then wrap it in a black sticky bandage, and properly so that it is in this state; and do not put anything on the open wound or other things where oil has been applied, lest you cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times they have done foolish things, and have caused death or corrosion on numerous occasions; and may the strappings be more gentle and softer than other breakages.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in place of these, rough bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, one or two days later, a swelling around the wound, remove what you had put on everything, and apply gentle ointments to soothe the wounds, just as you would apply tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you elevate the limb many times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone can slide back lightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot be reduced but the bone returns again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these disjointed pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death occurs, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of the bruises that come on the skin
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not allow nourishment to reach the member; or from numerous irritations; or from too great movements, not in their time; or because it has little blood in its body, if it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and gladness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the irritation is often from warm water, so that nourishment flows to the member; and returns to its natural shape.
the member twisted after the healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone opens, and the form of the limb is ugly, it does not preserve its natural function: if one does not believe that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great evils come from them, and by chance death; however, if the nodes and torture are fresh, then one must be aroused by warm water, or mollifying herbs are applied, as for foilles of vismalve, and roots, and mellilote, and similar things; and one makes a mollifying plaster, as one does it well, and you take the mussilage of vismalve, and mix it with fat of geline or oil of sisament, and make a plaster on it; or you take greasy figs, and crush them with flour of colon, and similar medicines that diminish swelling.
And the node is often removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with a moist hand. And so one must diminish movement in the limb at each hour.
And if the tortuousness is enveloped and hardened, just like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if one wants to cut just up to the bone, subtly cutting at the incision; and to put cushioning and study into the treatment.
Here is the translation:
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if you must now reposition it in a straight line.
For if you delay, the swelling will increase, and by chance if it is reset to its place; because it is not advisable to move it at the hour when it is swollen: often spasms and other pains come about.
Always, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the aposteme (abscess) has subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reposition it gently, and treat each limb as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
of the jawbones
Sometimes it happens that the jawbones are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jawbone occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and become soft; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its original position more easily.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the minister touches the head of the patient, and puts his fingers like a pouch on one hand at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be firm, to hold steady; and instruct the patient to relax their jaws, and move them from all sides.
And the fingers place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are treated with warm water and oil, until they are reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are restored evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, if you place a moist cloth on their forehead, made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with many threads.
and the patient sleeps on their back, and their head is supported between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor exert themselves too much, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then eat what they want lightly, and do not struggle to open the mouth to chew and swallow, until the jaw is well-relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural position, then fever and severe discomfort occur, and sometimes a solution of ventosity, and sometimes a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of danger; and many times he whose condition it has happened to will die within eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge it from the inner side of the ribs and of the breast, and is often dislocated at the defect, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
and the thigh that is against the hip cannot be dislocated; if it does not, and if it dislocates sometimes, you must reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy;
and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates to the part of the joint below; and the second is to the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates to the part above, and this happens rarely;
and do not dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not dislocate within the sinews; and many times they dislocate towards the joint, especially to those who have little flesh, for those who have little flesh, the wound heals quickly; to those who have sufficient flesh, the wound heals at points, and returns to points.
And by chance it happens to some men a blow or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and believes it is dislocated by that.
It is necessary therefore that you test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocations occur when they slide towards the joint, and you make a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity. and you will find on the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath it, place the finger on the head of the shoulder, as if it were a nest; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the finger;
and this type of dislocation cannot be forced back, when it is new, or if the patient is sick.
And the method is that the ministers lift the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers beneath the hollow, and lift the joint with force upwards to the level; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, placing it beneath; if done quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the medicine should be gently mollifying and soothing, like a decoction of alder and fenugreek and mellilot in water, and so it is soothed.
Then the patient should be placed on their back, and a straight stick of equal length is put under the shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then the mirror is placed at the heel, and the top of the shoulder is lifted gently, and the hand of the patient is treated.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see that it is reset in this manner:
and it is that you make present a home which is larger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the stick of the patient, and lift the stick high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and other ministers treat the hand of the patient thus below the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long pole in the ground, so that the head should be just like a pestle, neither too large nor too thin. then place it under the patient, but let there be soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing upright from the long wooden pole; then his hand should be extended below in another way, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a pole of 12 feet in length and 4 fingers in width, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the seat, according to this form.
Here is the translation:
And when it is in, whatever the manner may be, it is necessary that you put under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made of powdered mill dust, with incense and egg whites, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold it firmly under the seat, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And it is necessary that you feed him little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then feed him more after 5 or 6 days, and move him; and if it is strengthened and it is not softened, he is healthy.
And if the joint is weakened by moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauteries to three places, as it is described before in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 6 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint has never been in its place.
Here is the translation:
And if after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and slow movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation from the burn
It is known that the joint of the burn is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not repeated, because one sees it well and feels it well; and it is dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the burned patient with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in this way, so that abscesses do not form in the vein, because if they form in the vein, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset from everything, especially when it is behind; thus it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can restore it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count in the interior, above and below, and bend the jointure to its fingers together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and presses from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that the minister extends the arm, and the minister holds the arm, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the mirror joins the jointure to its hand, oil it with some oil to soften the jointure, then bend the jointure strongly, until it returns.
and when it is in place, set a dry plaster with an abundance of egg whites, and hold the forearm firmly, and bend the arm at the collar of the patient, and leave it for some hours, then remove it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some hours, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
And if it feels irritated after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it well and rub it thoroughly, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat woolen compress, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make them enter into a bath. and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the compress back on, and then enter into a bath; and thus do three or four times, until it is healthy; and if you see, set on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady; if it returns to its proper disposition.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints however; it must be quickly returned to its place, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess does not form there.
And the reduction is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers of the hand, and the doctor places them evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place; then put the sick hand with its palm down on a table at extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on a table, and the doctor places their hand under the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, then hold the swelling down with compresses, and let it settle thus without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot stretch anything at all: then know that the nerves are paralyzed, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy than to cauterize in this case, and by chance nothing else works.
And when the hand is in its place, put it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it go; then take it apart and leave it thus.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no great grudge, then soften the water with warm water, and rub it until it be healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any part, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly;
Here is the translation:
and let it be still for a while, and then set it even that day; and do not touch the joint, as we have said, and loosen the joint, and make it mobile, and reset it in its place; and do this often, until it is straightened.
and do the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
from the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur with no control, cannot hold them, and often some members are softened, or the two hips or the two arms.
And often the shinbone is moved to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gout".
The treatment is that you should rewarm the gout which has come from childhood; if there is no cure or healing of the entire body.
And that which comes from a fall or from blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak of great words, where there is no real profit in all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes before the worst, no one is healthy;
and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for the ones that properly come to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a level place, and have a strap beneath them, so they do not slip;
then make a splint for the chief in earth firmly, and another at the feet, and bind a linen bandage around the patient's joints, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and let the minister know how to bind the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the splints;
and let them be well fastened, the splint as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is straightened.
And if it does not straighten by this treatment, take a table of three long arms, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the table beneath the patient, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and put the mirrors at his feet on the other side of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it so that the turntable turns to the hand.
And it is that you fix two splints at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet two others, and between each splint, above and below, a palm's width of space.
and have in each splint a hole, where the turntable runs, and let the splints be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two splints have one turning splint, on which the string turns, and have in two turntables two small splints of a palm's width, to turn the turntable.
and then put the string that is among the axles to the turntable towards the head, and the other string towards the feet at the other turntable, and each of the ministers turns his turntable with all the string, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, set a plaster of soothing ointment with an abundance of egg whites, and then the bandages, and then the stellate of a small tablet of two inches long, which surrounds the lever of the gouty joint and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a string, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, until they are healthy;
and if nothing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stellate that we have mentioned before; and never administer in a piece of lead,
and never does the appearance come in the rear of the spine behind the back, and think that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one must not have false presumption: by chance death may come.
of the dislocations of the hip
Here is the translation:
And the knowledge of his dislocations is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the ailing knee than the healthy one, and cannot bend its knee to the fire. and it is the limbs that are deprived of warmth from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of the one who is near death, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of the one who is ahead, it is that they straighten their leg according to completion; however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make them walk, it cannot go forward, and holds back their urine, and inflames the groin, and when they want to pass, it goes above the heel.
And the signs of the one who has it behind, are that they cannot stretch their knee, nor bend, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the back beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you recognize the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no effective treatment; and it does not seem that there should be any pretension.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of three manners of dislocation, you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should apply a strong minister, and strongly bind the leg with two hands, or with a lien that is tied above the knee. and another minister extends his hand in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft thread on the hip; and another holds the top of the bandage;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to three similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then it is necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the hip joint, then it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the limb which is under the ankle, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the ankle, and towards the stronghold;
Then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the injured hip, and stretch it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the injured person together with a strong soft ligature on the two heels, and on the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the others;
Then let it be suspended from the top of a pole, and let it be one arm's length above the ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the top of the hip, and let another minister be suspended with the injured person, who embraces the hip in its former shape, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at its former shape, then guide the injured person, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretch a ligature properly on the injured leg, and on the foot also.
Then place the cauterizing irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert the cauterizing iron between the hips of the patient in the shape. and has planted drapels of wet cloths around, so that it does not blind the patient, then extends each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal on his hand at the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press in this way as we have said in the gibosity, and ease the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the mirror on the edge of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the injured part downwards, nor lift from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said about the couching on the hips. and it is on his face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
and it will be a point when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and he rests two or three days, then dislocate it, and apply the plaster on top; and if you see that they are equal, bind them, as before, and let them be for two days; then dislocate it, and make it comfortable, until the limb is comforted.
about the dislocation of the knee
The joints are dislocated in three ways: namely, forward, backward, and sideways; and they do not dislocate at all from the front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their thigh, and if it does not straighten at their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their face, and put your foot against their feet.
then take their knee in your hands, and pull it between your two, then bend the three bones of the knee strongly; and another minister extends their foot, until the joint returns to its place, and the signs are that it straightens well at their thigh, and the leg becomes light.
and put the plaster on, and set the leg straight at the hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then remove it; and do not trouble the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not in a good position, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the flesh is swollen, and it pulls before the part where it is dislocated.
The pulling back is lighter, and one must extend it lightly with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
And when it is dislocated from the entire toe, then you must make the patient sit upright, and tighten it with a bandage, forcefully applied above the knee, on the thigh.
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left. Do this several times, then lift it high up, and push the foot well up high.
and do it thus many times, as we have said, by bending and drawing back the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strong hold in the earth between their thighs, and wrap them tightly around, so they do not hurt themselves;
then pull the muscles of the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with their hands or with a strap, so that it is placed on the neck of the foot; then stretch out each minister equally, and the straps should be between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient in place when one stretches them;
Then place the mirrors equal to the dislocation in his hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns hastily.
And when it is at a point, set the plaster and stupes on top, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the veins that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are softened, hold firmly; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and delay going to see the patient for four days. And if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses break out, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two
When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them gently without force, and it is a light task.
And if the dislocation is in any of the toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a plain or flat table, and put your foot on what opens up at these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is even, and it does not open at all, then put under the foot of the patient a table at the .ij. head, then hold it firmly, and let it be for two days, then release it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wounds and of dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not overly confident in the cure, be wise in the art and do not take it lightly for a long time, and be merciful and slow, not hasty.
and you begin with calming hot treatments, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses will come to life;
and when the limb is in its place, then administer calming hot treatments, and cure the wound, as it is necessary, with soothing remedies for dryness;
and if there is a dislocation with a fracture, and you find the bones separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen.
