You, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest of the science of medicine together with its filling, and I have finished it by its explanations and through its declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is foreign in our region and is estranged from all in all, so it is perished the science and diminished, and there remains nothing but small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and the science is estranged.
Or it seems to me that I should revitalize it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation, as is necessary.
And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for whoever undertakes this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and tendons and the number of joints, and their movement and rest, and from where they issue.
And therefore Hippocrates says that the name is much with the name, and little with the work, and similarly in the art of hand.
We say to you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not familiar with what has been said beforehand, should beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have often seen many who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut away the abscess of scrofula or neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; wherefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the largeness of the stone, and knew well that if it was not taken out he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who took on the care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking was also wounded; and the ignorant surgeon stretched the break over the wound as far as it would stretch by force of great ease, and did not leave any room for healing, and left it in this state; and he commanded him not to loosen it at all; and it remained thus until the leg became entirely inflamed and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untangle the leg; and when I had untangled it so it became peaceful and felt no pain.
But in all ways the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who drained a gangrenous abscess and then inflamed it through the wickedness of his lordship.
For when a chancre is pure of melancholic moisture, it is not necessary to touch it with iron unless one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, most dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you beware of yourself, so that the foolish surgeon may not be able to speak ill of you.
So take up your arms with caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that through the favor of God you come to salvation and are praised; and leave the frightening diseases of great sickness; and put away your arms from those things that make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and it is the chapter ordered from head to toe; and about the forms of instruments, and the handles of cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered and with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered from head to toe, and with the forms of instruments.
Therefore, that we may remember our work, it is necessary that I say the quality of aid and harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle science and the hidden answer; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I do not suffice for their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally in every complexion where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot and moist complexion, and dry and moist complexion.
In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some have divided and said that cauterization is great help; and others have said the opposite: that cauterization is not of any use in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat nor dryness; and says he who says the opposite that cauterization makes great help in hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the hot complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true at times through experience.
And in any case, do not meddle with fires except by him who has experimented and knows through long usage the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of humors of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the remedies and hopes of the time; as for other complexions, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on cauterization.
And know, son, that fire cauterization is together with the secrets of cures and of greater benevolence than burning medicine cauterization.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member unless it be called.
The burning medicines come from one member to another, and bring forth grievous diseases of unhealthy sanitation to the sick person, and by chance kill the patient.
The fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do so, unless there is superfluity.
And I have found this by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because I do not like to take away the secret which is revealed in fire, and the quality of work, how it repels diseases of bodies, as philosophers say by demonstrating; accept it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose suitable times.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the evils impending are thus put aside by the help of cauterization; and likewise if cauterizations are for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait until a greater evil comes to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say so, but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of pain, and excels in speed because of its valor, and because of the virtue of its work and its nobility.
And it is possible that the disease comes at some times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and excesses are assembled within him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is not cauterizations administered in place where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and it is said that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. Therefore it becomes clear that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that gold cauterizations are more deadly than iron ones, and they didn't say this except for the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the place of cauterization doesn't cause corruption, but this is not true because I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; and gold cauterizations excel over iron ones, just as they said.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know how it's burned by the color of the gold, and it's soon cooled down; and if one heats it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore we use fire cauterization because we have found it to be advantageous for our work.
And I have ordered this chapter to come before the others, so that the way may be more clear to find.
of cauterization for an olive stone.
These cauterizations are suitable for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to numerous headaches and pains in the dens and throat, and indeed all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, moistening the head three or four times, according to what the virtues, age, and habit of the patient can tolerate; and then make the patient's head wet.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on your weight; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where your thumbs will come to rest, let it bleed for a while then heat the cauterization called "olivare", which is the form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it descend and spread little by little in twisting; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see a bone about the size of a small grain; and if you don't see it, do the cauterization again until you see the bone as I told you; after that take one pinch of silk, and put it into an awl and soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and let it stay three days; after that put a moist cloth in butter; and leave it there until the scab is removed; after that treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when an open wound stays open longer, the more it purges; and therefore it is helpful.
And some of them said that one should heat the cauterization until part of the bone is charred, and then remove what is charred from the bone, and be cured.
And the others say that one should heat the cauterization so much above, and push it in so hard that it makes a gap as wide as a green thread that women put in their purses, so that the humors may flow out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that one must treat and soothe.
And these two methods of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in all cases, except perhaps in some people where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the bone is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the patient's bone is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and conducive to my work, and from this I take my cue to assemble salvation.
Of the ancient pain in the head
When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts long, then the patient must use year's and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head, oils, and poultices; and if one makes the fire cauterization that we have previously said, it does not help.
Take heed if the patient's head is of strong temperament and not too cold; then cauterize below that cauterization a little as we have said above.
After make a cauterization on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cauterization in the place called "vasselz"; and is one spot where you put poultices; and hold your hand so that you do not see right up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations on the horns be more subtle than those for the middle part of the head, and that's the form.
of the head's cauterization When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease extends up to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by worldly medicines, and all the other remedies that I have said in the division of diseases have been tried and do not help: then make cauterizations according to two manners, that is to say of medicinal fire and of fire.
The medicinal fire cauterization is that you take a lump of aloes, remove the bark and re-mold it into one small piece for each horn, then make the temple incision in the same way as the pain holds so that you can place the aloes under the skin; and when it has been placed, tie and strain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; then release it and treat the wound with turpentine for two or three days; then put on a poultice in butter until porosity occurs.
After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see that you do those things from some burning medicines that I have written or in the treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cauterization is as follows: Heat the cauterizing iron to the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clove or has a small knob; and mix with a little appearance; and put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until the middle of the key's ember is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and stop the bleeding abundantly.
After put cotton on with thread, and put it on the spot for three days; then I put moistened cotton in butter, and then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", all the way to the point, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that is not old.
of the migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previous cauterizations from medicine and fire do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then apply it to the painful spot a line of half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut the artery and come right up to the bone; and beware of the jaw's movement when eating, and the nerves' regard for the silent one who may come suddenly, and beware also of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if it has great fear and even more so than he who does not know it, and who is not a student or experienced in this; and leave the work to myself, but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the area around the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cauterization that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other one and more helpful.
of ear pain due to cold
When pain comes to the ear due to cold, and one has tried solutions and other remedies that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizing iron called "poin" according to the form:
After point all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and distance yourself a little from the root of the ear once you have marked the painful spot; and make 10 points around each ear; after, cure the wound until it is healed.
of mouth torture
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not except those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterizations for similar ones that come from scorched and spasmodic nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torture that moves with phlegm and idleness, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery near the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another at the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery until the middle of the key's ember is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the same as the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knives be a little thicker; after, cure the wound just as I said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the spot called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated just as we have said before.
from lethargy
To this illness it is fitting to give the patient large and pillowy powders for the brain; after, rinse the patient's head thoroughly, and place on the back of the patient's occiput the plaster of mustard which is written in the treatise on plasters; and that is the manner of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then make three cauterizations around the head from the top to the neck, with two inches of space between each one; and cure him as the others, and if you see that it is necessary to add, and the patient is suffering, then make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on both horns, and cure until he is healed; and the cautery which is called "olivare", just as I have said before.
of the chill of the head It is fitting that the head be cleared of years and what we have said before; after, rinse the patient's head, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the flesh is burned, and lift your hand; after, cure him until he is healed, and be the cautery which is called "olivare" that we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is fitting first to clear the brain of years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from extreme medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, then make gargarism and mastication to clear the brain often with good meats; after, rinse his head in the middle, and make one cautery according to what we have said before, and one on the nape, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, then make cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and be the cauteries olive-like according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, then make one subtle cautery in this manner:
When because of melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then make the cauterization with these cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
And if because of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink something by which his brain may be cleared, according to what is said before in the division.
After rinse the patient's head; after make one linen bandage well made, like a circle, and put it on his head; and the patient be crossed, and be well held from all sides; after present the liniment, and anoint with butter of ancient barberry; and heat it over moderate fire, so that the doves can bear the liquor; after empty the bandage inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week, one time with another good governance, until he is healed.
Or if you see that the cautery is not doing well, make more points all over the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then put on wet cotton soaked in butter and goose grease.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink which clears the head, and guard against all moistures, and make him sweat or take a bath several times fasting.
After instruct him to bend his head back, and make a cautery in the head, and make two cauterizations on both temples if the descent of awe is to both eyes together, or if it is to one eye only; and seal all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and be the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and take care of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop as soon as possible.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how to stop it; and never make a cautery or apply heat under the two bones behind.
of the tears of the heart
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I said at the beginning of awe descending to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauterizations on both temples, and two cauterizations under the haiterel behind the two bones; and if there is need for more, then make a slow cautery above the forehead for every small cautery.
of the tears of the heart within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cooked nights; after rinse his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-like cautery; and make two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" on both temples, a little below the eyebrows; and take care not to cover the artery. And that is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivare". Here is the form:
And if you see that you make two cauterizations on both temples as long as the eyebrow is; and do not leave your hand off until the third part of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points to the oil Never occurs when the hair of the eyelids is converted into a partition, and points to the oil, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Or the cautery by fire commands the patient to let his eyelashes be long and equal; and if they point to their birth, then bind his eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your sight; afterwards draw a figure on paper of eyes that is as like the leaf of myrtle, and make the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put moistened cotton on egg whites and persimmon seed oil on the eye, then apply the cautery where it forms.
Afterwards cauterize on the figure you have signed in small and small strokes many times, so that the skin is burned away from there; and the sign of the health of the work is when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted to the level of the oil; then lift your hand, and let it be like this for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the swelling is gone; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural level, and be even, and do not prick the hair into oil.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment form like the leaf of myrtle; next take French soap and live coal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then pour it on the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on paper with eyes; and if the patient holds only in one eye, then work in one, and if in both alike; and put moistened cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head be in your sight, and place your two fingers showing above the medicine, and press a little bit and move all the time that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels it as if from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, then lift up the lead of ashwood, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if it is thus, then it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the lead or where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are in place; then put on moistened cotton in butter until the burned skin is healed, afterwards treat with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work by great care that the medicine does not harm the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then begin again the medicine on that same place which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; afterwards treat until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this be your constructions; and do not be surprised if the right way is not found for him whose study is this art.
The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise on the treatment of fistulas using cauterization, specifically describing techniques and procedures for treating patients with this condition.
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make him cauterized according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your sight; and hold the minister's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he turn away his head; afterwards put moistened cotton on egg whites or persimmon juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is thus: and shape it like the top of a vulture's feather, together with the quill being the cautery; if you see, then make it pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, then make it like a tent; but however, this one that is shaped is worth moving for your work.
Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then make an opening, and drain off the fluid; afterwards put hot cauterization on top, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the eye, so that your hands do not behave foolishly; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be well. If not, then begin again the cautery once more, and another time if necessary, and let it be for three days; afterwards put on moistened cotton in butter, and the treatment with drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass without healing, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the rest according to what comes into its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand by fistula, and make an incision; afterwards put into the incision one small piece of wax in the shape: and it is shaped like the quantity of one third of a plover; and hold your hand with the wax firmly, and do not move the patient's head until the melted wax has reached his eye; and it is necessary to put moistened cotton on egg whites or ash on the patient's eye: the wax thus seals the fistula opening, and heals by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the eye, and bring back the fistula to its proper place in the eye according to what is needed in its own natural location.
Cracks on lips. Many times cracks on the lips occur, which are called "pil", and indeed on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small cauterizing cutellary according to this shape:
And place it quickly in those cracks until it comes to the front; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
Apostem of the throat.
When an apostem comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth; and it festers and rots and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards push or probe the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at the front of it, and at the back; and do thus once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
Movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then put the patient's head in your hand; afterwards apply the cautery in such a way that the form will come after in this manner as if you were putting a cord around the tooth; and put hot stuff inside the cautery quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift up your hand and reapply the cautery according to your pleasure; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and keep it for an hour and rich vapors will follow.
And in this manner the teeth which were moving are stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
Of the pain of the teeth.
When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, whether it is actual or apparent, and the medicines do not work, then there is need for a cautery in two manners: and a butter cautery and a fire cautery.
The butter cautery is such that you take the fat of a cow, and the end in a iron or clay spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it with melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and place one hot iron until the fire comes to the crest of the tooth.
The fire cautery together is such that you take a cord of iron or clay, and make it thick so that the heat does not come to the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, from which the form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter during the application of that cautery, and then let out rich vapors; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofulas are from phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery in which the form will come after, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from one part of the cautery; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and wrap it with moistened cotton in butter until the soreness is removed; afterwards treat the limb with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture prevails on the channels of the phlegm, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be cleansed first with soluble medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and let it burn only slightly. Afterwards make another cautery at the jointure of the neck to the top of the spine, and be the cauteries which are called "clavicle" from which we have the form before; and treat the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
of the throat. When all and every disease of phlegm is from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or choler, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the forehead in the veins; and one other cautery between the breasts, and be the cauterizations which are called "clavicle" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make a cauterization in piercing on the entire cauterization which is called "point" from which the form comes before in the disease of the ears; and be the points just to .xxx., or around that amount. Afterwards treat the limb according to what is said before, and be the cauterizations at three rains according to this form:
And because of this are the cauterizations lighter, because you do three in a row.
of the dislocation of the shoulder. ( Same text as before ) After be careful the patient on his back and on his side; after lift the key that is inside the titillate as to your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, so apply the fire cauterization which has two needles of what form.
and cauterize the key until it pierces just to the side, and comes out the figure of the cauterization together with four cauterizations; and therefore is made cauterization with the cauterization which has three needles, because the form of cauterization are six cauterizations; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and that's the form of the cauterization which has three needles.
And sometimes it is joined on top of this one nerve, because there are eight cauterizations.
After put on the cauterization powder bruise with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens then, after make cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized clavicle, or many cauterizations in piercing. For the joint is refilled, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of the cauterization of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauterizations for pleurisy with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as big and as long as your arm; and moisten it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize one cauterization between the armpit and the neck, and two small ones a little below in the part that is under the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly; and one cauterization inside the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the breast, after the cauterization that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather let it be open just as in smelling.
And some ancient said that someone uses a fire cauterization similar to a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and suddenly the pain stops, just as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or an ulcer comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse in accordance with what we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three manners of cauterization that are all good.
One of which is that you make three cauterizations, or four, along the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cauterization that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient lie down on his back.
And another manner of cauterization is that you heat up the cauterization which has two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key that is near the mouse, or the patient's side comes from the left, and be the elevations which you lift the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
After put the two needles inflamed until the key is pierced from the other side, and then take out the cauterization, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the cauterization with three needles. After cure when it has gotten corruption after a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one nearby the breast; and let the cauterizations be well close to the point of the key.
After let the cauterization be open to get rid of corruption for a long time, and do not stop the treatment of the patient after the cauterization; and the healing will hasten, and both intentions will come together with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization for the belly is the clavicle that we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what is mentioned here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellowish water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the ulnar and annular; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn. And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, otherwise the yellowish water will escape, and let the cauterizations be according to this form:
After make two cauterizations on each leg, one on the tip of the ulnar and the other under the kneecap in front and another behind, in the middle of the leg; and let the cauterizations be long, with one under the knee joint and the other above it; and leave the cauterizations open for a long time until the swelling subsides; after cure according to the other treatments that we have said.
of the menses
When the menstrual flow comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by manners of cures; and you see the patient suffering and of strong constitution, then make one great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been said here before or cauterization of the stomach at the cauterization of the circulation; and three cauterizations around the belly subtle to each small cauterization clavicle subtle, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cauterization on the fingertips, and one cauterization on each thumb, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and composed of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that one which is all below the almecdate (poc) and poc in triangulating, and one cauterization under the belly. Two must be done.
et if you think his stomach is chilled and the meat not cooked and one sees the face swelling, then one applies a great cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the gallbladder at all the cautery nails; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After cure the wound so it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut into the fleshiness which is called "thelul", if you scrape off the cautery that appears like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut in the fleshiness; and I leave until the cauteries come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood runs out; do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshiness, then cauterize each one as we have said; after treating with ointments which are beneficial so they become healthy; and if you cauterize a great cautery on the abdomen, it will have greater aid.
of an uncured wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall tell in its place, then comes such a disease that it cannot be healed except by means of cauterization.
When to anyone a fistula comes, and it is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then you must prove all the way through one single tent, and beware that you know exactly how far the tent is. After that, scrape off the cautery that appears like a razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and repeat the cautery until those corrupted flesh and pus are burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of what is needed; and beware not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then beware of those places, and do not make fires except in a charred place, and think it is not perished; after cure the wound so it is healed, and if the wound is sealed, and the matters are removed long times, then know that the wound is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the wound is torn, and corrupted the bone at its foundation; and thus as one of those things that we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When the pain of frost comes to the kidneys, and great swelling, and does not take shape like a woman, then it is necessary that you apply a cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other at the cautery nails that we have said before; and if we cauterize in middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will do greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from frost and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part of the bladder, where the hairs of the foreskin begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and let each be as long as the nail of a thumb; and make one cautery behind, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be nails-shaped according to the form said before.
of the uterus When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that one makes three cauterizations around the mouth, as we said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind; and let the cauteries be nails-shaped, as we said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip of the haunch, and because of this the patient moves from its place, and the sign is that the hip is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the wound of departure is open, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip of the haunch with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the wound around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations on the olivaire, and let them be as deep as all the others; and cure it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hip of the haunch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the thick humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
After that, you apply a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is: that you cauterize on the hip of the haunch three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make good depth and great, and leave between each cautery a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauterization be on the olivaire; sometimes one makes a cautery in middle on the top of the hip, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see fit, then cauterize in the form of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the spines of the bone are burned.
And that is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg. And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, then make two cauterizations on either side where the patient says the pain stays, and one cautery above the ankle three thumbs' length to the left; and let the cauteries be cutaneous, and let the flesh of the bone be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain is spreading as far as the toe or almost, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four times with the cautery called "poin".
And if necessary is, then make more; and if it seems that the pain is under the kneecap towards the thigh, then make a cautery with the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more great annoyance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted all the feet. After a purge of the belly which brought about his death.
And if the pains are together in two parts, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And let it be scalded until it is entirely red and gives off steam; then place it on the sore of the patient's haunch, and turn it so that it lies upon the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it three days; and then anoint with butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of ointment until he is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery for the fear of his regard, and if we see not who uses it; and yet these are good cauteries, which can be endured by him where it afflicts.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or percussion or excessive evacuation, or from similar cold material spread, none of these likenesses is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after these that the patient be void of fetid pills or others like them, and one makes signs on the back, where the pain holds, three lines of nine strokes each, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauterization be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the hammer's midpoint according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow back when they get up, and fear; and you find it in the last spine of the back and in the appearance that appears on the other spines.
When you see this and you see it cured, then cauterize it with a cautery of the same kind according to this form.
And let the cautery prick each part of the spine equally. And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a piercing cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another. After cure, let it heal until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer a cautery in gibbousness which is in spasms of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the physician calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make the number of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-like according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, when the cautery is done with all the points one claims "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then do the cautery on each knee three or four cauterizations for each part, with all the olive-like cauterization; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand back any longer than until the sparks of the fire are extinguished.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains some pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the ribs or down to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance over the patient and apply medicines. For if you make good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the itching of the scalp
When itching comes in the armpits, and the boils descend to the groin and it is newly so, then it is necessary that when you see it cured, that he does not move at all that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the wind descends from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are repaired, and then cauterize in a sign of nine strokes under the itching on the bone of the elbow, and at all one sign like the half of a circle above the body; then scald the cautery with this form:
until it is white and gives off steam. Then cauterize the boils back to their place; and minister to him with your hand so that they do not return again; and work well on the hips of the patient, and put a pillow and a servant under each hip, and another above the breast which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your might, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, start again once more until you reach the bone; and beware subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; do not burn him; and by this means the patient will not die or suffer other evils.
And know that when you don't reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless. It is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and those of grown people also as great according to theirs; after three days, cure the wound of the cautery with butter until the blistering is removed; after that, cure other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be exhausted long enough, so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if someone ministers to him a well-made bandage, and wraps it for 40 other days; and have good rest, so that he does not work too much and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and high singing; and when he follows this instruction, then is he healed entirely. And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in its chapter. of the itching of the belly
When itching comes in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cautery of the same kind according to its quantity, and let the third spark of fire be extinguished; after that cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at three angles according to this form:
But the first sign is on the joint and make a line across the width above the itching, and another below, and with your hand inside all the way to the bottom of the cautery, nail-like. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being hurt, and this pain lasts a long time, and the remedy of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the fire called "points", and the cautery should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twists and pain. If he is healed from the first cauterization, that's good; if not, start another one on top of it, for such cases are like the member itself, which must change as the part nears, so you should make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of surgery
The surgeons are often helped by fire by great aid, and indeed the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not neglect or leave any part out, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the whole patient, then make 5 cauterizations on the head: one inside the head to the nose, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the occipital bone; and leave your hand so that the cauterization comes up to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the surgery is spread out everywhere and it's clearly failing, then it's necessary that you cauterize those areas on the head according to what we have said, and one cauterization in the neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the hump and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the chest, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are behind the calcant, lest you burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the elbow, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
And know that the more I make cauterizations, the more aid and progress is made; and the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as the healthy ones do, because the body is already too corrupted. And it's necessary that the cauterizations be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron. Afterward, cure the wound with farina mixed with honey and other cures until he is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and emplasters, but it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little way into the flesh of the limb; then cure with ointments until he is healed. And sometimes one makes a cauterization at the hand, foot, and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and however, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease called "ulcers" is festering, and the remedy of medicine is worth nothing, then cauterize with one cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of flesh in the limb, until the pus is removed, and its color changes; then cure with farina of wheat and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colander and almond, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until he is healed.
the cure for syphilis by cauterization
When syphilis comes at the beginning and you see it getting worse, then cauterize around the chancre with a circular cauterization. And although wise men say that one should also make a cauterization in the middle of the chancre; and although this seems to me not good, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once or twice; and more rightly is that it should be cauterized around, with the circular cauterization, as we have said in many cauterizations.
of swelling which cannot be removed
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it tarries in dying, either because of the superfluity it produces or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or due to time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauterizations in succession; afterward leave it so. For it will hasten its dying.
And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterizer to the shape:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterizations have pierced the flesh, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them outside in this way, so that the course of the corruption is alleviated. Afterward, cure until he is perfectly healed.
the cure by fire with iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a wasting away of the member, for it wastes away the members just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat up small and large cauterizers little by little, according to what is needed at the site where the disease is; after which, cauterize all around until you remove all the corruption, so that nothing remains but what is corrupted is removed. And then let it rest for three days, and apply ointment on the burned areas with oil as long as the eschars of fire are removed, and all the corruption. Afterward, cure with emollient oils generating flesh. If you see after three days that healthy skin does not grow, it's good; but if not, then start again the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas. And this wasting away has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but nevertheless, fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure with medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
The hairs that come to the feet
Many times it happens that at the feet, by default, a disease appears which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a big thing needed to be removed that hurts the foot. And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you take one burning iron and shape it like a vulture's feather, and make it of good iron according to its length so that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and have fine edges; after which put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail; and then let it sit like this for three days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice with wild marjoram crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with ointment by rubbing char until it is healed.
And if they are converted by default in the body, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then you must bring hot water cautery; and it is done in this way: take a clay or iron pipe, or a vulture's feather, and place it on the nail and the surrounding flesh, that is to say, porridge-like sores; and put the pipe on so that it surrounds everything, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edges of the pipe come to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water's deep path all the way to the root; and let the patient suffer for a moment the burning of the hot water an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself entirely with all its roots. Do this again another time, until you have reached all those in the body, then cure them with ointments that produce char.
The treatment of the shaker
When some shake due to cold or nerves, or quartan fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or five on the backbone of the back, one cautery between each backbone; and one on the feet, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped part; and then leave the shaker, and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
of foul boils
Sometimes boils or foul boils appear on the body by default, which come from gross corrupted matters. It is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the boil: a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by fire, or of long aristolochic root, or a lenticular cautery. And sometimes one cauterizes them at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow further forward, but are broken off the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after blood evacuation.
When the artery is cut Many times it happens that great haemorrhaging of blood comes from the artery that is cut at the wound that appears by default, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to stem.
And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them very steady until the blood is stilled under your fingers, and no more drips; then take the olive-shaped cauteries, small or large, as many as there are, all of which should be red with fire; then take one, whether great or small according to the size of the wound and the place where the artery is severed, and put it on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there until the blood is restrained.
And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take another one hastily from those that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do these one after another until the blood is staunched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that lies beneath, nor let any other harm come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well staunched, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three methods we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stop blood; and let it be bound and restrained in a manner.
Who will apply the stopping of blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting hot things on, or other similar things, unless it is not beneficial.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have the eye or medicine nearby, then one should put their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch them well until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move one's hand, but moisten with cold water frequently so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and staunched; and make inquiries ahead to gather what one needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the symptoms and causes and treatments and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to feet, and I will go on in this chapter by the same route, so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
And thus as I begin this, dear son, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauterizations, and therefore it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to venture into foolishness. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come with such a bad disease that they will die quickly due to the intensity of their disease and the greatness of their malady; and one must have fear of these things. And among these are those who will give you their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It does not behoove you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and lose; and use prophecy and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, and se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.
Or I have instructed this chapter in the manner of chapters, according to what is before or after the chapter on cauteries, which I have described from top to bottom, so that you may find more easily those things of which you will have need.
Two full cups of water.
Know that this disease often befalls children during childbirth, and when the midwife holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a unknown cause.
And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and all those I have seen ended in death; and therefore it seems to me that one should hasten the work more quickly in such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could no longer be supported; and believed so strongly in the moisture that he would die, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the suture, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut a slit in the head as wide as two noses, so long as the moisture flows; and see here the form of the skull bone:
If the moisture is more thick and the abscess is larger, make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs that the commissures of the head are open on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not seem to be answered: then it is necessary that you cut three slits in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside. After that, close the slits with bandages and powders, and put wine and oil inside, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tents and ointments, and let the head be drained equally, and then feed the patient dry meat from a moist poultice as long as the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you observe where the greatest swelling of the abscess is, and the gathering of the water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then at the place where the abscess is swollen and the water is gathered, and cut according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there is bleeding of blood, so that the patient dies from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
of rheum.
When it happens to someone a disease which is called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help at all, then the last cure is fire cautery with what one will cauterize the two arteries.
It is necessary then, when you see them to be cauterized, that the patient bend their head back; after which they stroke the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck so that it is straight as one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the edges of one and the other are behind the ears, and they are answered; then mark the edges with anointing oil; then cut one and the other with a sharp awl for two parts, until the cut comes to the bone, and that is by the width of the head.
And if you see, push the awl under the artery and cut above it, cutting equally as two go across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood springs up continuously outside.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the length of the space with three fingers, then sign with anointing oil and cut up to the bone; and what needs to be done with the blood is to let it flow outside for 12 c/units, and perhaps a little more or less according to how much the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains above the bone a point of the suture, cut off what abscesses come forth, then drain the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
of migraine.
When ancient migraine comes, and sharp catarre, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and ancient foresight and similar things, and it is not helped by medical treatments or any other means, then we cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends their hair back on their temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it beats well and is not easily responded to except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responded, then the patient stretches their neck with some cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place of hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the awl which has this form:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then take it up high to the pincers, and detach it well from the membranes that are below each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it at the tip of the awl, then cut off that part according to the length of the two chins. For if it is not cut off, blood will not flow from all over.
And take the blood of 12 c/, up to 3 c/; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two strong silk threads in two places, so that no harm comes before the wound heals and bleeding subsides; then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the area with a cautery knife up to the bone until the chins are cut off; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
For cauterization is aid to finish off moisture: that's why it is of greater help for moisture. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries to fill the place with old cotton and put a well-made tent on top; and when you remove them, take care with dry medicines that produce flesh and tents, until they are healed. And if the artery bleeds so much as long as you work there, hasten to cauterize it with a cautery knife, or fill the place with vitriol and strain it onto your hand until the bleeding stops; and if you don't have what's needed, put your thumb on the place until the bleeding congeals, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and then strain it as needed. And what is most important and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery knife, cutting off two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced so that the heat can be kept for a longer time. Because when instruments are too tight, they hold less heat. And it should have between the two knives a space of great width, and then when you have marked where to cut the two joints, and you make the hot iron burn until it reaches the bone, and open the vein in both joints; and be distant between the two shoulders because it is not sewn all at once with this cautery; and that is the form of the cautery.
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the top of the forehead, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine one makes, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel the forehead in a state of trembling as if with fear; and the skin is so tender and moist that the hairs of the paper are fallen, and the papers are scalded and scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary for this cure.
And they called it the "blunt cure" in old times, and is that you do to the patient who has this disease by shaving the hair from his forehead, then making three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions should be like two threads all along the forehead down to the nape, and the other two as two threads along the edges above the papers, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are along the edges above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each wound should be the size of three fingers across the width of the joints.
from the incision which is above the temple down to the second incision; and scrape out all the kernel that is between the two cuts up to the bone on top, then make another cut from the middle incision down to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.
and insert the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first incision; and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that is the form: And put the cutting edge facing towards the charred bone and the blunt edge towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle incision. And cut off all the vessels that are descending from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to what opens out of the kernel, and then make another cut in the middle incision down to the other edge; and then extract blood equally, and express the wound for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and cover with moist cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and asafoetida, and take care that apostemes do not come; and on the third day, release the bandage, and administer great quantity of hot water, then the cure of ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes' humors
When any of them come to a severe and habitual catarrh, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakening the sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and there is great pain in the forehead, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and that catarrh do not come from many veins, and the true cure that is here, it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another one from side to side. Begin at the left temple and go to the right temple, and make the incision down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow onto a sponge, then wash between the two lips of the incision and put in old cotton and linen tents; then bind with cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and take care not to let apostemes form hot; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until char begins to grow out, then apply the cure of excitative things that make char appear.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of camphor, and make an ointment out of it; and administer it to these wounds in order to produce char throughout.
of the dressing of the ears
All that comes out of the ears is one of the three things: or grains, or beasts, or pieces of mine ore or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as jaisses, beans, peas; or flowing things, such as water and oil and similar things.
When something like a stone or another thing that doesn't belong in the ear and doesn't grow there comes out of the ear, put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, distill some violet oil or sesame oil, then administer an extraction; and make the patient snore with condiments, and stop up their nostrils when the snoring comes, and wrap around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear above. Many times it has come out through this cure; and if it doesn't come out, administer an extraction with fine tweezers, and that is the form:
If it doesn't come out with the tweezers, it's good; if not, administer an extraction with a fine forceps of small double-edged; and if it still doesn't come out, make a chain of iron and tie the head of the chain or ear canal tightly, and stop up what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then pull it out firmly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take a lump of glue from which birds take their feathers, and put on some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and wrap a small amount of cotton around it; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out. And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to cut the ear so that an aposteme hot and swollen does not form there; and the manner of cutting is that you first let the patient's cephalic vein bleed according to its virtue, and extract the blood according to its measure; then sit the patient down between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and make the incision as if it were a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your strength, and quickly suck it into your mouth; and continue the cure until they are healed. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, so administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one spoonful of held subtile according to this form:
and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have cut it into many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction may be gentle.
Then it is good to have the patient use gentle blowing first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let there be a cloth on that same ear where the water is. If it jumps out because of this, it's good. If not, take many stones according to the length you should hold them tight and light, and heat them in the fire; and have the patient put one or two piths from their ear into them, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone to stone until the water comes out completely, and thus it jumps out completely; and if you see, take one reed, and stick one of its heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire as long as the thickest reed is burned; then redo with other reeds until the water comes out completely, just as we have said before.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, such as a mouse and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then administer an extraction with pincers; and that is the thing easiest to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you have cured it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not profit, then it is necessary to look at the ear towards the sun: if you see any worms, then treat them with subtle pincers; and if you do not see any, take a cane whose shape is this form:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle end into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck it out thoroughly to the entire cane; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop around the cane with cotton as I said in the chapter; and if they do not jump out completely as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to the form which is as you see:
And it should be made of silver or tin with a narrow channel below and small holes above to distill; and to press inside the distillation with an instrument well-made for this purpose, and if you see, take one scraper and wrap it around the pointed edge with cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and all that you see of your medicines into the cane, and the cane should be in the ear; then put it inside the scraper to all the cotton, and press your hand temperamentally until the oil is distilled or dripping from the ear; and if the patient feels it inside, and the distillations are a little heated by fire so that one can distill in the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicines would not be as good.
of ear stoppering
No child is born without a perforation in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the stoppering of wounds or birthmarks within the ear, and these stoppings sometimes come very far into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is just a little bit outside the perforation, and one sees it well.
That which comes very far in, and one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, it is necessary to put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the obvious obstruction, then work with this entire instrument according to the form:
And it should be gentle and cautious in front and back, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the obstruction is a birthmark or flesh of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and scrape it lightly, until all that flesh is completely removed.
And if the obstruction is very far in the ear, then take a subtle scraper and heat it slightly on the fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you feel the obstruction that the patient feels grief about hearing, scrape lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and move to another wet tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if blood decorations come forth, then dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the blood decorations which are found in the treatment of distillations.
of paper wax
This wax that comes from the eyes of people when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to spread with tenacles and pincers, and scrape off with a scraper from its roots; then put on the lead vitriol broth.
And if there is a scab, then cauterize the lenticular wax with a subtle cautery, and after the incision it is worth moving; and many times they repair, but no part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of huckleberry
Many times they come from the eyes of people some things that resemble huckleberry in shape and hardness, and because of this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the operations are such: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; make the incision then on the wide part, then peel off each part lightly, then take with pincers, and scrape. If you cannot scrape without piercing the paper slightly, do not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, assemble a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing to force it, for the ointments will restore it soon and remove the flesh.
Et if the wax is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper and let the wax stay at one pinchures, and press it from one side to the other; and if the paper is removed by the incision, that does not harm anything; and when the wax is pressed, then lift the oil of salty water, and cure the place where the affected part is painful until the patient is well.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is accumulated on the papers above, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it causes much trouble for their eyes, and they come to have catharrh in the mornings, and are unable to look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on top, and their papers are moist beneath their eyelids that the swelling and appearance have covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place at your thumbs and feel the exinach between.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head in your side; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, then place it over him; and press with your thumbs from one side to the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make a channel in the middle of the moisture up to the spatulate trenching a slit as wide as the wound you would make on the opening of a vein; and make the skin so fine until you come to the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, the exinach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a white fatty piece.
Then pull it out as one piece of cloth worn between your thumbs at the far end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and take care that you do not push into the slit, lest you come to the whole spatulate just to the eye, lest you hurt it.
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit gradually until it appears; then pull it out as we said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the place, and strain through bandages.
And if there are such men who boil and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains; then cure him until he is well. And if he comes to an abscess, hot or cold, then treat with emplasters soothing until he is well.
of the hairs of the papers
When hairs grow on papers that are not natural and become inflamed, they harm the eyes and cause manners of diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the papers and albugine, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and there is the cure according to four ways: or by fire cautery together, or by water medicine as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
You should put the patient's head in your side, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand; if it is turned, that is good; if not, then insert a needle into one thread above; and let it be near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow below these hairs, and draw the thread up over all the paper, and turn it at the top; then make an incision in the part under the paper, under the hairs that are attached, to the entire spatulate, from the great tear to the small one; then pull out the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then mark on the paper a figure like the leaf of myrtle, and all the same it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift the paper which is divided into parts.
And if there is one who needs to cut a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened; then make an incision on all the spatulate above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the great tear to the small one; and let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the key, then skin it entirely; then assemble the two lips with a stitching using a fine wool thread, and clean up the blood, and make sure the excess threads are secure on the eyelids for all sorts of things sticking, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, just leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitches or constraining things, because the paper relives with the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is tedious (as the ancients say), and it is works without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, with three needles separated according to the shape that is here:
then cut off what protrudes in small forces evenly according to the shape that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, then take a needle with one thread and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread below the great tear and another thread below the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your thumbs; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have marked, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is well; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar ointments that soothe.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: so you must use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make an incision inside as I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatulate; and cut off the two ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what protrudes from the paper of the eye, and strain the two cauterizations of the two parties together; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and turn black and fall away, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if it gathers more force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted, and they can no longer point to the hair; and that is the form of the .ij. canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and put in it one thread of soft and subtle silk; then assemble the threads and tie one to the other subtly, and make the length of the threads a palm's length long; then order in the chase one other thread of subtle silk briefly, and tie the chief of the thread; then place the patient's head on your shoulder; and be under the sun so that the works are declared, for it is a subtle and small work; then put the needle through all the chase in the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pierce the paper hastening as you draw it up over the natural hair; then extract the hair until it comes out to the top of the chase on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the chase down to the bottom of all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes out through the opening above and you see it with your own eyes; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for .ij. days or .iij., until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh heals above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural eyebrows, and be lifted with that which you left, until it is elongated and then lift it.
of the blinding of the eye
When this disease called "aleacrati" or the blinding comes to the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the manner of the work on it is that you cut open the swelling, and loosen the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and rose water or almond oil, and linen seed, cooked, and yolk of egg melted in some of the oils, and envelop it in a tent, and cure it thus.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not set back according to its former shape; and this work that we have said is nothing but a remedy for this disease, so that it does not return according to its former shape.
of the flesh which comes in the eye
This disease that is below and truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and cutting and cauterization and similar things; and the manner of the work in it is that you take a needle, with which it has one double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the threads come out in two pieces of flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and gather it together in one broad spatula.
And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is needed, that is good; if not, then take a razor and place it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts inside the paper; and let the pieces of the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the shape of a letter which has no "j" Greek; then remove the flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are worn down from below, from what follows the paper, and then join the two severed parts and sew them with one thread of linen; then apply the treatment for those things we have said, using soothing medicines and tents, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from cutting or sewing or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument of all their power so that they can make the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
of the swelling of the paper
When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is swollen with white of egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the subtle spatula, which is not too worn out nor too constricting, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too worn out or blinding the eye; and your incision, which you use to cut off that assembled part, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and let that entire assembly be healed, and make some time in the eye a salty water, and raise sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and place on the eye damp wool in abundance of egg; and after three days use the cologne and similar things until it is healed.
of the uncleanness of the eye
Know that the uncleanness is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard scab, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when you touch it with iron and cook it with pincers, cannot be removed; and both of these similarities begin around the great eyelid, and grow little by little until it covers the entire view and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes; and lifts up the paper with one hand, then coils the uncleanness with pincers, making it small, and stretches it upwards. Then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or cow on it, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the uncleanness, and make it pierce all the way to the end of the needle, and tie the uncleanness with one thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape off the entire hair from the side of the uncleanness that follows the prune and silk to the hair's tip. Then cut off what remains at the root of the eyelid, following the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid so that by the incision the body does not produce tears as usual; and sometimes it will set itself on the corner, and on the thread, just as we have said. Then one must scrape off all the softness of this form:
Et garde que the spatula does not touch the fatty skin and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pours into the eye a little bit of bitter oil, and makes the person fall asleep with litargire, and leaves them until the next day; then cures what needs to be done until they are healed.
And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle in, and the surgeon cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicine; and it happens just as I have described in the division; and if you see it closing, then work on the patient's oil and take the spatula lightly and quickly according to this form:
And pull the nail upward subtly, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the oil a mixture made of litargire and red colic powder, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as it happens with aposteme hot, then milk it, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the wound in the oil causes great harm, then suspend it with a needle, and cut off a part but not all, so that there will be no excess bleeding; then distill into the oil red colic powder made of litargire.
of the flesh that grows on the prune
And the flesh of some men grows sometimes red flesh, and covers the prune and holds it back with papers and turns to the outside, and seems like a gourd rose; and the work is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then you do the eyes, and coil all that flesh into suitable needles for this, and sustain it by force; then cut off the first layer, and go cutting up to the razor edge until the end, and take care not to bleed the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the nail and with the small forces that one removes the shell, just as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then pour oil of bitter oil or distill red colic powder and similar corrosive medicines into the oil, and put cotton on top with an egg yolk, so that it may be assured of hot aposteme; and if nothing remains, and the wound heats up to you, and you doubt hot aposteme, then leave the oil and cure the aposteme with soothing things for hot aposteme; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make all flesh stuck in the oil by this appearance.
But it is also necessary that you ease the cure of each oil weak in natural way; and in accidental way, by iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
The shells are red veins that are covered on the oil, and tolerate the eye's work and weaken the oil always. It is necessary then to the first that you look if the oil, in which the shell is, is full, and there is no other disease besides the shell; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, then suspend those veins with all the needles according to your wisdom, and be the needles subtle double according to this form:
And be two needles by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then coil those forces with subtle needles, and remove the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and take care that you do not bleed the oil at all with the spatula points, and make this work at midday before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cut too much than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil green and red colic powder to corrupt what remains of the shell.
And if you are unable to coil all of that in one hour, then make a poultice on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of hot aposteme, then begin again according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The surgeon so names "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and by medicine with burning water according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a device in it that you should cut into the aposteme, where it should die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take it with all the instruments that have this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and should be made of iron into one sharp point, and should be pointed like a razor as it is in this present form:
And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the surface with medicinal powders.
If the bone is sealed, and flesh grows, and the bowels of the belly are sealed, and remain thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other device than to return the fistula to its natural state according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and medicinal powders, and when it is uncovered take one force according to this form, and be the key of iron at three angles, and the handle should be reduced to the head as you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the wound, and remove your hand from the oil a little, then turn the entire force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what the vein goes in if they hold their hand on their belly; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the area, then the matter will go to the navel; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the issue of the oil
When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the pupil, nor any decrease in vision, it is necessary to instruct the patient; then make them well, then apply poultices or hot cloths to relieve pain, for the purpose of promoting healing, then place a poultice made from aloe, encens, sarcocolle, and myrrh on top, and then strain the eyes; then apply an emplaster above with bandages and drapery; and the manner of the drapery is to take soft drapery, double each piece four times, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eyes; then strain it tightly with a durable bandage, and repeat the poultices for relieving pain without causing injury; then remove the poultices and let the eyes be strained day and night, and if the poultice becomes worn out, it is necessary to restrain it much; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, that is good; but if not, repeat the emplaster and drapery and poultice and ventouses until they are well.
rupture of the vitreous humor
When disruptions occur in the vitreous humor, then it opens up and comes forth like a grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected part below up to where it is above, then insert another awl where there is a doubled thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the vitreous humor around, and strain it well, then extract the awl and place a wet linen cloth on the eye in abundance of egg white; and let it be until the doubled thread sticks with the vitreous humor, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor, each part forming a circle of drapery, until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear greatly inflamed, then pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes from the depth of the eye, and drain the moist discharge and lower the eyes, and enter it soon; then strain it until they are healed.
from the bottom of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but the bowels that are assembled in the eye, resembling a liquid flowing down, and it's not actually liquid; and the manner of its appearance is such that you sit the patient on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from two parts, and gently move them until you see the bowels coming up to your eyes; then it will be fixed, and will not descend and will be uncovered the light, and the patient will see things as they were used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is actual liquid, and if the descent of the bowels is not prepared as we have said. Then sit the patient in your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make a small hole on the corneal tissue by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the bowels come out; and when they are issued, then distill hot liquid honey mixed with honey or fenugreek boiled with honey, and cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
tears of the eye
We have the resemblance of tears in division, and what is necessary for piercing; then work according to health. It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light because of the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly and strain it strongly; then place a piece of paper over the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then place the point of the instrument under the cornea through the thickness of a finger's breadth from the eye to the part of the lesser eyelid; then push the instrument called "almagda" forcefully and turn your hand until it pierces the eye, and feel that almagda comes into the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the distance from the pupil to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument just above or below one line after another. If the tears are flowing now, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, and if the tears flow back up the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, gently extract almagda by rotating your hand slightly; then pour in a small amount of pure gemstone water and leave the eye inside. Then put on either side of the oil, or a wet linen cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant egg white, and bind with the healthy eye. As for us and those who are of our time, we place a common broth with abundance of egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, since there are some people who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deeply into it, but make a subtle opening; then insert almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a suitable bed, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be vigilant about all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then release him from that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary to do this during the cure or after the incision now, but you must wait for this, because the tears flow rapidly.
If an aposteme comes, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and address it to what soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then release the sight and place a thin cloth over its face for some days, and be in that dark house. And then come out of the house little by little, and turn back into your own condition; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in his land they perform an almagda puncture, whereby water is sucked out, but I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of old; and by chance it's a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because one who does not know them sees them; and they are truly of earth.
And the heads of these are of the same subtlety, and the ends in three angles are sharp.
of the flesh on the bone
Sometimes bones or flesh are joined in diverse ways, because of which there are some that resemble scorpions to many feet; and if it is such a bone or one enchanted with bad color, and if it has a bone softened by good color. In that then of these bones which is softened and not enchanted, you must have the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the wine onto those bones, and treat them warmly; then take what you can support with the subtle sharp instrument on one side, until you know that bone is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, then open it all with one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if it does not trouble you, or the abscess is closed, do as the cautery dictates; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the blood is stanchied and all bones are removed, then pour on the bone vinegar and wine.
If the bone works and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is bone newly formed in the bone above, so that instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary that you put one piece of linen thread about a finger thick, and it be greased with hands, and have between each knot less than or equal to one dot; and place the patient's head on the end of the thread at his power, and guide it in an aromatic smell until it comes down through the nose into the mouth; and many times do this for children at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to make it; then hold the head that comes out by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out by the mouth with the other hand, and know one after another as we are on the thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that bone, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the bone just as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of bone; and then put a piece of cloth on the bone some days until it is healed, and if it needs medicinal powders, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which they distill oils and medicines in the bone.
And it should be of silver or earth, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead you as well; and if you see, make a closed cane, and the instruments should be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the bone
Many times a disease called "telul" grows on the head of the bone and becomes great and large, so that it is visible to behold; and because of this, you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all flesh, then place on top the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting until it is great, take heed if it is hard, of bad color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron as it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of bad color, and you see that you can cut it all out, empty the patient and cut with no fear, and care for the bone with drying and restraining things.
when the bone is cut and cleaned
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these worked cartilages, it is not very beneficial, more than in some men. It is then necessary to do as with any other, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips to a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if the lips are already split apart from one side to the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their keratin until they heal, then join the two lips to a seam, and strain them, and powder on powder with dragon's blood, and incense powder; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of great or other plaster suitable, and let it be as long as it cures by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the seam is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses on the lips
Many men have abscesses inside the lips, hard and resembling grains of peas, smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each knot, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply the leech after the incision with vinegar powder, until the blood is stanchied; and then remove the leech, and cure the lip with drying things until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times a joined flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you sustain it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the blood or fluid flow; then put on top vinegar powder or other drying and desiccating powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times occurs, then cut it again and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and this is the form of the instruments to cut.
of the sordes
Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unclean things that are unpleasant and harsh; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as far as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; it is necessary that you have the patient sit in your hands, and his breath be on your holy breath, and remove the teeth or rough surfaces until nothing remains; and so do with the blackness and yellowness and jaundice and other stains, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, then begin again the next day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, so that the scraper that removes the teeth has different forms than the one that removes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you tarry from pulling it out as long as you can, for this should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to regret. Then when the patient is constrained to pull out, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth's vitality. Many times the pain torments the patient, and thinks that it is about a holy tooth, and causes the good tooth to be pulled out; and yet the pain does not depart from them because of this, until the bad tooth comes out, for we have already wanted to do this to these saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth's vitality, it is necessary that you scrape all around the tooth as much as possible with a very hard spatula to protect the gum from every side; then move it to your left or right with subtle tongs at the first notch and notch, until it is well extracted, then secure the tongs; and have the patient's jaw in your holy place between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking, and if it does not jump out, take one of these instruments and insert it gently on each side, and then move it as you did initially. And if the tooth is pierced and bleeding, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the perforations are; and if you strain it subtly with tongs, so it does not break while straining; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and the tooth will revive in the patient by the malice of the root causing greater pains than the first. And take care that you do not act like the ignorant saints who, through their haste and boldness, sometimes break the carriage and do not bring what we have told; but they often cause great diseases to come forth from the roots that remain, or from the carriage that they break, as we have often wished; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the wound with vinegar or with ale and salt; and if there is bleeding that often occurs, fill the wound with vitriol broth; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, with which one pulls out teeth first, should be long-pointed and having thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And should be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and should be well made of iron, and should have teeth to hold in place.
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains at the pulling, it is necessary that you put a wet cotton cloth on the wound for one or two days until the wound is softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri", by which the head seems to be like a surgeon's; and should be made inside as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the whole carriage around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a plane, of which this is the form:
And should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, that is good; if not, then take the aid of all instruments, by which the forms come as follows:
And if one uses this instrument which has two nails, by which this is the form:
and other instruments that are before in proportion to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great tongs, by which this is the form:
And this instrument should be made so that it cannot break; and knows that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find for themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are such diseases where the old did not teach a single instrument due to the diversity of cases; or if it breaks the carriage or another bone, or wherever it may be, it searches for instruments which it needs, as I have told you, and takes the aid of gestures, by which this is the form: And should be strong and well-held to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and extract; and then restore the wound with medicines corresponding to this, and if there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then treat it with all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly formed after the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be straightened or filed: then draw out; and if it is paired with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the form, and looks like a little beak, and should be made of iron with a sharp point:
And the coping piece and piece by piece in a few days due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file as this is the form:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little over a few days, so that it does not move until it is smooth; then the plane at the end to any rasping, and if the tooth is too rough and bleeds the tongue, it is necessary to file off the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the teeth in front loosen, either through percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without spitting it out, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, and this does not work; then one must restrain them with a thread of gold, for silver threads become green and putrid, but gold never changes; and the middle thread should not be too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are misaligned, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the hooks between the teeth on both sides, as many as there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and gently, so that it does not move; and be sure to tie at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the hooks with a pair of tongs, and assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue; then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it slips or breaks, tie another thread; if it holds and serves like this for its entire term, that is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two false ones, as you see:
Et when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, piece by piece, as we have said; and does not intervene except for those who are wise and patient, and sometimes makes a mold of an ivory tooth, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and holds it there so as we have said, and remains and serves thus long time.
of binding the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or naturally at birth; or by accident of a healed wound; and the work is such that you do to the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your care, and lift up the tongue; then bind the nervous ligament of the large one, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it's due to a sudden wound, then put an unguent and bind with a cloth that ligament; and watch that the incision is not too deep, lest the artery beneath be injured; and when you have done, lift up the water rose and easy, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen tent; and let the patient wear it each night, so the wound does not become septic. And if blood flows from the decorrement, put vitriol on the wound; and if the blood increases, cauterize with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another treatment until he is healed.
and if you see that it is of fusel color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards blennorrhoea, and there is moisture, then anoint with unguent, and apply a poultice made from subtle spodium, and deliver from one part to another; and if the blood flows excessively to your treatment, put vitriol powder on it until it is stanchied, then return to your treatment until you have completed all further; then lift up the water of rose and silk, and cure with other treatments until he is healed.
of abscesses in the throat
Sometimes an abscess called "godath" comes inside the throat, which is properly called ".ij. amandres", and when you cure them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take heed: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and fusel color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron either, also for the decorrement of blood; but let it stay until it dies, and then you will cut it open, or it would burst on its own; and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, have prepared the instrument to bind, but first examine whether the abscess has settled down and is quiet. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with his hair in your care, and work the mouth and take the serjeants between his hands, and press the tongue beneath all the instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be of silver or subtle lead, just like small knives:
Can you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the unguent and insert it into the amandres, and train it further above as much as you can; and do not touch anything else with cloth, then bind to the instrument, of which this is the form, that seems like one force; and although the head is curved, and one end bent towards the other, they are very sharp, and made of iron or andainne:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then bind it with forceps, of which this is the form:
And it should be split on one side and named on the other; and when you have bound one of the amandres, then bind the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and rose-colored water, and if decorrents of blood come, then gargle the patient with vinegar, or cooked apple peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanchied; then cure him until he is healed; and sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat besides the .ij. amandres, so bind them then as you bound the .ij. amandres similarly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, to wit, one small-sensed abscess; and I had carefully closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died within a day or two if she remained thus. The abscess was so large that it had pushed out two fingers through the two perforations of the navel. I hastened then, and inserted an unguent into one side, then drew forth and brought out a great portion of pus; then refilled the other perforation with an unguent and worked on the mouth and pressed the tongue; after which I inserted the unguent into these abscesses, and bound part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Thus the constricted passage in the woman's throat was opened up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again and again, and refilled the space that I had emptied out, until it became very large. Then I bound it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus she remained without growing; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened to them after me.
of the warts
When they rise up from the warts and are inflamed and long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if they are below large and rounded, it is called a wart. When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscessed area is quiet, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to bind it; and that which is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusel color or black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision. For there is great danger on the patient. It is necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, about its shape and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have made a reminder of above; then insert the unguent into the wart, and draw it out below, and bind it with one of the two instruments which I have said in the incision of the amandres. And it is necessary that you do not bind more than the superfluous part that is outside the natural term; for if you bind more, you will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the amandres, and cure him until he is healed. And if the patient has fear of binding, then it is necessary to use an artifice at the cauterization of the sense that fears. The manner of the cautery is with hot water. It is that the patient puts his head in your care, and then presses his tongue against the instrument which we have said or written in the chapter on cautery, and mixes with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using this instrument, of which this is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d'une cuillier, et met l'estruement a tout la medicine sus l'uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu'elle ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l'uve, la quantite de la moitiet d'une heure, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l'enveloppe sus aucun estreument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l'estruement a tout le coton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s'arrede sus l'uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfaiz, puis laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jours ou .v. Et si tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés lou cautere l'essue entor l'uve, de coton embut en burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arisez d'aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu'il soit sanez.
This cure is more skilled at the incision than the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put a little water in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with firm earth, and inside the pot have one instrument shaped according to this manner. And it should be of silver or of earth, and one of the keys should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the steam rises to the vein through the pipe, until the vein is mortified; after that, repeat often until the vein dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess hot, for many things happen then; and do not make it more than at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a pipe and put an eggshell inside the head so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the steam to trouble the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Many times it appears at the throat as a bone or fish spine, or nothing; so it is necessary that you search what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, until you see the thing move; and what does not appear and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit while the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing appears again through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or one piece of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes out, it will be stuck, and then you will pull it; and if it does not come out as we have said, take one instrument of cloth according to this form:
And the instruments should be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised high up; and take care not to touch the epiglote, lest all life depart, nor push the bone inside; and make sure that the patient puts the instrument in, because he may see or the thing is forced out; if he pushes it down, or pulls it out entirely through the instrument evenly, until it is out.
of the snot of the throat
The snot of the throat is never medicated, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient to the sun, and then press his tongue to the instrument that I told you. And if you see the snot, pull it out slowly with a little hook or fine pincers worth doing so. And if this doesn't work, take a shaped pipe and put it in the throat of the patient, then put a hot iron on the pipe, and do this often. And if the patient holds water all day, then take a full cup of cold water, open his mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the snot feels the water, it will come out.
And if it doesn't come out as we said, then subfumigate the patient with asafetida at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the vein; do this many times, for it will come out without trouble. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are live coals, and cover it with a perforated cloth, and in that hole be the keys of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and have the patient put the head of the pipe in their mouth, and close their mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the snot; and now the snot will come out, and if it doesn't, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and drink no water; and then there is need for it to come out through this governance.
And the form of the instrument to which one uses to pull out the snot is, when it can be seen, like curved forceps for easy entry into the throat; and it resembles a spoon's beak, and has a roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold this form:
the chapters on abscesses
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is recorded hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is the same as itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are on the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the leucotomy are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess is not to be pierced until the swelling is gone according to its completion; and there are those that must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that come in joints. For when abscesses come in joints, and one leaves it until it is rotten all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Et covient que tu saiches l'oure de la perforation de l'aposteme qui est meur selonc l'acomplissement, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the departures of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the quieting and settling of the top of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit where it belongs depending on the location of the abscess, and where it opens up movements; and the perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is at hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no swelling.
In those that swell, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in a charnut location, it is necessary that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, the body's veins will be stretched from the discharge of blood, and they will be filled with much foul matter; and by chance, the lips and the depths of the wound may harden. And for some abscesses that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the member needs. It is necessary that you bring forth small abscesses with small perforations; and large abscesses with large perforations, and many fissures according to the likeness of the grandeur of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the core, and cover; when it has become as one would make a banner, and is exhausted, it is necessary to do so as one does with babies: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such from which one cuts like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angels; and if there are such where one makes a round shape, and other shapes and similar coverings.
Those who do not have a head, as if an abscess is superficial and soft, it is necessary that you pierce thoroughly; and when the abscess is large and has collected a great amount of pus, and you pierce, do not pull out all the pus at once, but rather pull out part of it; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then pull out something above it; do this many times with gentle movements, until all the pus comes out; even if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or elderly men decrepit. For the hopes sometimes shake with the issue of pus, which by chance could kill the patient, and you would not be aware of it. Therefore, proceed with great caution through this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, apply the dressing to the wound; and look if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, it is necessary that you place a tent in each one so they come together against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and tie it just until the third day; then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs at your work, apply cold and moist compresses wrapped in a cloth, and place it on the bleeding wound many times. And if the bleeding persists, apply governance and care, and the powders that I have said are good for this book, and if it is winter, and the wound or abscess is very nervous, it is necessary that you put up wet tents and cloths in wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the skin is charred, it is necessary that you put up wet cloths in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and dress and care for it, as is necessary, until it is healed.
And this is what one must know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have told you how one should proceed in treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
none (this appears to be a single word "des soros" without any accompanying text to translate)
Small abscesses come from the chief of the head, and they are like us who are in toils, just as a silkworm is in its cocoon, and there are many similar things. Some are fat and those that have moisture like puffed up flesh; and some are hard and rocky to cut through, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make it difficult. The work of cutting is that you test each instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then pour it above the long one. And when the moisture has been emptied, then scrape off without leaving any skin; for it will return again if anything is left; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and these things happen to what remains of the night. And then start the cotton again, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it no longer remains of the night; then care for the wound with ointment in a suitable manner, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds one fat night, then cut it according to this form, from the long one; and throw away your needles, and scrape off all around, and put all your care into pulling out what is under the skin where it lies; and if the artery makes it difficult for you, do as I have said afterwards. And similarly do with an abscess that is rocky, and of cutting and curing, just as I have said.
And the cutting above the rocky and moist abscess is lighter, because it has little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head or where there is no moisture, and one of these abscesses that I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a dry stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if anyone had done anything to it, they would have made as much a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming from the head, more than those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent part, so that the pus can issue; and care for it as necessary.
none (this appears to be a single word "des scrophules" without any accompanying text to translate)
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and sometimes in the groin, and each one is surrounded by its own skin, just like the night and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and there are many similar things to these abscesses. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some malignant ones that do not want to obey health. So when you see a good disposition to touch it, and it has the same color as the body, and is quiet on each side, and is not arched towards the neck or artery or conduit, and is not very deep; then it is necessary to cut it above, and scrape off each part, and use the two lips of the key with your fingers, if you need to, just as we have said about abscesses on the head; and pull gently and carefully, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor are the sutures too tight or too loose, so that your hands escape, and you do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l'artere, and if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vitriol powder or some blood-stopping powders in the wound, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound becomes soft and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work until you have completed it; and then check if there are any small scrofulas left, cut them off and clean them. And if there is a vein in the root of the scrofula that is great, do not need to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall without harm; then dress the wound with old Egyptian cotton soaked in oil.
And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no longer any superfluousness due to the greatness of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut the root of it and draw out the pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluousness, pierce them where they appear to be most swollen; and pierce thus as was said before, depending on the situation, then apply poultices with oil and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then dress it with ointment going into flesh, until it is sound.
none
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the cut of the throat, which is called "epiglote", be avoided; and one does not make a mistake by doing so, because all the veins and the plexus of the patient's evil humors are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both. When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to flee the perdition that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles, or by the quantity of the syphac wound, not in the cartilage.
and that one is suitable for the section of the epiglote as there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is timid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its length, then cuts the leather until it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the syphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm in the channel which bursts forth through the broken place and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour is passed about which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of leather and sew it all smooth without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is sound.
Albucasim says that one should not do this just yet until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death is approaching. Then cut off the epiglote because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
and for this reason the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the throat;
and I was called to cure her, and I found her already as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that had issued from it, and I knew well that she had not cut the vein or guided it only through the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was sound.
and nothing happened to the maiden except that she regained her voice, and returned afterwards to her usual condition;
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglote there should be no fear.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of a jade, and it occurs very often in women;
and it occurs according to two ways: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no artifice.
And the accidental one is according to two ways, of which one is similar to a goiter, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery. and there is fear, and it is not necessary to work with fires that are small in the one who is little, and test and search all the interstices. if you find it like a large boil, and it cannot be moved by any vein, then cut it, as one cuts boils, and treat it to its entire head, if there is no swelling. and search thoroughly, and heal it as needed, until it is sound perfectly.
of boils
Many kinds of boils are, which I will tell you all the likenesses;
and now it is necessary that I tell you all the difference that is between boil and abscess.
I say that an abscess is hot and feverish, holding until the ebullition has passed, and the purulence is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
With the boil there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one pus which is its own sack and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins like a jade, and becomes large.
and they are according to two likenesses, or white, or moist, and much of their color is as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the boil, that you test and inquire first of all the instruments which are called "interstices", according to what its form will come or will be shaped afterwards.
And the manner of inquiring abscesses from us is that you take or find the moistest place within the abscess and turn your two fingers in and out, until you know that the instruments have pierced to the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the instrument and take care in case it jumps forth.
If moisture comes forth, regardless of its color, then treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after extracting the instrument no moisture comes forth, know that it is hard, then treat it in a cross shape and take hold of it with forceps, and scrape it lightly from each side and preserve the skin over which it lies as you would lead out a healthy wound with the needle;
and if you cannot lead it out healthy, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to the abscess through many times;
and if even a small part remains and the blood gives you grief, then apply the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put hot soothing things on the abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the abscess is great, then cut away both lips of the wound, and treat it with whatever flesh is left.
and if the vein's contrition is against you or another thing hinders and applies the place of vitriol powder, and let it lie two or three days until the wound purifies, and rest the ebullition of blood; then return to the cutting what remains from the needle.
See here the forms of the instruments used for extracting, and there are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small; and among them there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and among them there are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, in order to search out abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are made of citrine stone, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are considered most valuable, and they are more proven in searching out the black lumps for encircling fistula abscesses.
and they are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula openings.
The forms of the lancets are many in resemblance, as you see here: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are lancets that have two black lumps of three kinds also.
and there are lancets that have three black lumps, and they are also of three kinds; and there are lancets that have two black lumps, and single lancets with one black lump, and they are all necessary in their place.
The chief of these is the one with which we cut, and there are some that do not cut much more than from one side, by which we scrape away the abscesses, so that we do not cut into the vein or the nerve.
and among these instruments are those with handles wrapped in cloth, so that the patient is not aware of the opening of the abscesses.
and they are three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see.
and we do not use them much except in the limbs, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scraper for fistulas, according to this form, with which blood is staunched.
and it is placed sometimes at the place where the veins and arteries come together, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become swollen when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to proceed according to this form of the line b up to g. then scrape away the fat, and apply medicine to the wound that is leaving behind flesh, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
and if the breast droops down and is deformed due to its size, like that of women, then make it in two folds above, with two similar incisions. so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b up to line g. then scrape away the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever else is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest or due to the depletion of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive oil. and leave it so that the remaining flesh and fat can be consumed, then treat it until it is healed.
(abscesses of the armpits)
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulas with nodes, and among them there are those that contain moisture.
Then those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with oil suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then treat it as we have said by making incisions in scrofulas, and if the wound produces pus, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
(of the rupture of an artery)
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sealed, then many times abscesses come forth, and it happens just as with an inflamed vein and abscess.
and if one knows thus that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it in your hands, you sense one strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, then it is rejected forthwith appearing.
and it is foolishness to cut this abscess, and even more so when it is under the armpits and in the groin and neck and in many other places, and is very large. It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and he who is at the head should also avoid it, and in him who has an enlargement on the artery that passes above the long skin.
It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and he who is at the head should also avoid it, and in him who has an enlargement on the artery that passes above the long skin. then work the incision into the one-time, and carefully depart the artery from the skin, so that it is uncovered.
then tie below it an awl, and make it pierce all the way to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two loops, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
then tie the loop that is between the two loops with an introducer until the blood flows out that is there, and loosen the abscess.
then administer the treatment that will unravel the bow, as long as the knot breaks. then treat all the ointments suitable for this, until they are healed.
and if the abscess is due to the opening of a vein, it is necessary that you daub with your hand all that you can of the abscess onto the skin. then tie the awl below the loop that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have one double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side. then bind the abscess, just as I told you, or tie one of the two parts to the two knots of the thread.
and if you doubt that the threads will not come loose, then re-tie another awl on all one thread below all the abscess at the incision of the first awl, and bind the threads in four loops.
then close the abscess until any excess fluid has flowed out, then close the excess fat and leave what is bound.
then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come on the nerves when they are bruised or from too great labor, and similar things.
And these things happen more often in the joints and in the shoulders and in all places where there are articulations, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of flesh, and it occurs in many dispositions without pain.
and when one strains it strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the very depth of the body, but below the fat.
and it goes well from all sides, and does not move forward or backward, nor above or below, and the one in joints should not be closed with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
and the one who is on the head or on the forehead, make the skin at the suture. If the abscess is small, then tie it with forceps and cut it in its root;
and if it is large, then suspend it with an onion and scrape it, then cut it open and assemble the wound at the seam, and let it heal until it is healed.
of big hanging boils Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere on the body, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and has subtle roots and large swellings; and there are small and very large ones.
and I have seen one man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and were corroding with moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces, and in the other 6, and the work in the incision is such that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist and has a subtle root.
so cut it open at the suture wide, and be present with the fire cautery. For when cutting comes too great bleeding of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient panting and fearful of the incision from the iron, then take one thread of cloth well made, and bind the fungus as we have said, and let it be for two days.
and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the cloth thread until it cuts the fungus, and choose by it without much labor; and if the roots are large, I would fear to cut even myself for the belly, but you can well cut half of it.
then cauterize it so that it does not revive; then treat the wound, and take care that you do not cut the fungus which is of mixed color, poor sense, and milk-like appearance.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.
when the bowel is full
If the appearance of the bowel comes from the cautery of a wound or the opening of a syphilitic boil, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it often does in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from flatulence;
and if it is due to the rupture of syphilis and the flow of bowel, then the color of the abscess is like the color of flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various issues. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it springs back, and then returns, and perhaps it becomes stuck, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through great labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, then it appears by these signs as the large and hard abscess, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is due to flatulence, then it is sore to the toucher, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or flatulence. So it is necessary that you leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowel, then it is necessary that you command the patient to straighten their leg, and be stretched out entirely, then sign around the belly. then instruct to sit patiently between your hands then go around the place where you have marked on all the skin. then cut off the top of the abscess to the extent of its great thickness;
then work on the middle part of the abscess extending over the ligature, and put your finger's index, and cut the intestine; if you find it stuck to the ligature, then release it, and push the intestine forward from the belly.
and if you find the bulge, take hold of the cinch, and cut away the excess.
and if the artery makes you resistant or the vein, then go around it well, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads on them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross like you were piercing.
then draw the abscess into four layers on the needles, and if you see, take out the needles, and leave the layer until it can be done, and remove the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and can be done, then treat with what is needed, and heal the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and can be done, then treat with what is needed, and heal the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound with what is needed, and bind the wound.
of the ulcer
We have said in the division about the similarities of ulcers, and how one should work with medicines, and how to avoid burning with cure; and we say that an ulcer starts in the thighs, and great caution is needed in the treatment, and the ancient ones say that when ulcers are on the skin or can be removed as if they were in the breasts, and in the groin, and in similar areas, one should remove it all at once when it begins; and when it is old and large, then do not approach it, for I never saw anyone cured, nor did anyone before me.
And the work, when it is on the skin or can be removed as we said, is that you purge the patient with black coles once; then make him healthy if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient a good place to do the work; then throw away your needles or ulcers, and scrape off all parts, leaving nothing behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the wound with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you resistant, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat with another treatment until he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is only eclites; and one should not touch iron on these two similarities: namely, tympanites and hydrops, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not help, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as all digestion of the belly and similar things; if there is no doubt; and if you see the patient with great vigor, and he only has dropsy without any other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should thus work: hold the patient straight on your hands, and have him sit with his belly pressed out behind, pushing the water to the lowest part of the stomach; then take the spine as follows: And be cut in two parts to a point, and yet not so deeply that it can come just to the intestine when you put it in, and not bleed.
then look to see if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if it's necessary that you cut on top of the belly three fingers' width below; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly three fingers' width; and if it's due to wind, then it should be on the right, and it's not necessary for the patient to lie over the incision so that the excess fluids don't flow to that weak place.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and tie it, and lift your hand to all the spine between the skin and the sacrum as when shearing to the quantity of an fingernail or around; then pierce the sacrum until the spine comes to the eight place, and that is the place of water, then treat it freely, and put this instrument which has this form: And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of lead or of light earth, and in the lower part one small hole; and on one side three holes, and two on the other, and one on the other; and are the joints cut as a feather, and that is the form of the incision which the writers shape like a pen.
at the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now descends on the instrument; empty then half or one third part, for if you empty more than is necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls faint, or approaches death.
but empty according to the quantity of his vigor, and according to what the dispositions of the vigor of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held because of the key which closes the hole that is on the sacrum, which I have spoken about, by piercing in this manner; then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
do this for a few days, and beware of pouring out all the water at once. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then the treatment is that of sepulture or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he stays still; and treat with desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, on the liver, and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the member (i.e. the penis) Enfant who do not have warts on their penis, or the warts are small, or they are not in their place. So it is necessary that one pierces all .i. spatumile very finely according to this form: then put a thin plug of pitch on the wart, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four; and when it wants to make urine, so take out the plug, let it urinate, and then put it back; and by chance there is no harm, for the urine that comes forth does not loosen the plug. Those who have small warts are cured by the medicine of pitch, as we said, and they will expand. Those who do not have their wart in its place are blackened, for no one is born with a wart at the head of the penis, why it cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot release because the matter cannot come just to the marris, and that's an evil disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then places the head of his penis and cuts it as if it were the shape of a feather, so that the wart may pierce in its middle, as it should; and be careful to stop any bleeding that comes many times, and if there is any, use what stops blood, and cure the wound until he is healed.
of penile pimples Many times these boils come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of skin; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you take them to a subtle onion, cut and clean all of them, then put wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure with divine ointment until he is healed. And if the boil is malignant, with a foul color and smell, it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it. When you have cut it open, and the boil is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the boil that is inside first; and when it is closed, then cure what is outside. For if you cure it all together, it is not certain that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and comes blackness and corruption to its own place and in the groin; so it is necessary to cut out everything that is black and corrupted, then bind with an ointment of honey and flour made from the rind of green pomegranates and vetches, then cure with other cures until he is healed.
And if bleeding comes from the wound, it is necessary to apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help in two dispositions together: that is to say, at the bleeding of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a pipe of pitch into the urethra of the penis, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the foreskin at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or there is wound or abscess, it is necessary then that you circumcise with a sharp instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis be delivered from all parts.
and if it is a great trouble to divide these things, it is necessary that you circumcise with a very fine instrument at the head of the penis and skin; then carefully cut between two, and put a thin cloth of wet linen in cold water, so that it does not tear again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the cutting off of continuity like other wounds; although when we do this work at our will and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision around one finger's breadth, with great force, and all in one new moon; it was cut so that there were two folds, and by chance if you cut above and leave below.
And then the recutting comes, and it is double pain, and the point of the member at the wound is not assured; and at the wound's cleansing by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times thus it happens that they do not need cleansing and I have seen this.
Of the cleansing that is done with force on all the ligament of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well on one entire thread tension; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin; and the manner of the first operation is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only making him tie the thread around the penis so gently, and then make him laugh in all ways you can. then make it rest between your hands straight ahead, and repeat the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then cleanse well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the signet with a double thread, then tie below one piece to another ligament; and hold it at two doves by the second tie on the pouch and index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then lift the blow above quickly and pull the head of the penis.
then make it rest between your hands straight ahead, and repeat the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then cleanse well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the signet with a double thread, then tie below one piece to another ligament; and hold it at two doves by the second tie on the pouch and index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then lift the blow above quickly and pull the head of the penis. then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and top of the powder a cloth soaked with egg yolk cooked in rose water, mixed with good and fresh rosed oil, and leave it there until the next day, and cure with another cure until he is healed.
The form of the forces at cleansing is this: the two heads are held and cut, and they are equal in size as the middle fingers.
The error of cleansing is when the wound inside oozes at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the edges make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it in place with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if they exceed three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then let it be until the abscess has subsided, and cut lightly; then cut as much as you can, and take care of the part of the penis, so that nothing will harm it.
Cure then the wound of sudden powder, that we have said to treat powders, and if it bursts outside measure, and it goes above, so it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
Of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to constriction of the kidney, or blood congealed, or bowel, or stone, or similar things that we have said in the division;
And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent forward over his knees; and his feet should be placed on the back, and he should stretch out his belly from the part above the back, and tighten the patient's abdomen as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction using all the instruments called "siringue", which has this form: and it should be of silver, with fine and light hair, like a bird's feather; and its length should be about one and a half palms, and it should be fine at the head.
And the manner of urine extraction is that you take one double thread, and tie it at the head to a small pouch of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the siringue; and cut off the superfluous part of the wool and put it just up to the head of the siringue, then oil the siringue with oil or butter and hen's egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist olive oil and boiled water.
Then gently place the siringue into the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the pubic bone; then insert the siringue just before the bladder, and feel the patient's urine come out as far as the empty space, and this is not done in accordance with this order unless the guide or sheath twists; then pull out all the woolen pouch and follow the urine with it, then draw out the urine and make it flow.
and begin again with the siringue until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient.
of the diseases of the bladder
When bleedings or blood come into the bladder, or putridity is assembled there, and you see it dripping with waters and medicines, then make use of all the instruments called "clepsedre", which has this form:
It is closed and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the leads are trimmed so that the medicine can be applied well to the penis without addition, so that one may draw out moisture and apply when needed.
and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, place the tip of the caster into the moisture, and pull out the liquid that is inside; then draw out the moisture with the caster, and then push it strongly back in; then the moisture will go in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the fine caster with which one cleanses the bladder; it is thus:
And it is of silver or horn, and the head is higher; and below it is one sheep's bladder that fits into it; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see being used to cleanse the bladder into it, then tie it between two breasts with a good double thread, and heat one end of that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the caster into the penis, then strain your hand over the bladder so that all the moisture flows properly, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread into those holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone and extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between stone congealed at the kidneys and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone congealed in the bladder is more common in children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and then it appears, and grates the patient's penis, and repeats many times, and then it hardens; and most of these stones are formed at the foundations; and childhood cures quickly until they are three years old, and it is very grievous in old age, and it is in middle-aged people, between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by cleansing with a clyster, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders the finding of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and have him bend down and move forward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes comes out from above; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his hips, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the bladder, then hasten now to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't come out with just one touch, moisten your two fingers of oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your two middle fingers, if the patient is young and complete; and put them at the foundation of the bladder, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your two fingers, then guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your two fingers and push it out behind where you will be cutting.
And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out with his right hand the cords above, and with his left hand to remove the skin that is below the cords in the part where one makes the incision; then put the spatula in place, which is the form:
And it is located between what is between the pubic bone and the fundament, not in the middle but at the left side of the naively; and be straight above the stone, and both feet should be on the fundament, and the width of the strap so that it is wide enough for the stone, neither too large inside nor too small.
by chance the pressure if the foot that is on the fundament, it will jump away without effort; and know that there are stones where there are angles and margins: it is difficult to get out; and there are those that are smooth like a slope, and rounded, from which the exit is light.
Therefore, where there are angles and margins, make the strap larger; and if it doesn't jump away, you must draw out on the pincers which are also like a file at the head, to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you can insert below one subtle instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot manage it thus, then widen slightly the little hole, and if the stone decays, then strain it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, then insert the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out, and the smaller ones after that if there are more. And if it is very large, you must divide it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out quickly on one side where the flesh cannot close; but nevertheless strive to extract, or to break apart with pincers, until you pull it out in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and place over it one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess; then revive the patient on his back, and do not release the bandage until the third day.
And when you release him, then arise the patient very well with oil and water, then care for him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if hot abscesses come to the wound and corrosions, and congealment of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means so that the urine is collected in such a way that it does not flow with the urine: then put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and harm it.
then lift the wound with vinegar and oil and salt, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works you do to cure him, that you bind his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra of the penis, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I say, by cutting away at it many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure. I have already proven this thus.
Take one iron rod in this shape and let it be fixed at three angles on one spike:
then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the penis slightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand in small pieces, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon after, the urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. It is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then make the penis come to the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
of women's stones
There is often the case that stones are lodged in women, and if it happens sometimes, then the cure is grievous, and it is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who exposes herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more inward than the stone of the man, therefore it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman who knows well, and find one who can do so, and if you cannot find one, then look for a chaste subtle mirror; and present to her a mature wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her finger on the fundament and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then force her to press it under her finger, and command her to put her left hand on the bladder firmly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until she comes to the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the body, where it appears in appearance, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make the first incision small.
then put your hand in the incision, if you feel the stone so far into the wound that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; thus knows the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the blood overflows, then apply vitriol powder to the wound, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men, to aid you in your work.
And if the blood overflows, and it's from the artery that was cut, then apply powder on the wound and the strain of tents and bandages, and don't start again, and leave the stone and don't try to extract it anymore, lest the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of blood is calmed and the limbs are steady, then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed.
of flesh hernia
Fatty membrane is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white leprosy, which is below the key of the kidneys, where the egg is contained; and it is called "leprosy", and sometimes it is properly in the fabric of the egg, as if it were another egg; and that is the skin of the kidney between the white leprosy that we have said; and this happens only rarely.
And the generation of this fatty membrane is from weakness that comes to the kidneys, and it spreads out that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white like water, and so forth.
and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is white leprosy that we have said, then it is an abscess on the kidneys, about as long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the kidneys, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper fabric, then it is an abscess with a part of the egg, and for that reason one thinks it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the kidneys and the white leprosy, then one senses it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test all around the quartan square, by which its form is as before. Accordingly, what comes after the quartan, judge what is inside.
Accordingly, what comes after the quartan, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be fed according to his strength and the replenishment of his body; then the surgeon places a pillow on his back, on something about a foot high, and puts many cloths under him.
then sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and stretch out the rod to one of the two flanks of the key of the kidneys;
then take the spatula left, and cut through the skin of the kidneys among the long ones just below the elbow, and let your incision be entirely straight as you cut through the skin of the kidneys to the white leprosy, and scrape subtilly according to your power.
then pierce the white leprosy with an aqueduct to one large perforation, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers, and lift up the white leprosy above; and do not touch the key of the kidneys, but only the white leprosy; cut it out or in pieces similarly on its side, subtilly so that if you do not cut it well enough, the water will return.
and if the egg bursts forth to your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white leprosy; then assemble the two flaps of the key of the kidneys with a suture, and then cure it as for other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you bind up the vessels that are suspended, doubting the disintegration of blood; then cut open the kidney to all the suspended parts, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that they are two fatty membranes; then cut open the other part as you did the first one similarly, then extract the blood, and put a wet linen cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound.
and put another wet linen cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and place it above the two kidneys, and put double cloths on top, and bind it with all the bandage that is according to this form.
Then take two cloths, and employ them in torn linen according to this likeness, and be assembled by suture in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the keys takes up on the foundation just to the back, and the others at the part of the elbow; and the other takes its chief on the two armpits, and let it all be assembled in the restraint in the buckle of the breech.
and sometimes this fatty membrane is medicated with a fire cauterization in place of iron, and it is that you take one cauterizing subtilly, and cut through the skin of the kidneys, and be heated as we have said, so that the white leprosy containing water is uncovered.
then take the cauterizer according to this form, and pierce that white leprosy with your fingers, and scrape it off with this hot cauterizer.
And cut it in all the ways that you can, until you have removed all of it; and be sure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more certain; and be careful about the disintegration of blood, and make sure that the surgical work is.
and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscesses or disintegration of blood or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this operation because of its horror, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the indications that we have said that fatty membrane is laid.
so that the patient sits on a light stool; then pierce the abscess in the part below to the entire spatula-wide, and place the perforation of the length of the body; and let the holes be wide, so that all the water flows forth.
then place cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow out, then cure it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow water to flow out of the wound in the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a quill or instrument used for treating the water of dropsy, as described above; and enlarge one part of the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the kidneys
Know that in the section of this fatty membrane there are more fears than one disposition, therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave it as it is.
and I will tell you the operation and the likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the kidneys; and it is by many causes.
It's to know that it comes from bitter superfluity and ague, which spreads to the kidneys, or from percussion.
and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess.
and by chance there are grievous and piteous abscesses of poor color, and sometimes they come from the opening of an artery or the swelling of a vein.
When it is by the opening of an artery, it is known by the warm abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it does not behoove you to touch it.
He who is caused by the swelling of a vein is known by his appearance at the expression of the fingers' touching.
and can well make the cut according to this appearance and on other parts. and is that you cut the key of the abscess, then lift it up and treat the white scab, and deliver the suspended part from all parts of the abscess.
If the abscess is already opened with these signs, then it behooves you to treat the abscess and cut it.
and if it is dry on the scab or in what is inside the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver all that tautness and cut it again.
And if the birth of the scar is in the back, then it behooves you to cut all of it and extract the abscess, as we have said.
And when your work is complete, then dress the wound with wet wool in rose oil and wine, and then care for it with other cares until it is healed.
of the abscess of the abscesses
This is an abscess enveloped in a wrapping similar to that of a berry, with the softening of the abscesses. and if the patient grievously complains when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is just as painful as that one before.
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It behooves you to have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bind the suspended abscesses downwards towards your hands. to all the vessels that are near the groin, and the master should tie them, and stretch them firmly;
then cut into the fatty tissue, making a wide incision in the direction of the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then put an awl where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come out, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupt moistures.
then care for the wound as with the others where one begins to bow, so that no vessel bleeds that could nourish one of the abscesses.
for by this there is no evil that comes, and if all the vessels come together, then it behooves to extract the abscesses from all the vessels. so that the ears do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rot of the scab. The events of this remedy are by the section that comes out through the scab, or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, therefore the intestines descend into one of the abscesses.
and this rot is either from the scab or from its extension, and comes in two ways through many causes: either by percussion, or by jumping, or by braying, or by lifting a grievous burden, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is from the extension of the scab are that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are even to the very bottom, because the scab presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the scab, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in diverse forms, under the skin near by, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's exit through the scab.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these fires of fear, for which one should avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place with his hand within the wound, if he can reach it. then be pressed upon his neck between your hands, and lift up the hips.
then stretch the key above, and cut all the skin of the abscesses from long. then bind inside the leaves of the flaps according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the ears may issue.
then scrape away the scab that is under the skin of the abscesses, until the white scab is fully exposed on all sides.
then place your index finger in the direction of the abscess, between the white scab that is under the skin of the abscess and the second scab.
and depart from what is behind the abscess, and between the second scab; and then move your right hand downwards into the key of the abscesses, and stretch the white scab upwards to your left hand, and lift up the abscess towards the wound. and instruct the assistant to stretch the abscess upwards, and release what is above the tie.
and ask your hands if there is any intestine enveloped or white scab remaining, and if you find anything, then bind it to the belly underneath.
then take an awl with a thick thread made of ten threads, and bind it in the back part of the scab, which is after the skin of the abscesses, after the wound, then cut off the ends that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the scab, which we have said is under the skin of the abscesses, with a strong bond from two parts. then envelop the ends of the threads and bind them together from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in there, lest an abscess grow there. and place the ligament in the middle according to the first long ligament twice that size of the same one, and then leave two inches below the key of the kidneys the great one of a span.
and after that, do the same with all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is below the skin of the kidneys, so much as the blood flows and the bowels, just as we have said before.
then smear moist wool in oil, and put it on wounds, and I will place the ligament that we have said. And sometimes the white cicatrix that we have said is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and leave the ligament until it takes care of itself; and if it tarries in settling, then raise it with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it settles.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
of flesh hernia
In this case I never saw anyone dare to perform the treatment by iron.
And the ancient ones say that it is done in the same way as the thread that is wrapped around the bone, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after shaping above and slightly below.
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the inguinals, as we have said, and opens the abscess; and not one of the intestines descends to the kidneys, and if it does descend, it is soon and repairs all hours.
and yet if it stays too long in this position, the wound or cicatrix grows so much that the intestine descends.
and this happens through the extension of the cicatrix that is at the inguinals, as we have said, for it is stretched, then becomes softened and inflamed, and opens.
and the cure is done by fire cauterization, as we have said before; and sometimes it is not cured by iron in this manner.
and it is that the patient lies thus on his back between your hands, then cut the inflamed swelling of the rupture from wide to narrow according to the size of three inches.
and then extract the cicatrix that is below the skin which follows, then take the rat and place it on top of the appearing part of the cicatrix.
and press it to the bottom of the belly, then sew the two appearing parts of the cicatrix on top of the rat's head, and sew one and the other.
and then extract the rat's head, and do not cut the cicatrix or extend it in any way, as I have shown you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines.
and then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the sons, let him not be troubled and cure the wound, until it is healed.
The cicatrix is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more suitable for this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the kidneys
Many times the skin of the kidneys becomes soft in some men, because the organs inside are softened, and it is easy to see; and when one wants to treat it, one must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see fit, sew off the excess soft skin at three seams or four firmly; then cut between the seams, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed, and the thread leaks.
of the chastisement
Know that chastisement is considered an omen in our law, and because I would not want to speak of it in this book, and it is only necessary for two manners: one is when the mirrors respond when asked to answer and provide a cure; and the other, because we often need to chastise certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and horses and other animals. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
Of the hermaphrodites
Of hermaphrodites it is said to be in two manners like men: one manner being that between the two testicles it opens as if it were the figure of a woman's nature, and it has hair, and sometimes it urinates too. And the other manner is in women, and it has on top like a beard and two testicles. And the cure for man and woman is that you bind up all the swellings together, and cure them as one would other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Of the tonsils
The tonsils are a swelling that grows on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it just as big as a hand, and this is the cure. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tonsils with your hand or with pincers, and cut them lightly; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occurs, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and there is another swelling that arises in the mouth of the jawbone, and fills it, and by chance jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you remove it, just as we have said about the tonsils, and treat it until it is healed.
Of the errant
The Errant is when the natural form of a woman is not clearly seen, or if the womb is small; and it occurs by birth or accident due to disease that has come upon it; or it's because of a swelling, or subtle or thick pus, and it forms in the belly, sides, or underneath, wherever it may be; and it prevents conceiving, childbirth, and by chance also having flowers; and the knowledge of this is by looking at the bulge. If the swelling appears close, then go to your right or left. If it's due to subtle pus, and it's near the two kidneys, then hurry and do as follows: put your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back with her legs spread; then the two kidneys will be formed, so that the subtle pus is removed, and the swelling is overcome; then take lint, moisten it in oil, and place it on the wound, and have the woman rest at home each day, so she cannot heal. And if the pus is hard and thick, then you should cut it open with a spatula like a leaf of myrtle. If the swelling is from born flesh, then suspend it with pincers and cut it; and have medicines that stop bleeding, such as dragon's blood, frankincense, and egg yolk together; then administer a wide strip of linen, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus be long-lasting, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured by other cures until he is healed. And when in the belly comes born flesh, then it should be cut open according to this manner, unless it's an enchanted aposteme. For an enchanted aposteme that is in the belly, one should not touch with fire.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which burst without warning, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thickened; and we have said in the division about their likenesses, signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure. I say that hemorrhoids and thickening, when they are cut open in the belly, and do not sense pain, there is no cure by fire. Those that are at the mouth of the belly, which can be felt, are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then apply the altelul to tongs, and cut it off at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain bleeding, such as dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomace of green apples and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply .i. plaster on her back. And if it stays, that is good. If not, apply leeches to the back and breasts so as not to cause pain; then take lint, moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the wound. And when the aposteme settles, then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like .i. rough head, so it should be cut off as I said about thickening; and then cure it until it is healed.
Of the Apostemes of the Belly
Of the Apostemes of the Belly
From childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first know the figure of natural childbirth, and signs that are when you see the woman going down below, and desiring to give birth; then hasten the child to come out forthwith; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue beneath its head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her belly, so that the child may come out soon; for when it descends above its head, the secondine is with it, and the excess of its superfluities are purged away by good purgation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes upon its feet, or upon the body or the shoulders, or upon its stomach, or in some other way; and it is converted by chance on its neck, and by other evil figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid her.
If the child comes out above its head in natural issue, and the woman labors grievously, and her virtue is weak, then make her sit on a stool, or women hold her; and make her nature rise with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then pour the midwife between her thighs the small spatula of which this is the form: and rend the secondine, and cut at her umbilical cord as long as the moistors that are inside are flowing; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek and oil of sesame; then make her sit and strain with condiments, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: thus the child comes out now. And if the two hands come out forthwith, then you must gently tie them back and back again; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift up her feet high; then take away the stool from the ground, and keep the woman so that she does not stumble getting up; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut at the hands with the scissors that are placed here before, and extract the infant, and tie evenly.
From childbirth on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to pour oil up high; and then turn it back and forth, until it is even;
then take one of the feet and stretch it back and forth.
Can't it jump just to the crotch, then command her to sit, and make her strain with condiments; if it jumps forth, if God wills it.
And if it is not forth as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is done lightly.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take musk powder of aloes, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and outside with this ointment, then make her sit in a warm bath down to below the ribs;
and when she is moistened below, then make her a collar of myrrh, and put it on her, and let her stay for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her strain and keep her mouth and nose shut, and take hold of her belly lightly, for the child is now jumping. From childbirth on its knees When the child comes in this form, then put the midwife's hands back and forth;
From childbirth where the infant comes with one hand hanging down It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and take away the legs carefully;
then administer the musk powder that I have told you of;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand; and rock the child according to the natural figure, and make her strain, and command her to take hold until the child comes out forthwith.
From childbirth on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife takes hold of her hand, then turns it back and forth, and rocks it lightly;
and when it is even, then put on the natural musk powder of aloes and oil, as we have said, and command her to move back and forth.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and command her to take hold; and make her strain. of the same manner for all the umbilical cord
of the same manner for all the umbilical cord When it comes forth in this way to all the umbilical cord, then cut the umbilical cord with your finger, until the moistors are empty;
and if the child bends on its face and neck, then cut it off at the jaw, so that it is not retained, and the child dies;
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as is necessary, and command the woman to take hold sometimes:
From childbirth of twins Know that twins are born sometimes, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it often happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live if they be named;
I know that they are multiplied, and are divided by the sac that divides them, which is attached to the jaw;
and sometimes they come out naturally like one under, as we have said.
If they come forth smoothly, so that the treatment is as we have said, and the ball is subtle, and does quickly and easily what it does; and does thus as it is worth moving for salvation. of many children
of many children Never are formed in the womb, that is, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise and glorious reason.
and it is necessary that the ball knows all this, because similar things happen to it by chance; so that it does as it is fitting.
of a dead child
When you treat the woman with a dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to perform manual work; if it is necessary that you know whether the woman has a healthy virtue and does not have an accident or fear of death;
if it is necessary that the woman be lying on her back, and have her heels inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the attendant holds the cord of two parts, or she is lying in bed so that she will not be troubled by the descent of the child;
then grease the mouth of the womb with moist oil mixed with alum and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the ball's hands with these oils and these mixtures. then pour them into the womb lightly, then take one or two or three as needed and pour in the ones that are suitable for this;
and watch to see if the child is prepared to descend onto its head; if you fix the onces in his ears or neck or mouth or palate or beneath the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs;
and if the descent is on feet, then fix or pinch and tie at the sides moderate.
and it is necessary that he holds the onyce in his right hand and puts the cord between the fingers of his left hand, and pours it all into his hand lightly, and fixes the onyce in any of those places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
then fix it against another onyce or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, so that the onyces are toothed in order to hold, as this is the form:
And if a part remains, then anoint the ball with some of his fingers with oil and pour it into that part, and treat the other part;
and if none remains, then place this onyce or more high up and do so until all comes forth.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by the constriction, so that you wrap it around a cloth, so long as it all comes out;
then wrap it in the joint of the foot or at the knee, and so it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in its issue, or it has a sharp-featured assembly, so that you pour the spatula-like spine between your fingers and mold the head and extract the water; or you roll it on the instrument which is called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus do the same if the child has a large natural head; and then pull it away from the bones with pincers,
and if the head springs forth and it is constrained to the forehead, so that it is split, as long as the moisture which is in the issue comes forth;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces to the extent that you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, so that it is necessary to make a hole until the moisture runs.
And if the child is on its feet, then the extraction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the womb is gentle.
And if it is narrow in the belly or at the breast, so that you should extract it onto a cloth wrapped around your hand; and make the belly or breast, as long as the moisture which is in it runs.
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, so that the ball anoints his hand with the substance of the womb, and pulls it up to the mouth of the womb. then I put one or two onces in it, and pull it out.
and if the mouth of the womb is constricted because of a hot abscess that has come in it, then there is no need to trouble oneself. instead it is necessary to administer things moist and greasy; and the administrator anoints with ointments, and makes it soft, moist, and soothing.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, then administer what we have said to a living child.
and if one cannot do so, then pull it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said to hot abscesses that come in the womb.
and if hemorrhaging comes from blood, then it should be stopped with water and other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose womb had contained a dead child, then she consulted one doctor on top of the other, and rejected the death of the other. After a long time, an abscess came in the belly and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great turmoil.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I searched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in better condition. and the woman lived for a long time like this, and sometimes a little bit of blood would come from there.
and I have not recorded this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to intervene.
how to bring the bone back to its place
Then comes the form of the pressure, by which one is bound to books; and for the two turns at the two joints of the two ligaments. However, the combs are more subtle than the restrictor, and are made of ebony or boxwood.
and the mouth of the wood is one and a half fingers wide, and the edge of the trees is one finger thick, and as long as one and a half palms. and between the two ligaments there are two joinings of this same wood, which are firm in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
and these two joinings are placed in the mouth of the bone to open when one turns the two combs.
Another form, more subtle and light in appearance, is made of wood from ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of pincers. and have two joints at the two bones, just as you see, one palm long and one finger and a half wide.
and when you see open the bone at all the instrument, then make the woman sit on one side, feet extended and legs spread apart, then place the two joinings together in the bone, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand on all the instrument, just as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the bone, until the ball makes what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their shapes are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been prepared, so is the work more hasty, and higher among men for their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her exhale gently, and hold your hands at the mouth and navel. and if she jumps for that, well it is.
If not, then take one pot, and make a hole or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the bone, as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassialign and centaurry.
all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put one end of the pot and the other head into the mouth of the bone,
and let it steep until the vapors come into the bone; then make her exhale, as we have said. If the secondine jumps quickly. And if she remains after this cure and is not well, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or with mugwort of hawthorn, and then apply it to the natural place.
and wishes for the secondine; and when she has found it, then take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the bone does not move during extraction. but it is necessary to move it lightly to the right and left, and then draw; if it comes out and dislodges.
And if the mouth of the bone is narrowed, we have said the cure of exhaling and fumigating with herbs.
and if she is not pleased with all that we have said, then take care that you do not force the extraction.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the bone, you tie to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with ointment of tetra-pharmaceutical.
so she will recover and regain her strength, and come out well; but nonetheless, when she has purged, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
It is therefore necessary to make suitable fumigations for this: none of the ancients have proved that fumigation with cabbage and dried figs is effective.
The form of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman to retain flowers and secondine is this:
And it resembles seeing a chain, and one puts the head into the natural place, and the wide ends above the fire.
and let the fumigations be above the coals, and let it steep until it is exhausted, and start another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation pierced, but rather it is obstructed by a subtle membrane. So it is necessary for the patient to pierce that membrane at her finger, and not pierce too deeply with a sharp instrument, and guard the passage so she does not touch it.
then put a moist linen on top with wine and oil, then apply the ointment cure until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it is not obstructed, put a loop of flax in the passage and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And whenever this obstruction comes from a sudden wound or abscess, then it is necessary to cover that suddenness: if it is cured, as we have said of the flax loop.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulations, and grow bigger when they come from above the foundation or in the space between the two parts.
if it has one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is ancient, it opens up, and absorbs moist air, white or subtle powder.
and sometimes these fistulas persist; and are known by this that there is or ejection or windiness when the patient has an emission, and by chance one jumps out.
And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and reach just to the juncture of the thigh, and just not to the knee.
And thus one knows that the fistula persists at the foundation, and does not persist. and it is that you place your index or foundation finger, and place a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuousness.
And if it has tortuousness, then I place a thin thread of flax or one hair of horse, until you feel the thread or hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and he does not come with vomiting or wind or fever, as we have said: know that it will not burst forth; if you hasten to treat it.
And when the fistula is pierced all the way to the bladder or all the way to the urethral conduit, if it causes urine to flow and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is pierced all the way to the groin joint, then the intestines come out at the normal place; if there is no curvature and the invention of pain around it, then it goes away downward, and neither medicine nor ointment is of any value.
and in these pierced fistulas there is no cure except for surgery, and the vanity of foolish doctors who interfere with them.
In that which is not pierced and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have proved.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts his legs up to his groin, and has his groins inclined towards his belly. then insert an iron probe, or a wooden one if there is curvature, as far as you know where the intestine comes out.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then it is necessary that you insert your two fingers there,
if it then feels as if the intestine has pierced; and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the sac or flesh, then know that it is pierced. so do not work on it, for one cannot heal it.
One says however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;
and the aid one makes there is to cauterize the wound subtly according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and put it all hot in the fistula, until it comes near the fundament; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these burnt-off bits are like the feathers of a bird;
and then treat it with moistened tents in butter, until those burnt-off bits are gone; then treat it with ointment anointing the flesh and healing.
If he is thus healed, that's good. If not, in no other way can it be healed;
and if the intestine enters and does not pierce all the way to the fundament, which is between your two fingers and the tent, and there is a thick covering of flesh or sac, and you see the fistula at that point where the covering meets the key; so cut off at the beginning of the fistula, and put it right before the tent, and then cauterize after, as far as it comes to the head of the tent;
and the intestine will be delivered and fall away; then remove those burnt-off bits that resemble a bird's feather, and none will remain.
And if the blood flows forth, and runs between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine at once.
For the fire cauterization brings together two good things: namely, the burning off of those burnt-off bits, and the stopping of blood flow and the drying up of moisture.
then treat with moistened tents in butter or in crushed hazelnuts, until the wound drains downward, and the burnt-off bits are gone from the bottom.
then heal the wound with ointments that dry and harden tough flesh, and are the dried medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
And if the fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament and is far from the body, then insert your finger or the bottom, and search for it.
If you feel the tent and there are two or three layers of skin, flesh, or fat, or it is near piercing, then there should be no more than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or cut off the excess to the foundation, or if you can, place tents and treat it as before.
and do not go too far down to the foundation, lest you cut off the tenant that holds it, and the evacuations come out unwillingly. then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut off at the foundation, either by tent or by another instrument appointed. then remove the burnt-off bit that is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And some fistulas are like this: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation near the skin above. so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form: And I insert one twisted thread into two, and insert the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that perforation, so that you insert your finger or the bottom.
and pull the head of the thread, and tie together the two ends, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one or two days;
and restrain it at no time, until the threads cut off those burnt-off bits that are between them and falling away.
then heal the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways you can, if it is not too far down.
For it does not behoove you to make a hole cut so deep that it reaches the foundation, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like thorn that makes the fistula is much rougher on one side and cutting-edged. and on the other side not, because of which you should not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
Ulcers are according to two manners: or they are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short time blood flows. and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture.
and anoint it with a small amount of yellow water or a small amount of blood, and have the color of the body
and the cure of those who have it in the foundation is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves by lying in chambers until the foundations depart from them and appear as sons. if it is hastened, and you hold it with pincers or at your fingernail, then clip it at its roots.
and if the bandages cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them up by one cloth or cotton or a piece of camlet. and extract it to your hands, then clip it, and powder on some warm powders that are in place of cauterizing. or you cauterize it as is said or written in the chapter on cauterizing, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the foundations cannot depart, then enema the patient with a biting and harsh purgative to wash what is in the foundation, so that it may depart openly.
when the patient can be reached, and if the sons are gone from the foundation, then the cure is light. and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pincers, and clip them, then treat as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you bring the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, and then draw out the thread above and cause the needle to pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is of the width; and strain the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood.
then place on the foundation one moist cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave him until he has defecated, and when they are done, then treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
of the burning of fire or foundation Many times there is a burning in the intestines and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you remove the skin above at the tip of a spatula or with your fingernail, so that it does not allow it to become moist. then treat him until he is sound as is necessary.
and if it cannot heal, then re-cut the raw area more strongly than before, until it heals thoroughly and is scraped clean. then treat him until he is healed.
of the tremor Fomication is a small appearance of furrowed skin above the body, and it goes very deep.
and sometimes the truth is frozen and one feels it just like death from tremor, and it comes to all the body, and more in the hands than in any other place.
And the cure is that you take a cord made from an owl's feather or a strong goose feather and place it on the tremor, until the cord surrounds the tremor entirely. then turn your hand around all the cord until you clip it entirely around the tremor, and insert the tremor deeply, and extract the tremor from its roots.
And if you see, then do it with a cord of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and tracing above.
but not pierce, so that it stays at the two ends, and presses And if you see, then cauterize the tremor as is written or said in the chapter on cauterizing.
of the form of the purgative At times one makes a purgative of silver or archaut, or melted and hammered iron; and at times one makes these small and large instruments according to how they are brought forth.
Those then that one brings forth in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the purgative, small and great, is above large, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and it has a deviation or the belly is bound, as you see, and the strings are pierced inside; and has two holes on one side and one on the other.
and is the belly or if one puts medicines into a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
and has between each hole one string of space, then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted wire in ten or twelve turns, and gather the belly as if it were a goat's stomach. and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then purgative; and this is the form of the circle.
And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purgative with oil or egg white or similar thing, then insert it lightly.
then grasp the purgative with both hands together, until it is fully visible, then extract the purgative, and lift the patient's legs up to the height.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then hold it as long as it can; and if the patient sleeps one entire night, then it is a greater help.
And if you purgative in the illness of belly disarray, and the medicine hastens to come out, then re-purgative until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then the purgative should be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle purgative above which the skin is strained.
of wounds
We have already said in the section on wounds; now we will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, and cutting with sword or knife, or lance or stick or similar things.
or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will start with simple head wounds, because the memory comes in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from a stone or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess: if it happens to heal quickly from the head wound itself, even if it comes out with blood from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part.
and instruct the patient to fill up on wine and thick foods.
And if it does not heal, then make his meat less rich and let him not drink wine or eat flesh.
and put something on the wound if an abscess comes, a moist cloth soaked only in rose oil or vinegar.
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and it's not moved by air or powder, which I will say a little later.
and if the air has moved it, then put on some unguents until it is healed.
And if the wound is great like a cut from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with sutures, just as I will say about belly wounds, in suture.
If the wound is exposed to bone and is gaping, and only holds by a little bit, then cut it away; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as cooked testicles and wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
And if you find or skin putrefaction, and it's not on the bone, then cut away all the putrid flesh, and throw it away, then treat it.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it disconnected, then tie it with a thread. and if that doesn't help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it's that you put in this powder which sets when the air has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of quicklime, and mix the powder subtly, and fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly, until it has thoroughly healed and joins up with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it be without binding, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with lime alone, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but only when the air has moved the wound.
And if the air has moved the wound, even if it's in its early stages, then one must not put that powder in at all.
but rather put on some digestive unguents, or fowl made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it drips down. then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it's small, then extract it with subtle forceps.
and I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and one of the head, but if the jugular vein or artery is cut.
If it's the jugular vein, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything restrictive on it, for it harms the veins and makes them retreat. and not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the veins is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but make the medicine sweet, like lime washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and wash the wound also in sweet water. and other minerals according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then puncture them or go lower.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes from it, then uncover it, tie it, and cauterize it as needed.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes. so cut the gullet on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape. and then bind it gently, and let it be for some days, then treat it with drying unguents until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it away. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave until the wound putrefies. and let the flesh be separated and laid open at the issue.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from a lance or knife
If it's a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of festering around the wound that make the patient faint: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it's not deep and is fresh with all its blood, then don't put the powder in at the first hour or bind it tightly for the blood that doesn't flow deeply. and congeals in the heart, and kills the patient. but I put on an attracting unguent, and bind it twice a day.
and if you don't have unguent, then put in the wound old cotton to absorb the moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. If there is no convulsion, nor bad trembling of heart or faintness from exhaustion. and when you see the good dispositions, then you know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with tents and other treatments, until he is healed.
and if it cannot heal or open, then you know that there is a fistula; so cure it as one should.
And if the wound is a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or on the face or back, then cure the one in front.
If it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and treat the burned areas if they are raw. and if they are not raw, then let the wound become purulent, so that it will facilitate extractions;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, middling, and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestines or the membrane of the intestines are torn, whereby their introduction is hindered;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a great one,
therefore it is better to put the intestines back in gradually, rather than all at once. because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, so they enter more slowly;
and for this reason the middle wound is worse, because one must put the intestine back to its place before touching the other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch of other wounds on the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing has come out from the intestine, and if there is something to put back, it is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or one cloth of linen in lukewarm water only, or you heat it in water mixed with squinat, and cypress, and spike, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes make it stay still, and be patient that it will only swell to deflate.
And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestine with water or hot wine that has been cooked with mallows and marshmallow. because by this it facilitates the entrance to a small thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut off hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is slower than the cut. that one should not cut without great necessity there is;
and that is the instrument to split it:
so cut within in the curvature and do not go further, and see where the shape is;
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, then put it back in its natural shape in its proper place; if you are able to do so, for this is a difficult thing.
When the wound is large and it is in the part below the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back. and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then make sure that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say about large and middle-sized wounds.
For small wounds, use what appears suitable to you,
then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and that is the common manner of stitching.
and that is the common manner of stitching. and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave a space of about two fingers from the head of the wound, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce both sides of the skin with the points of the scalpel.
then strain it with a double thread around the needle from both parts, and bring together the two sides of the wound gently,
and then leave a space of about two fingers, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this until you have used up all the needles. until the entire wound is restrained;
and are the needles suitable for small and large wounds, because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be moderate;
and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
lest they cut and open the wound before the healing;
and then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or cloths on the points of the needles to keep them still. and leave them there until the wound is healed.
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two.
The second stitching method is common, and it is that you gather together the two keys of leather and the two keys of iron altogether on an awl where there is one strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced these keys all three together,
and when you have pierced these keys all three together, so then remove the awl from the part where you started, in the manner that one counts threads;
and put a space between each stitch, as thick as the width of a minor denier;
this stitch is good for a man,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
who was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's breadth long, and his intestines were protruding two palms' breadth long,
and the wound was in the abdomen. I brought back his intestines, and it had been so for twenty-four hours.
and the wound was healed just in fifteen days, and I cared for him, and he was cured.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in one place where there was none to be found, nor any medicine; and I put a piece of old cotton on top of the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the awl and insert it into the part outside, just up to the inside;
when it has pierced the leather of its own accord straight on, then take the head of the iron or thimble where you have inserted the awl;
and make it pierce from the other side into the part inside, just up to the outside;
and the intention of this stitching is that you stitch as the pelter makers make their pelts, and that you leave once the iron or thimble on one side and then pick it up again on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly,
is like what some people do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads of the iron to the other head, in such a way:
insert an awl or head of the needle nearby, and make it pierce just that one; and leave the two heads of the iron; then turn the awl, and make it pierce from the outside part just up to the inside; as with the two heads of the iron;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part just up to the inside, in two other heads of the needle that are on the other side;
and this is the second manner of stitching and the most common.
Galens says this saying, and some people bear witness to it,
one must stitch the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
and one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew hides;
and know that when the rupture is inside the belly, it is the stitching more difficult than of other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the heat has changed it, then put back the intestine and the bowel; then place on top a powder of sweet earth,
then put back the intestine and the bowel; then place on top a powder of sweet earth, and if the heat has changed it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and sew up the iron and needle; then treat the wound as with others, until he is cured.
and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton; and move it two times a day until he is cured.
For you don't need any other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not cause community with the principal members, then it is good to moisten linen lightly with oil of temperate heat, or with rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or purulence in the bowels, and this often occurs, then cleanse with black wine tea, and similarly if the purulence comes just to the intestine;
and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal if it is wounded, and it's because of the weakness of veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to that of dogs.
And if the wound bursts forth from the abscess, then put it back in its place as with the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned green or black, then it is good that you bind the part that is black, so that no blood may flow from there. because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two keys hanging from the part below the wound up to the outside in order to ease the extraction when the abscess breaks and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people,
because I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was enveloped and became a fistula, and there came forth evacuation and flatulence;
I applied treatment to it according to what I could do, and I did not cease to subtletize until he was cured, and the wound was sewn up.
And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
and some experimenters said that when someone has a small wound in the intestine, they must be bound in such a manner: take fresh membranes from great testicles, then sew together the lips of the wound and when the membrane has opened up the mouth, then place it on the two lips
then place another membrane after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered
and sew up the wound. This headpiece stays in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal
in this way: take the head of this intestinal thread that has been well stripped and then tie to the head of this thread a fine, twisted linen thread then push the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it in the proper way;
and this manner of stitching with membranes is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the greater intestines, there is no remedy or salvation, except subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is congealed and runs backwards.
And a fistula is according to its white and hard nodule, or one that does not cause pain. and it is also congealed like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes runs clear and straight, and at other times thickened. sometimes little, and at other times sufficient;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and has no scar, is nothing other than by one of the eight causes:
namely, by the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard scarring inside and above the lips, which does not allow new skin to grow. or because there is too much pus; or because the flesh is rotten and the material is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because of the property in the region which is late in digestion and slow in health, and flows naturally by nature; or because there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments of medicine in the division.
Therefore it is necessary that I let you know the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the sacrum, or intestine, or bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous sanitation, and there is only labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the level I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and you see it understood, then take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, then cut;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of cloth; for the cloth bends around the twistiness;
and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the holes;
for the moisture flows from one hole to another, and cleanses it;
then cut the bleeding at your discretion, as you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is congealed in depth;
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein; or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you;
or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you; and take away the rotten flesh and corrupt scars that are inside; and then continue the treatment until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well congealed in its proper place, then it is necessary that you cut deep, as much as you can; then put moist tents of medicinal water and push them just to the head of the fistula;
then put moist tents of medicinal water and push them just to the head of the fistula; until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then put unguents and salves on healthy skin, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. If veins or nerves do not injure or main members of prime importance, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it all until the corruption is gone. then apply salves to healthy skin, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed and runs backwards as before; Know that you are not yet far from failure:
then uncover and cut until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then repair the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep to be treated; so there is no other remedy than to leave it to natural decay.
and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can remove it with pincers, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose;
and if there are many bones, then remove all of them, not leaving even one.
and if the moisture makes you contraindicate, and there is no error or fear, if flesh and moisture and fat, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place a piece of cloth on the wound to prevent putrefaction. and leave it there until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and then the bones will come out more easily.
and if it is a large bone, such as one of the thigh or leg, so remove only the corruption until all the decay is gone. then restore the wound;
and if there is great part of the corrupt flesh and comes just to the bone; then it is necessary to remove and scrape all the way to the corruption, and then cure until it is sewn.
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to a reason that came from within the body,
until the materials came to the leg and was inflamed with a large abscess, and had no cause not to open.
but the doctor by his foolishness opened too high up so that the abscess burst, and it ran with a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and there came out a great deal of pus that all flowed downwards and moisture from the body.
and many doctors put a poultice around for two years, and there was no remedy in the art of medicine,
so that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him. and what flowed out through the pus with great abundance. and the skin of the young man became red and had a yellowish color.
I inserted a probe into one of those pus-filled openings, and then searched all the pus-filled openings.
and I found that one was connected to another from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened and cut into one of the pus-filled openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and it was corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came right up to the bone inside.
I removed what appeared on the corrupted bone and believed that there was no other corruption except for what I had taken away.
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long period of time, and was unable to heal.
and then I started again, and found the bone just as before.
and I found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then took it away, and made up my mind to set the joint.
but I was unable until I cut around a palm's width from the bone, and then drew it back to its full length. then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and set right quickly.
and there was no need to start the work again except for the patient's weakness, which could not bear. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For through the evacuation bleeding often occurred, but he was entirely cured.
For through the evacuation bleeding often occurred, but he was entirely cured. and instead of the bone, hard flesh grew, and he was in good condition with no harm or contrary effect from anything at all, neither when he lay down nor when he got up.
and stretch the top, so that you pull out the corrupted flesh below. and uncover the flesh on the place where you want to cut, so that the knife does not wound the flesh. and put a heated iron or a flat board under the bone to heat up the corrupted flesh. and it is necessary to cut as far as one can see and feel the corruption, and cut again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part. so uncover all the flesh; then put a heated iron underneath,
and then cut from one part to the other along the length of the corruption, and make sure the cutting is about the width of the corruption, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint and remove the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, then there is no other option but to cut.
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or the toe, then it is very strong and powerful that thing. but still you must inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you; and purify it in all the ways you can, but make sure the vein or nerve does not hinder you.
and know that the knife and the saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; and because of this, it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each kind of work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so think about the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
of fire The head can become dislocated either due to an internal cause or a external cause;
and when you have used medicine to treat the corruption through medicinal cures, and they do not help. so it is necessary to cut that member down to the point where the corruption begins. so that the patient escapes either by death or by evil, which is greater, through the failure of the member.
so that the patient escapes either by death or by evil, which is greater, through the failure of the member. and the signs are such that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire. and after the blackness, it then goes to corrupt one member after another. and takes hold of everything in the body; and hurry with cutting.
and if it is by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions, vipers, and similar ones.
If the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cut it off, and do not give him space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cut it off at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes up to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death. and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
and so it is done when the corruption comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut off after the second joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cut off all the foot; and if it rises in the leg, then cut off at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to let the patient die by exhaustion.
and the manner of cutting or sewing the member is that you bind it above and below, and stretch one servant's thread down, and another servant's thread up, and you divide the flesh that is between the two threads into one broad spatula-like piece, so that the bone is uncovered;
then cut or sew, and put one linen wrapping on each side, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy flesh. and another wound and abscess will come to the patient at once.
And if bleeding occurs from the wound when you are working, then cauterize the area immediately, or you place some restraining powders on top; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in sore foot:
he got a burn that seemed like ash from fire,
and the corruption came first to his thigh of the foot, until it consumed all the foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed.
and long afterwards the corruption came again to the thigh of his hand, and he came to me,
and I put some counteracting things on him after the purification of the body, but he could not stop the corruptions;
and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I would not, because I had hope of counteracting the matter; and I also doubted whether if I amputated his hand, he would die, because the virtue of the man was weak; and he became despondent entirely, and returned to his land, and he hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed.
and I told this story only because one must sometimes do another's tailoring, as the need arises.
No abscess ever comes in a hard or charred place, and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus. and then they burst and perforate, and the pus leaps out, and the flesh remains void, just as if it were a vessel. and the skin that is above is also as delicate as one of those fine, lightweight cloths. and they do not reach down to the bone, nor down to the nerve, and such diseases are called "saint".
but if it is so long that it comes down to the bone and in front, then it is called a "fistula".
and the cure is that you cut around that skin all the way, and similarly when it is delicate, like a cloth. and it does not hurt because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will hurt, and the corruption is not in front, and if the skin is thick with flesh, then cleanse it with a poultice thus:
look to see if the breast is large, and the pus that comes from it has a foul smell, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take aloes, and oil, and lye, in equal parts, and put the mixture into a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take as much of this as your need requires, and mix it with water and honey. and use the mixture to cleanse the breast, and restrain the abscess. and let the medicine stay for two hours, then strain it out slowly;
do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the pus is removed.
and sometimes it is cleansed with ashes' water, when this medicine is not present, and you take ash of vine wood, and pour water over it,
then let it flow, and use it to cleanse, as long as you know that the breast is well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot bear it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes' water, then cleanse with water and honey, or add a little lye to boil. or cleanse with honey and sweet wine, which the honey has properties to purify and wash. and the wine makes the skin warm.
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well purified, then cleanse with what brings forth flesh in it,
and that you take defined plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or cleanse with some medicines and unguents, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of unguents;
and if the abscess on the breast is small, and the catheter of the cleanser cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with a little iron, and put in a tent made from Egyptian ointment. or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it just enough so that only one corner or the catheter can enter,
and if the abscess that discharges pus is above, then cut or lower it down to where it is. For when the pus is in front, there should not be any flesh left to linger; and if you cannot cut off the breast below as you see, then prepare it in such a way that the pus flows down to the lowest point where it is.
and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see so it is arranged in this way: that the bowstring runs smoothly downwards and does not leave anything of the bowstring; and take consolidative medicines to put on the chest,
and apply it over one linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then cover with a piece of cloth the spot where the wound is on the breast, slightly larger than the first one; then apply a soothing ointment on another cloth according to the size of the wound; and put it on the breast wound to ease the bowstring, and do not remove the large cloth except after several days once;
and the one on the breast wound is often removed to remove the bowstring, and know what comes from the bowstring, whether it's venom or pus or enough or not digestible or indigestible;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not;
and when your medicine has been extended in this way and you see the nature that emerges on the breast wound, then know that the skin is healing and approaching health;
and then release it in the morning or on the third day, and when you open up the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast discharges undigested bowstring after several days, know that the breast is not healing. And if subtle poisons emerge after a long time, do not despair of health at all.
for health is approaching. For there are people whose flesh does not heal in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested bowstring emerges from the breast after several days, know that the breast is not healing;
and if the breast tarries from healing and is parched, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue; as defined by the ointment, for it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the final medicine;
take the defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and equalize it with old wine in terms of its substance;
then cook it and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked and thickened, when the defined ointment is not present,
or you take mercury and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then bind with a cloth, and apply it to the breast, and at no time administer or aristologue for a long while, and roots of lily celestial, which is also like fine wheat flour and centaury;
and roots of lily celestial, which is also like fine wheat flour and centaury; and use simples or composites: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use; and if the wound is prolonged, and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is prolonged, and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption is deep and makes an impression on the bone, or in hard flesh, or in ligaments; so it's the cure of the cure of abscess, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the elbow
Fistula is an abscess that arises below the elbow of the palm of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance occurs in other joints;
and when it is ignored and not taken care of, then a nasty abscess comes forth, and runs and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the elbow, and sometimes goes all the way to the end.
and comes to corrosion just up to the bone, so that it brings forth stinking pain, and is the joint of the joint wide open, and is the color flushed.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, so it is necessary that you remove all the excess fluid that remains from the elbow, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the elbow is healthy;
and if the elbow presses on the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed, so it is necessary that you put a straight splint under the elbow that pricks the flesh, and bind it tightly at the top, and cover that subtle and delicate flesh; and apply to the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it away and remove it, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the joint corroding, then cut it away in one of those ways as has been said before, then treat until it is healed.
and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut the elbow of the spatula in a crosswise motion above,
and be careful that the cut does not come all the way to the flesh which is under the elbow, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The joints that arise in some men's hands by chance are entirely fleshy, and sometimes there is a bone or two, and no elbow,
and none of these arise in the root of the jointure, or the birth is in some of the joints. Those who are born in any part of a joint do not move, and those who are born at the jointure of the joint, by chance, can move.
the cut on one who is fleshy is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
One who is born in the root of the jointure is hard to cure: if it holds firm against treatment.
In one who is born or has a defect in the back part of the joint, it is necessary that you remove the surrounding flesh right up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread for this, and treat until it is healed.
The swelling that comes on the joints together comes from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning with fire, or from similar things.
You should mend that wound so that it is repaired according to its natural forms. Then put between two tents or moistened cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick together; Or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the flesh is stuck, as it is fitting.
If an abscess comes out at any of his fingers with the palm, then mend that wound as it is fitting.
Of wounds
Vessels are large swollen veins full of melancholy superfluities that come to many members of the body.
and it is more common in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him occasionally purging with black broth, and then the juice of basil.
The cure for iron is according to two manners: one is when you mend, and then drain the black blood away. and the other manner is that you open the vein, and let it bleed completely.
The incision is according to this manner: first rise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick flesh is softened. then strain the patient's leg from above the knee joint down to the part below the kneecap; then make an incision in one place, or two places, or three places, with a wide cut.
then lift and let drain the black blood at your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood as the patient's vitality can endure has flowed out.
and then bind it up, and tell him to abstain from meats that induce black bile.
and repeat the evacuation and purging when the veins are full and harmful to the patient.
The elevation of the leg is according to this manner: rise the patient's leg if there are many hairs. then put it in a bath, and rise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it at the fire, and then cut into the vein of the long part at the head of the kneecap, or in the part below to the ankle.
then bind the skin with linen, and scrape the vein from each part, until it appears when you touch it.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white cord.
then bind the thread underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then tie it with linen.
then cut in another place on top of the two thumbs, then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears. then lift it up by the thread, just as you did, and tie it with another linen band, just as you did first.
then make another incision, or more if you need to, then lift it and cut at the joint of the foot.
then drain and lift up to the second incision; then pull it out from one incision to another, until all the blood has flowed out, then cut.
and if you cannot drain and lift it up, then put an awl through every strong double thread. and tie and drain it, and put underneath one thread, and turn your hand from side to side, until it flows out. and take care that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot drain or lift it up, and it will cause harm to the patient.
and when you have drained it all, then put on the wound a moist cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and swollen together, and is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it in a twisting manner, but do not incise it; and drain it as we have said before.
then it is necessary that you cut it in a twisting manner, but do not incise it; and drain it as we have said before. The form of the iron used for cutting the vein is curved, and does not cut off, so that it cuts the vein.
and is of large curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is situated in legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or tree, and on land where there is no moisture.
and by chance it may be found in another part than in the legs, and this occurs due to the putridity that comes from beneath the skin.
as if a serpent and worm come forth from within the body and are enclosed between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes with a very great inflammation in the leg, then the skin changes and the vein begins to come out, just like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, then it is necessary that you wrap a piece of cloth around one and a half to two and a half Z's, and tie it.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it gets loose at the end, wrap it around the cloth again and tie it. and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part around, and do not cut it in its root, until it has come out entirely. for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause abscess and putridity at the same place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the head, and that nothing remain in the body.
and sometimes this vein when it is treated with 5 or 10 long palms, and one man came to me whose it was 10 palms long, and when you cut it, he put in one thread or plug, and perforated it down to the bottom.
and so all of it flows out; and the matter that is inside be emptied, and bring medicine to the place that prevents putridity for some days, then care for it as for abscesses.
And sometimes this vein has many veins, and indeed when it opens in the joint of the foot or at the foot. and it comes out with many plugs, and from which it jumps veins; then care for it as we have said before.
Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "disease of oxen" because it often occurs with cattle.
and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes up and down through all the body. and it can be felt as it moves from one limb to another, until it breaks through the skin where it goes and then jumps forth.
and is caused by some kind of humor, such as pus or serous fluid or worms or lights in the bowels.
and doubt is raised about its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye. by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot avoid but when it goes:
so then it is necessary that you tie the above and below with a strong cord tightly.
then pull up and pull out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it, then cauterize with fire on top until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye at the top of the head, then press down beneath it with a small circle, then pull up and pull out.
and it is necessary to use the patient in cleansing of bodily medicines which dissolve bad humors.
and beware of meats that engender corruption.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and shortly after, I saw it rising also like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, just as bright silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little after it ran through all the body, until it came to the other arm;
then she told me that it was turning around the body, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before. However, I had seen many that had well and truly moved pain from one place to another, but I had never seen it, just as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered, and therefore appeared that windiness constrained;
and did not appear according to this reason in those who are well-nourished, and who have moist bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see this disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then tie above and below hastily, and then pull up until that windiness constrained comes forth. and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it to your eyes,
then treat with those that restrain windiness, such as stinking pills and serpent's pill, and similar others.
Of Arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they fall.
The diversity of their types is that there are some with large points, and small, and pointed, and smooth; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with fragments; and that which falls in any member falls in one of two ways: or it falls into the principal member, pointed;
such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears to you: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain is when the arrow hits it and pierces the bone, and the skull bursts forth which is above the brain, and it is when there is blindness and heaviness and confusion and reddening of the eyes, and inflammation and reddening of the tongue, and convulsions and commotion of understanding, and vomiting of gall; and by chance it is without further movement from the nostrils or ears; and by chance it affects speech and voice; and bursts forth from the moist white wound resembling boils, and also breaks forth like burnt flesh.
and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the treatment, and do not pull out the arrow unless it is loose.
The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and by chance the arrow moves just like the boil, and in cutting dark blood, and comes with cold sweat and cold fainting: then know for certain that death is impending.
And the sign of the arrow that hits the womb is when without foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's color changes, and sighs high and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow hits the covering of the chest, it is below the small ribs; and it vomits great gall and great pain and sighs; and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance it bursts forth from the wound some thing of undigested food.
And if the arrow hits the belly, and bursts forth no further than a grain of fine barley through the intestines, then there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine bursts forth and comes out, and the patient feels very great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and head of the shoulder and spine and rib and hips and knees and legs, and a similar member, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, for that reason you should do likewise.
It happened to one home where an arrow fell on the floor in the root of the nose: I tried to remove it and pulled it out from under the fat on the ear, and he was healed without any harm.
And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen in the fat of the eye below the paper underneath. and the arrow was lodged, and I could not pull it out except for the tip towards the wood. and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bowstring, all one foot long and light without ears; the patient was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab with ears:
I filed down the barbs, and extracted it slowly until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I pulled out an arrow from one man who had it stuck in his belly, and thought he was dying;
and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow and bound it, and pulled it out further, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see one man to whom an arrow fell on the back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural activities.
And if you see one other man to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
And I pulled out an arrow from one of the prince's king who had it stuck near the nose; and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was all lodged.
I was summoned for the cure after it had been stuck three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched it with all a subtle tentation, and did not feel it; and he felt a pricking and pain under his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow
I put on the spot an ointment attracting and digestive, because the flesh did not swell; and I found the arrow's point.
and I found the arrow's point. I put on the ointment for many days, and the wound was healed above, and the patient remained thus long in time.
so that he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for many days, until it was open.
and I tried to remove it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck at the place; then I inserted it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow became visible.
and passed well beyond the terms for three months,
and then it broke open so that I inserted forceps, and pulled from one side and the other, and it could not come out;
then I did not cease to file and bind it with various instruments, until I grasped it one day with well-made forceps, according to the form that its shape will take at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the doctor judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed entirely.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on what I do not say, for books cannot fully comprehend.
but wise masters know well a little thing, and about what is present and failing, found nine works, and nine instruments, at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out from the members where they are stuck except according to two ways: or through the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which jumps out on the side where it enters is an arrow entering in flesh and jumping out sometimes now.
And if it does not jump out now, then leave it until the flesh is purged around it, and the issue is alleviated.
and also if it is stuck in bone and cannot come out, then leave it thus for some days, and gently move it each day;
and then it jumps out, and if it does not jump, then pierce around with a very fine point, until the flesh around is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it with all the skill; and if you find it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it so that the wound becomes large. and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the end where it is stuck,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the end where it is stuck, if the flesh that is stuck between two parts moves so you can and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead, as much as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead, as much as you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrowhead, that you may pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the surrounding skin is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flowing of blood makes you reluctant, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision on the nerve and vein, and devise how you can pull out the arrowhead without danger.
or quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow hit him. for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it pierces anything there, or the skin is swollen in that place so one can see or feel something abnormal.
then cut above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out; if it jumps forth now.
And if she is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until she enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull her out.
And if she cannot come out, then leave it alone, and then resume extraction until she comes out forth;
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it through to the entire length.
and if the head falls off, and you see that administration is necessary, then administer one instrument sharp-edged. so that the point of the arrow enters the edge of the instrument; and then push forth.
and if the arrow is broken, then use one instrument with an entering point, in order to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is stuck, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow falls or sticks in the chest, belly, bladder, or side, and it is near, and you can cut above, then cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to remove arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look at this form:
And there are many kinds: great, small, and little, according to the size of the arrow.
of common veins of the body Of veins through which one is cleansed, 31 in number, with 16 on the head.
that is to say: two jugular veins which are behind the ears, and are called the "herbech". and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is on the top of the nose. and the two jugular veins that are in the neck. and the two veins that are in the upper lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins through which one is commonly cleansed are five in each arm:
one is the cerebral, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cerebral and the basilic. and people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side. and people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the femoral. and it is the one through which one is cleansed, which appears clearly above the pubic area.
And the saphena is the vein that is between the auricular and the annular, and it has two branches.
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the curve of the pocket on the left side, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse" which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The cleansing of the veins that are behind the ears helps ancient catarrh and migraine; and the quality of the cleanser, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient.
and the quality of the cleanser, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient. and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: which then go to your right side, and where you feel the pulse below your right arm, if it swells up.
then take the lancet, and push it down below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards. and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two inches from the traverse, and make the blood flow until you see.
then tie it up tight, until it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The cleansing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth against ancient migraine, and against sore eyes, and accustomed obthalmia, and in the body of watery eyes in the eyelids.
and the quality of the cleanser is as I say: and it is that the patient tightens their neck until the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse below your right arm, and if it swells up.
Then lift the key above the vein on high at your thumb index, and push the lancet underneath. and lift the vein high, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and make sure the blood flows according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton;
and then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of its cutting and extraction, in the beginning of this book.
The vein of the forehead is worth just as much as the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face, and in migraine, and in fever.
and its quality is that the patient stretches his neck twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose shape is:
and place the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and not once with a wide inflammation.
Moreover, it is not fitting that the inflammation be too great; and the healing should cross, for the bone is close, and by chance breaks the inflammation when it is subtle.
The vein of the two veins that are in two arm-pits helps those with, and with the itch, and with fever, and with yellowing in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and its quality is that the patient stretches his neck twisting without a cord, just as before;
then heal it, and be the vein of the traverse, somewhat long, somewhat wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the inflammation is subtle, it may break by chance; then make sure the blood flows, as much as you need it to, and then tie with cotton, and tie well.
The vein of the navel is worth as much for ague, and for fevers without fever, and for diseases of the face, just as migraine and fever that come to the face, and especially when it is old;
and its quality is that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his navel to your left hand, and take the subtle flame that is long, and place it in the space between the two nostrils. for the vein does not open well here, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too far in depth, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then tie it up for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The vein of the two groins helps with the constriction of the anus, and with the beginning of menstruation, and with many diseases, and with impotence, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and ulcers;
and its quality is that the patient stretches his neck below one and the other, just as we have said; and be the master standing on top of the head of the patient, and the patient sits on one seat,
then heal the vein of the long one somewhat widely, then let the blood flow temperately, or as much as is necessary;
then do the other part in the other vein, then release the ligament, and hold the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the healing of the liver The vein of the upper lips helps with soreness in the mouth, and with decay of gums, and splits in the lips, and around the navel.
And its quality is to make the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and recognize them by their blackness, and by those small dark veins around them: then cut one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
then cut one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
Of the healing beneath the tongue The vein beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healer is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up their tongue, and looks down at each side for a black vein:
then heal one and the other, and do not go too far in depth, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck which are commonly healed are healed by two methods:
either by piercing each inflammation with a wide myrtle or olive leaf, as you would cut through meat, and it is called "anasil"; and they are large and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The shape of the myrtle inflammation is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are filled with thick blood and appear openly, and contain thick and troubled blood; and that's the shape of the olive inflammation:
and it is more subtle and pointed, and it is for healing subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are beneath the throat, and under the neck, and under the breast, and under the belly;
and it is necessary for the healer to heal carefully, and be wary of the artery that is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and there comes a flow of blood, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and it should not be pierced with the inflammation, but cut as anasils.
And if the basilic vein does not open obviously, then it is necessary that you squeeze it, and change to another one; or you want some sign from it, or you heal in place of it the vein within the arm: it opens obviously; and the cauterization at the flame anise-like, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the artery, it is necessary then that you straighten the arm, and touch the location until you feel the pulse. Then mark the location of the vein, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame-like anise.
and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the location inflamed, for it is of the artery; avoid then.
And if you see it flowing upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Hurry then, and place your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens;
and bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient's limb; and be above fear, and do not move until he is healed.
And if the blood is not stopped, and it flows forth, and medicine is not present to you, then cauterize the artery if it opens, for the head of the artery retreats; and stop the blood.
And take a bark of fig tree, and split it, and take one half and bind it well until the next day.
if the blood is stopped, that's good; if not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping is not grievous in more conditions for the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The vein of the vein is in a medium so it helps to treat blood from above the head and below the body. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he goes too deep and finds the nerve. and it swells up and the wound becomes grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you cauterize the wound with the instrument of anise-like; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
And if there is vein between the two nerves, then split it lengthwise.
The vein of the cephalic helps, which treats blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to cauterize in piercing with olive oil or myrtle flame, for it is the most safe of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries below.
However, it is necessary to seek the lighter location, and do not cause any harm if one does not work at first, and then reattempt; and by chance some people's locations swell up when one tries for the first time, but it does not cause harm. The quality of the vein is according to your opinion.
The first thing you must know about cauterizing, is that cauterization is only necessary for preserving health.
and to prevent illnesses from coming; and the vein is made in one of the three veins that are found there: namely, the cephalic, the saphenous, and the basilic; and one should cauterize at the beginning of precursory signs to purge, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should cauterize on the first or third day after 2 or 3 hours of the day.
The vein that is administered for illnesses has no fixed hour or time, but when there is need by day or night, in all hours and at all times;
and it is not necessary to cauterize children until 14 years old, nor a woman who is carrying more than four months until the seventh month. And one should not cauterize those who are over 60 years old.
And when someone wants to cauterize, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels with a light enema. if they have much putrid matter retained, so that the veins do not draw off the superfluities from the intestines, which are harmful to the main members.
nor does one heal those who are too fat from meats, nor those who are drunk, as long as it is excessive, nor dropsical.
and beware of cauterizing after colic passion, and vomiting, and discharging of belly, and multiple times of abiding with a woman, and labor, watching, and fasting, and all that which takes away the virtue, or by something of the arm or body.
then subtly purify the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then bathe or take a bath, if nothing else prevents it, to subtlety purify the blood.
and treat the vein of the liver around the third time, as we have said;
and keep that day from labor, and from pleasure, and from lust, and from similar things;
and be light and joyful, and let the cauterization be higher than that of which one is being cauterized, and rub the arm two or three times.
then straighten the ligament above gently, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
and then rub the location with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
then moisten the cauterizer with a small amount of old oil, then place his right hand's thumb on that vein below the location where he wants to cauterize. so that the vein does not flee and fail at the time of piercing. For there are veins that flee like cords when being cauterized, and those that are full of windiness. so that when one puts the flame on it, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open up the vein, and thus is one of those.
and if it cannot open the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the cauterizer be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens at the first attempt, that's good; if not, then one reattempts a little below or above that location with haste, unless the location is swollen.
And if the location is swollen and the patient is frightened, then one leaves it for a day or two, and does not bind the arm: by chance an abscess will form; do not enter into water then the wound will begin to heal if it pleases.
and if the wound is small, or the bleeding is subtle and you doubt that it will not flow so much blood as you see, then trust in that very wound itself to bleed correctly all along.
and do the work a little hastily, so that the swelling may ensue; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the swelling, do not begin to heal again, and put on a little bit of oil, for it lightens the body from blood, and is more nourishing in this swelling with the oil.
and thus administer the oil to each wound that you heal the veins, in order to stop the flow of blood.
and thus it also makes a triangle and a bow from each, when one puts it on the swelling; so that the blood subsides and parts when it is too great.
And if there comes a big abscess which often happens, especially when it is not opened up more than once or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and put on the swelling a moist sponge in water and a little hot oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if some blackness or greenish color remains at the swelling after several days, then it does not harm; and if you see, put on something of aloe or myrrh mixed with the juice of camphor, mastich, or similar things.
And often it happens that an abscess and appearance arise at the healing of the wound in the Basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the swelling soft to the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance there may be a lack of blood from the artery; but make one poultice dry to harden the swelling, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each of the bloods according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is robust and strong, and has need of bloodletting, to make the wound larger and have the flow more abundant.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and have it heal slowly and gradually, and one should have it heal by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this manner of healing is a safeguard against the disarrangement of blood and the compression of nerve, and is more valuable than the healing of the long or the wide wound.
And to one whose body is failing at the wound, it is necessary to give moist bread soaked in juice of green apples; if he is feverish, then treat the blood three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then moisten bread before the wound with marmalade or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he vomits at the wound, after the flow of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth of flesh and a subtle, well-scented syrup.
and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to break his arm and heal another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heal slowly and gradually, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
And who wants to break his arm after the first healing, and he has a strong body, then he heals in 7 hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to heal from another side, then he must be healed on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already fevered, and it brings on a fever; then one must draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the wound so that it can discharge pus. then you should observe all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on the boils when they are healing, so that death may not come instead of pus. and this often happens when the healer is negligent;
and it does not happen when you see the arm being separated, and blood coming out the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on it; unless he is crooked, then let him extend his arm hastily, for this would be bad.
but let him leave it until he heals the second time; or you should push to the point of the flow, until the blood that is congealed at the wound of the vein issues forth. and put on one little bit of oil mixed with water, and press on it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it at all, until the abscess is alleviated.
And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, then let him be bled in that very place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein on the arm is healed at the place of the main vein because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the flesh is red.
then it should be tied gently, so that the vein appears well, then he should heal across, not from side to side or lengthwise.
and the wound should be large and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in winter, then do not put your hand in hot water again, for you would put more heat into the wound than in summer.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
The healing of the salveta of the right hand is worth more than all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it; and if the wound crosses over, and if you cut it all the way around, then it hurts nothing;
and do not go too far in depth, for the nerves are beneath the skin's covering of flesh.
and then place the hand in hot water, if the wound is frozen and cannot come out.
And when you have let the blood flow as much as is needed, then apply oil and a cloth to the vein to suture quickly, and do so for each wound.
The sign of the left hand is worth less to the sickness of the mouse, and do so too with everything I have told you on the right.
The sign of the spleen is worth for all diseases that are under the body. such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of flowers, and disease of the joints, and of old knees and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its sign is that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks. and above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the shin, and from there many veins go.
then take it for the largest vein or at the ankle that matters most.
And if you take it above the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and take the sign across also as when cutting; and let the flames follow.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the bleeding stops the first time, then start again the second time a little above, because the wound is salty. do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do so with the spleen of the other foot equally.
The wound of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its sign is worth for the pain of the loin, when it's because of hot blood.
And the quality of its sign is that the patient enters or bathes, and stretches above the ankle four fingers by twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then take the sign in all ways that you can, and crossing. and is worth more than you cut, for the wound is sound, and it is much reopened by many hands.
and is worth more than you cut, for the wound is sound, and it is much reopened by many hands. And if you don't find it, then take any vein that opens above the heel and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
and let the blood flow as much as you see, and then loosen the ligament, and put on cotton and tie it; it is now healed.
(no translation provided)
Vacuum cups are made of horn, or metal, or glass; and the process of applying them is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this vacuum application which is without cutting is done in two ways: either it is applied all at once, or step by step.
and two others on the two sides of the neck; and the vacuum below the chin. and the vacua at the two shoulders; and the vacuum above the hips. and the vacua on both arms; and the vacua on both legs. and the vacua at the two ankles; and the vacuum treatment does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and therefore it has not been abolished anywhere, just as one makes a sign of bleeding. and it is not suitable that it be administered, neither all at once nor step by step, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body has been purged.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to vacuum, or for habits, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time.
for there are some who, when they need to vacuum, have a heavy head;
and there are some who swell with repletion and redness on their face, and head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes.
and there are some who swell with a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood. and there are some who imagine, and see through blood and hurt and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order it to be vacuumed after three hours of the day.
The sign of the mouth helps with the headache that comes to them, and it is not suitable for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body.
and this vacuuming is in place of the sign of the cephalic vein,
and it does not suit someone who has a cold complexion or has catarrh, for this would do them great harm.
and therefore it is not suitable that those with a feverish disease of the head use it.
And those who frequently recover from this, become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to put the vacuum a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The vacuuming in the neck is in place of the sign of the head and the basilic vein, and therefore it is worth for the constriction of the belly. and to the rupture of the channel of the womb, and all over, and to repletion;
and it is necessary to push a little harder, for if it holds too tightly, it will cause forgetfulness or swelling of the stomach and heart.
The vacuuming on both sides of the neck is worth for headaches, and obtalmia, and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in place of the sign of the basilic vein; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to express their hand when they put it, so as not to cut the artery, nor to bring forth a stream of blood.
The vacuuming below the chin is worth for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the signs of the two lips.
The vacuuming on the shoulders is worth for disease that comes from heat and repletion.
The swathing of wounds is worth as much as three veins from the arm, for it takes blood from these great veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deep, for the flesh is bare of fat, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
The poultice that is on the buttocks is worth as much as hemorrhoids from the fundament, and as diseases below, and it is necessary that the poultice be large and made of earth, so that it can pull well; and by chance, if they were subtle, they would break; and I make great wounds.
The poultices of the legs are very effective, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth as much as old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and womb, and restore the flowers; and are placed on both shins, and both ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring about fainting in many dispositions.
The manner of applying the poultice is that you first apply it empty, and then suck it temperately, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then cut, and put on new poultices, and take heed in the disposition of bodies, for there are some who have tough flesh, and clear pores: therefore it is necessary to strike once only, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtlety the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike the third time; and when we want to draw out some blood little by little, we can only withstand once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we often start again; and if the blood is thick, we strike deep, and the end is that the vessels are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for him who has thick skin and hard flesh, and who have large pores, that you anoint the places of the poultices with oil that is aperitive and dissolutive: if it's in summer, with oil of violets, or with sweet almond oil, or with oil of pumpkin seed;
and if it's in winter, with oil of sorrel, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balsamic oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
And if the person is cured with tender flesh and large pores, there is no need to put any oil.
but it is necessary to wash after the poultice with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of pumpkin, or water of porcelaine, or another similar one.
And he who has much moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities should rise with old wine, or water of succory, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones;
and one should not be cured by poultice before bathing or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and one should not sleep immediately after the poultication.
and it is necessary that he warms himself when he must be poulticed and when he is being poulticed. And take heed if the person who is being cured is choleric, and if the blood is too abundant and inflamed. and it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as unripe grapes and endive and lettuce in the morning, and similar things;
and boiled parsnips, and hare's flesh, and damp meat.
And he who has a cold complexion should take honey syrup and medium-aged wine that is between old and new, and boiled peas, and boiled parsnips and small game birds and young pigeons.
and the day he will be poulticed, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some people treacle or muscat wine sometimes before the poulticing, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the blood be subtlety drawn, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The poultices that are applied without cutting are those that are applied on the liver, and on the muscles, and podagra, and on the belly and the navel and the kidneys and the haunches, for those members do not tolerate being cut on at all.
and one only does this in order to draw blood from member to member. just as we apply them to the breasts when the child is sick; in order to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we apply poultices to the belly and navel to reduce the member.
and it removes the pain when there is inflammation or piercing, and it also by its attractive virtue happens to remove the inflammation, or dislodges the piercing from its place.
and so it does when one applies it to the liver and muscles when there is retained flatulence.
and these poultices are administered empty in order to suck for just so long; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with lukewarm water.
just as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with hot water only, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
The form of the poultice administered at fire is this:
And it should be half a palm wide and a little over a palm deep, and have a small notch or cavity around the middle about as big as to insert a needle.
and it should be made of earth, soft beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when applying it to the member.
and have in the middle a cross-shaped piece of earth or iron, so as to place a candle wrapped around it.
and there are both large and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who use them;
for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and those for thin ones are different from those for fat ones.
And one should thus put this poultice on the member:
take the candle of wax or a linen thread, and place it inside the poultice across the cross-shaped piece that is inside the poultice. so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the member, and your two fingers be on the pustule that we have said, so that when you want to, if the vapor goes, and remove the cupping glass;
and apply the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need it.
In the cupping glass therefore which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, all day long, it has no point or pustule, and is only applied to the member when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb so alone;
and that's the form:
Cupping glasses are not applied except to limbs where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in areas bare of flesh, such as the head or neck, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses that are in sweet and clear water without bruising, take them;
and put one in sweet water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then wash with vinegar and cupping glass, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the cupping glasses;
and when they are full and firm, if it is a place where you can put a cupping glass, then put one there, for this is very effective afterwards.
If not, lift the place gently with ease, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze;
and if the place heals too late after the cupping glasses, wet one linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the cupping glasses are constricted;
and if the cupping glasses are multiplied, put on crushed vitriol, or gallstones, and similar things, until it is constricted;
or you put on half a handful of peeled peas over the place, and leave them until they are absorbed by the place, and it will be constricted now;
and if you need more, take other cupping glasses.
And if the cupping glasses do not want to take, rub the place with fresh blood, or put in a needle until the blood flows out; and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will absorb it;
and when you see that they are draining, powder on a small amount of aloes and oil mixed, or ash, so that they will be constricted now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a restoration for fractures and dislocations.
Understand, dear son, that foolish men who gaze upon this chapter do not know any of the ancient books or letters;
and for this reason is estranged the science in our land, because I never found any good;
and I know nothing except through the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abridged it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of instruments that are applied, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of speech and chapters where wise men put their understanding and remain on virtue, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, unless something else entirely overpowers, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old people;
or if the weather is not very cold or too hot; and consider cold humors, to know frosty joints, and flesh of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty foods, and do not overfill with meats that fill veins with blood, until you have doubt about aposteme heat, or spreading matter in the limb; then restore the patient to their previous governance as they used it.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a big nourishment, or they have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and kidneys, and feet, and pork belly, and eel, and fresh fish, and full wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the patient recovers more quickly and sooner the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of old people and decrepit ones cannot be well taken up or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but take no care, reset on the broken bone .i. large splints that absorb and join the member together, so that it becomes strong as before; and do not leave him without his work, and therefore one must nourish with rich meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is one thing, and the fracture of the chest or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures. For there are fractures that go through the skull, and others that occur while adjusting, such as when one cuts with a pen to write.
For there are fractures that go through the skull, and others that occur while adjusting, such as when one cuts with a pen to write. And also a fracture with wound, and a fracture in a small crack throughout.
And each manner has its own method, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings it into place;
and is known the fracture of the bone by what the wound is twisted, and is open to view by dislocation, and sounds under pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor feeling in the probing, and the patient does not feel great pain, except for one spot of fracture;
but it can well have a twist, or crack, or small fracture. So it is not necessary that you move him with your hand, but put on medications that come later, and then constrain him subtly.
And know that the fractures that go through the skull, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary now to bring them to a point evenly, so that hot apostemes may come.
and if hot abscesses come forth, let it alone for a day or two until the abscess is appeased; then set it equal to the movement that you can make lightly and carefully, and know that the restoration of this is more gentle than the restorations of one who has pieces; then hold it steady, as it is needed afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is stretched to two parts, whether it be a hand or foot, or by your hand if it is small members, or by two cords, or by one cord and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then reduce by all means the additions in their places by movement as much as you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
and adjust well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel well by the hand if it seems to you that he is not well: then dress it nicely, and do not hold it too tightly or press as those who cause the abscess to come forth hot and contractive in the member, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is in place, then punish well the patient so that he does not move it, nor in waking nor in sleeping, nor in turning nor in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put him in such a condition that he feels no pain.
For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put him in such a condition that he feels no pain. and take care that he is set straightly, so that crookedness does not come when he is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I am telling you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: then it is necessary to envelop them in cloths of soft and subtle linen.
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: then it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and strong linen, for the wide linens encircle all the great member, and hold it steady from all parts equally, so that there is no tautness.
then bind around the swelling lightly, three or four turns according to the member, and hold your hand on the linen for a little while, then go above the break and hold it less tight, so that the break will slide away a little.
and soften the linen little by little, until you take a great part of the sound flesh, then take another linen and wrap it around again above the broken bone.
then go back to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too tight nor too lightly, as we said in the first chapter above.
then put between the linens and wraps, as long as it is all equal, then bind everything above with one bandage, and then set your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put something soothing on top that reduces the abscess and takes away the swelling, and let it be thus for some days.
then set your splints on top and be of the width of a well-cloven cane, or of boxwood from which one makes knife handles, or of palm saplings, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint you put on top of the break is a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
and be as long as it is needed for the member, whether small or great.
then hold on top of the splints just as you did in the first chapter, then bind above with a thread harmoniously, as in the first chapter above the break.
the tighter it is on top, the looser below; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
for if the threads are thick, like I have seen in the works of fools who make their bandages from linen ropes twisted into a knot, and that is a great error, for the binding cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not need to have less than two inches between each splint.
And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the splints after the binding in their sound flesh, then put under them cloths of linen or rough flannel, so that he does not get wounded.
When the wound is with the break and the ligaments are broken, I will speak of its cure hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to bind with splints all the broken members on the first day. For when the members are large, it is not necessary to put splints on them sooner than after five or seven days, or more according to your safety and avoiding of hot abscesses.
and see here the manner of ancient poultices to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the poultice restoring the break in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of poultice restoring the break and dislocation and twist: take 10 parts of aloes, 5 parts of myrrh, 8 parts of galangal, and 20 parts of gum arabic; mix well with abundant egg. If a person's complexion is hot, use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and will restore broken bones quickly, and is valuable to many people.
Another manner of poultice that is valuable for twist: take 10 parts of mugwort and visnaga; myrrh and aloes, 8 parts each; acacia, 6 parts; Armenian bole, 10 parts; and grind well, then mix with water or abundant egg, and administer.
Another manner of poultice for joints and bones that are separated from their places, and calms the pain ensuing, and the surgeon uses it on the bone and the break: take new linen, and soak it in water and cooked oil, and put it on top. This poultice does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly relieves pains.
Another way to plaster which restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of earthy papyrus, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce the remaining aposteme. Take root of viscum, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, each in one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and heat the limbs by applying it with moist coriander water or water, and use.
Another way to plaster even stronger than the first one, when aposteme persists during the restoration of the limb. Take roots of viscum, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and sassafras, and flowers of violets and camomile, each in equal part; and grind, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Hipocrates writes in his book that one should not apply anything to a broken limb for restoration except a wax and oil ointment, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should apply to a broken limb for restoration dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to plaster that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and shaved horse hair or bird feathers, and viscum, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster with it.
And then the plaster is applied a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not remove the plaster for several days.
And if pain comes to the place, or pruritus, with lack of rest or swelling, then hasten, and remove it, and take off the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge into water, and lift up the limb, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased. then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry lard moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of warm aposteme.
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and may the pain be removed, then resume the subtle bandage and a little plaster, and do not strain it as hard as before; and continue to treat it subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the aposteme is gone and the limb is red and warm, and pain and swelling are removed from all of it, and you need to apply plaster and bandage, then start again as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not remove it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes let it remain for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the break is set and approaches the bone on.
then apply the restraint more strongly than before, and let the swelling go away with its natural process, as I said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than is necessary, know that suppuration cannot come. then arise the wound with hot water, every time you remove it, and make it so every third day, and ease a little the bandage.
by this work then cut off the suppuration from the limb, and quickly remove what those foolish healers do to torture the limb: that is bad, and it is pitiful work, and I see nothing else but to desist and work correctly.
Various ways of breaking There are many ways of breakings and various forms, and the causes are destined;
for there are breakings that are caused by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone is broken entirely down to the sacral bone which is below the bone, as done with an axe or fist; and therefore this manner of breaking is called "haichure".
Or the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound of these two breakings is great or small.
And if there is a packed blow, or splitting, or collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent breaking which approaches just to the tendon that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound is reunited in the bone as subtle as a hair, and it is a small split, and therefore it is called this breaking "capillary".
and if the wound is made or by being struck with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and causes the bone piece to go down below, and the bone is split as cooks do when they strike the cauldrons; then the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their skull, as children's skulls are.
and happens to all these ways of breaking where small pieces are dislodged as they are; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all ways of breakings by their deduction upon them, and the inquiry made, and through the corrupted flesh which is above.
The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, the black breaking appears.
In the treatment of the breaking, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, and loss of understanding, and stretching, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes bursting forth and reddening, and other similar things in more or less disposition, then it cannot be healed without a doubt.
And if you do not see an unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day of the moon that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, so that the tendon below the bone is corrupted, and come the accidents which we have said.
And if the breaking of the bone comes just to the tendon that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the split part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the wounded patient's head, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and above the figure of the wound more gently than you can.
and if blood comes flowing to uncover the bone or abscess appears, and it is necessary to assist with what is needed, then you should fill the space with damp cloths in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down and be assured of no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone by, and that is done according to two manners of work: one manner is if you cut off a narrow strip in front, and that is its shape:
And then put another cutting more large than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have many diverse cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and be pointed, and made of iron end; and work lightly, lest you hurt the head.
And if the bone is hard and rough, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, thusly as you give cuttings with tarers, not too deep lest they go beyond the bone of the test, and should have above the point a margin or one circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, each becoming its place in the space of the bone, so that you have tarers for all tests; and that is the shape of the three manners of tarers:
The quality for piercing around the bone is that you put one tare on the bone, and turn it to your hands so long as you know the bone is pierced; then place the tare elsewhere a little bit later, and do all around, then cut into the interstice of the bone which is between the pterygoids, and make this more subtly than you can, lightly, just as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or any of the instruments that you have such as tenacula, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you take the appliance which remains from the bone to all one other instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more tense and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if nothing remains of the small bones, or no scales, then gently remove it with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galien says, which is more sound; and he lifts it up very strongly, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place below the head of this lenticular incisor, whose shape is:
And do not cut on one side only, and the part is bent in two directions, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet upon it, so that you cut lightly all around the bone, and be well aware of the membrane that is below.
if it is attached to the bone, then remove it lightly, for one removes well without harm, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to fill up that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have in various quantities, in order to apply the most suitable one in each place, according to the work and figure of the break.
So remove first with great scrapers, and then with more subtle ones, and do not stop until it is well.
In each of the other fine cuttings and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you apply the remedy according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily grasped by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the spine is exposed, then it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, lest you injure the spine, then apply above one more layer, and do not strain it too much except that it covers only the wound.
and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed down, then remove it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, aristology, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and place it on the wound, and apply medicines continuously without biting.
and take care that the wound is thus clean, so that you do not leave any ointment or allow bowels to assemble on the membrane of the brain, for when bowels assemble above the membrane of the brain, they will burst and cause great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed on the spine, it does not penetrate above.
Take care then, if any bad accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if no harm comes except from the medicine that you have placed on it, and this virtue has, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and mix them together to make a cloth, and place it on the spine. then treat it with manner of treatments that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one alone by itself, for these are two bones; and that below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your little finger or pertusion of the neck into the break, and insert equal that break into your finger's index, and in the pouch by the way out, until the neck revives according to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and the finger cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the head of a rope, a little bit thick.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it similarly, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed down, then bind at the top of the neck with cloth strips of linen, if the break is in one part.
Where you set one against another, if there is a break in it; and let the tents be as big as they fill up the holes of the night.
And certain physicians say that the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it seems that they should be moistened in the concoction of mutton fat, and flour; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
And sometimes you put duck down instead of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around, and the breakage holds, and blows on the patient's part; then do as you see.
And if an abscess comes to the night while you are working there, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a little pot of aquilion.
And if an abscess does not come, put a poultice on by default, made of rye flour and incense powder, cooked with mutton fat, then put it on light poultices, and do not tie the night.
and if the breakage of the night is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then take it to suitable instruments for that, then cut the gap, and cure things in jointed bones, and solidifying, as with suitable poultices and ointments for that.
and if there is no wound inside the night, then cure with tents, and put in plugs of wool, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured below, and there is no wound to be found, and the breakage is so only, and is not broken in two, except that it is known slightly by the canines inside.
It is necessary, if the breakage is in the right part, that you insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the breakage is in the left jawbone, then insert your index finger from the right hand, and insert the breakage slightly inside, and adjust it with the other hand by default, and make equal.
And if the jawbone breakage is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of four parts, until it becomes equal.
And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or fracture, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone cerote, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a great strap well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it as tight as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure is changing, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put a poultice on, made of flour with mutton fat or rye flour, after you have removed the cerote; and put on a lightweight linen poultice, and if the poultices are worn out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it alone until they are healed; many times they heal in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a breakage and wound together, remove not a single piece of the bone that is taken out; but subtlety in removing it with suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it by fire according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all those pieces, and none remain, then cut the wound, if it is wide, and put on one of the suitable poultices for that, to produce bone, until they are healed.
of the splint The splint breaks multiple times in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: or it is broken and separated into two, with pieces, and it is the most easy to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is thus when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, one holding the shoulder that feels the splint broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then set the break even with your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or deviation.
And if you need to extend further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or linen, and make it thick according to your necessity; then stretch and lift the splint, and restrain the sphere with your hand, so that you set the break even as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the splint to the outside because it comes too far forward, then it is necessary that the patient lie somewhat on his hatereil, and put under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow; and have the assistants lower the shoulder, so that the bone of the splint is raised.
And then address the break to your fingers, and if you find it rough, then it is necessary that you cut into it; and draw out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any impediment, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have; but put this instrument under the splint, in order to ward off the syphac.
and resembles a spoon, and is not at all rough, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one broad and the other narrow, such as the fracture of the wound that you made when you broke the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then cut the wound, and if the fracture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
And if a hot abscess comes, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar, and put it on.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a poultice made of flour and mutton fat, and put light poultices on top, and put a sphere underneath the armpit, if you need to. Then take a very wide band of one palm's width, then put on double cloth and poultice; then take a thin strap three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band are hanging. and put the steel on the splint, and turn the bandage over the healthy shoulder, and under the sick shoulder; and wind each part separately, and when you see that the strap holds the splint properly, and you clearly see that the steel is not moving above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the straps loosen, then hold it back.
and make the patient sit on their back, and put something small under the shoulder blade to lift the aid in high; so that it will ease the break of the force by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie if bad accidents come, until twenty days.
then restart the poultice if you see that he needs it, and tighten and leave it so, until he is restored; and she is restored in twenty-eight days, and to some people less.
of the shoulder break
Often it happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes wide and does not have much flesh; but one can feel it only by touch; then prepare according to the shape of the break, and wind according to its natural form in all ways you can; then put on the skin powder from the mill with abundance of egg white, and light bandages, and put on one double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle steel plate, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are hairs under the steel plate at any point of the shoulder, take that hair and wrap it in linen bandages so that the steel plate lies evenly; and then hold it all with a strong bandage so that the steel plate does not move from its place, and check the strap each day; and every time it loosens, hold it tight, and put the steel plate back in its place if it gets out of place, and have the patient sit on their side; and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five; And when this number is complete, then loosen it, and be sure, for it's not a bone that can become loose easily.
And if a piece of the bone pokes out beforehand and points downwards under the skin, then go on top, and open it, and do what we have said in the break of the force to appease a hot abscess.
of the breast break
The breast is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the edge. And when it is broken inside, it descends downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of breath, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the hairs in the broken bone, and one can feel that well.
And the restoration is such that the patient sits on their back, and puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly places it evenly in all ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put on poultices and bandages over the subtle steel plate of salt or another lightweight material, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the strap around the back, and hold it tightly, and reward each hour the strap, and if it loosens, then hold it tight; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, and scrape off the poultice, and address what has come of the cures; then wind the poultice again, and hold it tight until he is healed.
of the rib break
Know that the break of the ribs does not come except in large places after the back, and at the top inside, and they do not bend except because they are rough; and one can feel it well by examination of the spine.
And the restoration is such that you put the break in place as it should be. And then put on a poultice and hold it with a steel band if you need to.
And if the break of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and puncture, just like from pleurisy, because the bone is poking through the skin; and breathes in gasps, and all, and vomits a great deal of blood, and this is a grievous sickness, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
And if there are those who say that you should administer foods that fill the stomach to push the break forward.
We do not do this unless hot abscesses come, if they have come. And if it has come, then he is healed.
And some of us say that you should put poultices on the skin to suck strongly, and it seems like reason; nevertheless, there is doubt that the poultice might attract superfluous fluids to the skin due to the weakness.
And some of us say that you should cover the skin with wet wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put an even bandage around, then take care of the care of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the bone poking through the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut on top of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath one instrument to ward off the scab; and then you must cut open the bone, and draw it lightly, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and cure with poultices until they are healed. And if hot abscesses come, then put on wet cloths in rose oil, and put them on the skin; and care for the skin as needed for an abscess, and be cautious sitting on the side where it is, until they are healed.
of the break of the neck
Sometimes the break comes to the bone of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and similarly at the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you see if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one tightens and pokes them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if one puts care into it.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see if it is healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents that are in hands, and on the back there is ventosity and egestion without will; and when one has soothed them on their belly, there is egestion without will. And when he is soothed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you anoint it if there is a warm abscess, by putting oil of roses or oil of egg yolk on it, until it is pacified; then put one of the soothing and drying plasters on it, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healed. And if some bone is loose, it is necessary to cover with a poultice; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if they are large, with a seam, then treat with ointment inserting fat, until it is healed; and if the socket of the bone is broken, which is called "the socket of the skull", then take your pouch from your left hand and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and needle on, if you need them; then tie it up, and if there is a loose bone, do the same, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the hipbone
It often happens that the hipbone is broken, and if it does, there will be a little diminution at the head; and it becomes long, and declines to the pelvis, and comes to the patient with pain in the place, and punctures, and swells what breaks.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, as far as you can reach over the breakage; and know what the breakage is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then place that breakage in its natural shape.
And if the breakage is of the length, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their belly, as far as the restoration of that breakage becomes apparent. And when you have put it in place, then put on a plaster, and then put on a wooden or horn needle, and bind the breakage so that it does not move; and fill the space below the ribs, until the parts are equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if the warm abscess comes, do not touch it, until the warm abscess is pacified, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and that's the manner.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is what is between the neck and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: of which one is that you take one piece of wood full of mulberry growth, in this shape:
And tie the two ends of the two pieces together with two strings, and bend them upwards, and place the patient on one seat; then throw the broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the level, and has about half a mulberry branch, then bend up some weighty thing or have the servants extend it downwards; then place the fingers of the breakage equal to their hands together, until the breakage returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on their backrest, and ties the hand to his neck; then instruct two servants to have one hold what is above the breakage in their hands, and the other hold underneath each string, and extend each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then bind one string underneath the breakage, and above the breakage, and have each of the servants extend to their part. And if the breakage is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one string in the middle underneath the seat, and another towards the neck, underneath the breakage; and similarly if the breakage is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put one string slightly, without labor, until the breakage is equal on the level, and on the neck; then set the breakage in place, as it should be, and bind it, unless warm abscesses come.
And if warm abscesses come, then do not bind it until seven days, and put on a moist linen in ease and oil of roses, until the warm abscess is pacified; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put the plaster on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put the drapery, and bind on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm may be in a state of equilibrium, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use needles, and put on the breakage a needle larger and stronger than the others, with two spaces between each needle, and have each needle be so large that it passes three fingers from one side; then bind on the needles, in the manner I said at the beginning of the chapter on the breakage, stronger and less distant.
And if you see the settling of the needles and the binding, as we have said, when you restore the broken member, and you doubt the warm abscess, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days the bandage, that pruritus or inflammation does not come to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If so, proceed, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not remove the bandage for more than three days or so, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and put underneath the shoulder a pillow made of equal wool, and look each hour of the day or night to see that the figure of the broken member does not move or become soft the bandages; then address it by the power of medicine, and give them food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is at its first subtlety; and when they begin to recover, let it be gross. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to take forty days to heal from the start; and then one must remove the bandage and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the place towards healing. And if the constriction is ugly and swelled, one should wait to remove it for one day or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is that which supports the pouch; and the other is large, and it is that which lies below, towards the little finger; by chance, breaks only the large foscile, or the small, and by chance both together.
When the small fosciles are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, so is the healing bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it is only the small foscile that is broken, then it is enough to extend slightly and set straight.
And if it is the large foscile, then it is necessary to strain more strongly; and stretch above one cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross-legged over himself, with one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the assistants' arms to the part below his hand, or to a strap, and another assistant above. And then set the mire equal, according to its best form.
And if in the breaking there are pieces, then set each one in its place, and if there is one that is loose or cannot be brought to its place, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and an osteum, as we have said before.
And if you have a wound with the breaking, I spoke of it in the singular chapter; then take care.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there appear abscesses, then apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft; and tie one dressing on top subtly, until the abscesses are appeased. And then remove the dressing, and put the poultice of mill powder with an abundance of egg, then set the splints, and let the splint of the breaking be a little stronger and slightly wider than the others; and know that it should have 7 or 8 splints or arms in several positions: whether the breaking is in one bone, or two; and strain more on the breaking spot than elsewhere, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and be the cloths above the breaking soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread, by which it is strained, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and ligament after some days. And if some bad accident comes to the member, such as pruritus that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in warm water, until those pruritus are appeased; and let the member not too tightly rest. And then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loose, or similar things, then adjust them.
And if you take note that swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it slightly, and leave it thus for some days, until swelling comes, and then strain.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days or thereabouts, then let him put his hands on his neck, and be his necks even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back; and know that this breaking is restored in 30 days or 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
Note: This appears to be a header or title indicating that the following text relates to the topic of "The Breaking of the Hand".
Know that at the back of the hand and with our fingers there often occurs a breaking, and only rarely does it happen.
And when the fingers of the hand are broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit upright in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the extended cloth, and stretch the assistants' broken bones, and set them equal to the mire, until they are well joined; and put the poultice and plasters, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the break; and be wrapped in one dressing of linen.
And if the breaking is on the palm around the belly of the finger, then make a sphere of cloths and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken finger; and then strain with one long cloth, and let the splint be as large as the finger of the hand, and strain, as is necessary.
And if the breaking is at the tip, then it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another below in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie all around the hand, and secure the ligament between the fingers.
And if the breaking occurs in any of our fingers, except the thumb, then set it straight, as is necessary; and strain with the finger, and if you see that you need to put a small straight splint to lift the break, and it does not move; and if the breaking is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then set it straight and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie all together in one holding place, whichever is stronger, or put a splint on top, like the thumb; and take note in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and secure what comes, as I have said.
Note: This appears to be a header or title indicating that the following text relates to the topic of "The Broken Thigh".
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and well one sees when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration is such that one ties a ligament above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then stretches each assistant's ligament to its equal part; and this is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the thigh, then one ligament goes towards the knee and the other ligaments below the break. And also if it is close to the knee, and then one ligament goes beside the knee, and the extension goes down; then set the mire so that the bone is equal in its two hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then put the poultice, and tie, if abscesses do not come.
And if there is hot abscess, then let it be appeased and then return to your work and your care; the splinting is done in this manner. Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.
If it happens, then disjoin it and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are fragments of bone that grip, then bind it, if possible; and if not possible, then cut the ligament, draw tight, and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the box is broken thus that one puts in stars, as in the aid and on the arm; however, in the restoration made it does not sound to the patient.
And know that the box is restored in 3 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of temperaments.
of the groove of the knee
Know that in the groove of the knee there is little breaking, but it folds many times. And if it breaks, then it is only a cleft or a pit, and it happens to all wounds, both with and without wound, and this one knows well.
And the restoration is such that one puts back what is torn to its place at the knees, as much as it can be assembled; then put the plaster, and there put a rounded stake if you need it, and strain it as it should be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breakages, just like an abscess or similar thing; then apply to each accident what is needed, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "malleolus" and the other is called "fibula"; and all other breakages come to it as they do to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is done.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns all awry.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it then turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns downwards. Then apply an extension, and put it back in place, and bind the stakes evenly; but nonetheless, it is necessary to consider whether the breakage is ugly, and there are many pieces, that the extension be smaller and lighter; and loosen according to your power.
And when you have completed all your work, then take two strips of greenwood that surround the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down; then envelop in two places one bandage above and below, and bind it in the middle also, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus is well; and some provide a splint of greenwood, and it is of wood, and put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do what is needed in the breakage where there is a wound; and move the leg each day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; and cure it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and the toes are also affected, and it happens with only a few exceptions.
And if there is breakage of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground, just as if it were going to walk; then put now your foot on the same spot where the bones are lifted up, then press down until they return to their places; then apply plaster and poultices above, and below the belly of the foot a small tablet with two full feet, then strain it onto the foot naturally, after you have wrapped bandages around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, then restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a stake according to the length of the toe, and be a little wider, then put below the foot that tablet which I said, and strain it naturally; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put above each toe a stake according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the tablet below the foot; and let it be standing on top of the tablet far enough from the belly of the foot that it is held well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, as we have said; and care for each accident according to what is needed.
of the breaking of the bone of the thumb
When the bone of a woman's natural disposition is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then incline her to the part of the back, and hold her steady by the rear; then fill the natural cavity with cotton, and put in it as big as one stone; then lay the woman down, and lift up the back little by little, and then jump the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the natural cavity, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and thus do it for seven days or around: the breakage will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of herbs, and tie a cord to the pit, and pour all the bladder into the natural cavity; then blow into the cord strongly until the bladder is emptied inside: the nature will return to the breakage; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of the man or woman is broken, restore it in this way as we have said about the bones of the hand; and are not hidden these breakages near to him who puts his study and use into it and understands my book. For the breaks signify in many dispositions the right path of restoration: then listen.
In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and put it into the shaft; then wrap bandages around, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of breakage with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a breakage with wound, whether it is great like the bones of the box or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, as the wounds we have said testify.
And if the wound heals, then keep it moist with vinegar, unless you have something else, then start to restore the breakage in the same hour or on that day, unless gangrene comes.
And if an abscess forms there, then wait until the ninth day to restore it, so that the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it for another third or quarter day, because you would bring a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent above the skin that has been uncovered, then it is necessary to set it slightly at an angle with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extension is not well-suited to be set equal in your hands, then readjust it with this iron instrument which is 8 fingers or 7 inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the physician to take 3 or 4, depending on what is needed in each cure for breaking; and it should be round and not too thin so that it does not bend under compression onto the limb during your work, and it should be a little above, and thick at the midpoint forward, like this:
And it is called a "palanch", for which reason it is necessary that the curved nail be placed on top of the apparent bone; and bind it once, until it recedes, and be equal to one another. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you file the head of the bone, until the instrument has control.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then file it with a suitable instrument, or chisel or scraper, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone from hardness and small flakes.
And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do this until it is in its place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly apply it; and do not put anything on the wound except for oil if you have not brought forth rot and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and file the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times this has happened to foolish physicians, and they have brought forth death or corruption upon the patient sometimes; and let the instruments be more gentle and soft than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to apply these remedies; but wrap around, instead of these, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days, the bowels begin to move towards the wound, then remove what you have put on top with all vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetra-pharmaceutical ointment and similar things.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is set and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs be adjusted in such a way that the bowels descend lightly downward.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but returns again with bowels, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which reason it is necessary that you want the wound to be cleaned with a tent, and remove all these deformed pieces that bring forth that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is written in this chapter beforehand. And when the bone is broken and appears on the limb, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar breaks in the large limbs, do not remove it, for many times death comes from it, but leave it until it becomes a scab; by chance it will fall off after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruises that come on the swelling
We see many times after the healing of a break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural actions.
Therefore, take heed if the swelling is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, in such a way that you take some of these things or all together, and mix them with black wine or with an abundance of egg whites or with ash; and apply it to the night's poultice, and tighten it well, and do not remove it for many days; then remove it, and start another, until the nodulations are removed; or you strain it on a piece of well-made linen; for the properties of linen are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already become hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then file it down, and make the excess apparent; or take it to any scraper, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the break in the bone is restored, and after it there remain weak and subtle limbs, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should be; or because there were too many bonds, and could not come the nourishment to the limb; or because of an abundance of inflammation; or because of too great movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and keep their body soft, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths to them, and give them joy and relaxation; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and inflammation often subsides with hot water, until the nourishment flows into the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
of the twisted limb after healing
When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and brings great evils, and by chance death; however, if the nodulations and twisting are fresh, then they should be risen with hot water, or mollifying herbs should be cooked, such as mullein leaves, roots, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, such as diachylon well made, and take the resin of mullein, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on it; or take fatty figs, and grind them with hemp seed, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the articulation is removed due to continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands. And let there be gentle movement of each member every hour.
And if the tortuosity is inflamed and hardened like stone, and needs to be removed by iron, then it is necessary to cut just up to the bone with a fine and subtle incision; and put caution and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary to bring it back into place without delay.
For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and by chance it may be set at the wrong place; therefore it is not good to move it until it has ceased to swell: many times this brings on shame and other pains.
Nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient whole again, then leave it alone until the abscess is pacified; then soak the member in warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member according to what comes naturally.
And I have arranged the chapters of dislocations from beginning to end.
of jaws
There often occurs that the jaws are dislocated forward and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: or they are somewhat removed from their place and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held in, nor can one close one's mouth, and wraps around one's tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself within a few days.
And if it is complete and entire, then it is necessary to reset it quickly, and not delay.
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and insert the mirror's pocket into one hand at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands are free, to make it equal; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all parts.
And the mirror sets it straight, until it returns to its place.
And if resetting is difficult, especially when both jaws are together, then soak them in warm water and oil, until they can be reset gently; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well with gentle softening, then put on damp cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with moist bandages.
and the patient sleeps on their back, and his legs are placed between two pillows, so that he does not move to either side nor tries to force it, but takes gentle food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are set.
and then eat as he wishes lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth to eat or drink, until the jawbone is well set and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural position, then fever and chills follow, and by chance, there may be a dissolution of the bowels, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a bad omen; and many times the person who has this, dies within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side into its continuity with the chest, and is dislocated sometimes backwards, and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses the joint firmly onto your palm, and it will return; then put on the poultice and bandage, and strain it.
and the shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate; unless it does not, and if it dislocates sometimes, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the poultice and bandage, and strain it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
and thus likewise is brought back the shoulder of the hip, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the lower part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the chest; and by chance dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate within for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for these it jumps forth quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps forth slowly and returns slowly.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they have a blow or crushing, and the shoulder becomes swollen with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you examine it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation is when it goes down towards the armpit, and you can distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them. and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit, reaching to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his neck, nor move with any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly when you touch it.
and this manner of dislocation is not to be forced back, when it is new, or if the patient is weak.
And the manner is that the attendants lift the patient's hand upwards, then put their fingers below the armpit, and lift the joint upwards to its place; and the attendants lift the hand and stretch it upwards, then put it back down; thus it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within three days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should gently soften and soothe them, just like a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and attend to them.
Then instruct the patient to sit on his back, and place beneath the armpit an equal woolen pad that is not too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror on the patient's heel over the pad, and lift the shoulder joint properly, and guide the patient's hand.
and another attendant holds the patient's head, so that he does not move downwards; now the shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it returning in this manner:
and that you make sure to have present one man who is greater than the patient; and he should be directly facing the side, and push the patient's shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another attendant guides the patient's hand down towards their stomach. And if the patient is too light, then let them hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And the dislocation is also done in another manner: and that one places a long heated iron in the earth, so that the head is as hot as a pistol, and is not too large nor too small. Then it should be placed under the patient, but so that there is a soft cloth above, and the patient's arm is straight from the long wood; then stretch out their hand downwards on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a iron with two arms of great size and four fingers of width, which has the head rounded so as to fit easily into the armpit below, in this form:
Then tie it on top of the head of the wooden beam with a soft cloth underneath, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient; and stretch out one's arm over the long wood, and hold the aid on top of the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on one shoulder of a narrow chest, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is so, however it may be, then you should place under the armpit an equal woolen sphere, then put the plaster wrapped in powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then hold it under the armpit gently, and turn the string on the plaster, and wrap the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he should be massaged a little, until the limbs are comforted, for he will heal faster; and then massage more afterwards five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and not softened, he is sound.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, then it is necessary that you should administer cauterizations to three perforations, as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and after seven days it does not hold, and the joint cannot lift one's arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set back in its place.
The dislocation that is in the direction of the breast or back, or behind, is made by pushing and stretching with one's hands, and another kind of treatment is administered; and it is cured until he is sound.
And if after the healing comes inflammation in the member and delayed movement, then have the patient take baths many times until that inflammation is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the shoulder joint
Know that the joint of the shoulder is loosened in points and returns to those points; and if it is loosened from all sides, both before and behind, and the dislocation does not return, because one can see it well and feel it well; and loosen according to each figure. And when you join the ailing shoulder to the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you should reset it as soon as the abscess comes to life, for if the abscess came to life, then it would be grievous to bring back; and by chance it cannot be brought back completely, especially when it is in the rear; and this one is worse than the others, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is when it is such that one can bring it back, that you stretch out his hand to your two hands; and his arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and press the joint onto its hinges together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand with his hand, and brings out from the root of the palm the shoulder that is loosened.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and have two attendants stretch out the arm, and hold it with both attendants, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth.
and when the mirror has joined the joint to its hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and press the joint firmly, until it returns.
and when it is back in place, then put on a dry plaster with egg yolk, and hold it firmly, and wrap the arm around the patient's neck, and let it be for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the string, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then redo the plaster and the string, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels inflammation after the setting of the joint, and it swells, then bathe him and rub gently, and press until it is eased; or you put a fatty sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath. and when he sweats, then gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then make him enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that, then put wet heated vetch fern on top, and hold it in place; he will return to his normal state.
The joint dislocation of the hand
The joint dislocation of the hand is dislocated, and the returning is gentle, more than other joints Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place hastily, in the same way that it is dislocated, so that the swelling is reduced or an abscess does not form quickly.
And the returning is done by placing the ailing hand on a table, stretching out the fingers of the hand, and aligning them with the eyes, so that they put their palm on the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it recovers.
Nevertheless, you must make sure it is well in place; then, have the patient put the back of their hand on a table for extension and returning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient put the back of their hand on the table, and the fingers place their hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's good.
If not, then strain on soothing poultices to cool abscesses, and leave it so without reapplying.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted;
and it does no harm to the patient except until the hand is swollen, and he cannot strain anything at all: then you know that the nerves are crushed, or the arteries; so there is no other remedy except to strain by fire cautery in the case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
And when the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have said, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then moisten with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
The joint dislocation of the wrist
Sometimes the wrist of the hand is dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the belly;
Then straighten the wrist, and hold the dislocation in place with your fingers until it recovers, then support the top of the wrist, and pull it towards the part where it is disconnected.
and leave it for 2 days, and then put it back in place that day; and bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and release it each day, and make it move, and tie the bandage again; and do this often until it is straight.
and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so just as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same also when it is dislocated on the other side.
The dislocation of the hip of the back
When the hip of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations jump forth without willing, nor can it be held, and many times a limb is softened, or both knees or one arm.
And many times the hip moves into four parts; that which moves at the back is called "giltosis".
The remedy is to reward if the giltosis has come from childhood; otherwise, there is no remedy nor healing of the whole.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cures say by great words, for there is no great benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
I say that in the giltosis that comes forward at the belly, there is no remedy nor healing.
and also that which comes directly in two sides, and one can only cure those that come properly at the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on their face in one place evenly, and have a strain underneath them, so they do not hurt themselves.
then stick one iron rod firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a strap around the joints of the patient, and one to the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and two attendants know the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron rods;
and be well tightened, the iron rod as we have said, and the fingers place their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover by this cure, then take a board three feet long and hollowed out underneath the appearance, and have the patient sit beside it, and place the head of the board under the appearance, then put the middle of the board on the spine. and have the fingers place their feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, then make it turn back by hand.
And it is that you stick two iron rods at the head of the patient with a length of a great arm, and towards the feet two others, and have between each rod, on top and underneath, a palm's width of space.
and have in each rod one perforation, where the turner runs, and be the rods firmly stuck in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each pair of rods be a rod turning, over which the straps turn, and have in each of the two turnings two small iron rods of a palm's width, to turn the turner.
and then tie the strap that is between the joints to the turner towards the head, and the other strap towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the attendants turns their turner to all the straps, and the master places the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then place a drying poultice with an abundance of egg white on top, and then the compresses, and then the sheet from a piece of cloth three feet long, to bring the joint of the gilbositis and the part of the spine to health, then tie it with a strap, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until they are healed.
and if nothing comes in the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the sheet that we have said before; and at times, one must administer a piece of cloth.
and sometimes the appearance occurs in the back part of the spine of the back, and it is thought to be dislocation; and this is the bone that opens up, for which one should not have any presumptions: by chance death would come.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come undone except by dislocation alone, nor does it happen as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiii. parts: within and without, and in front and behind; and more so dislocated within and less so outside in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and appears more swollen on the diseased side than the sound side, and the diseased person cannot double their knee over the fire. and it is the place that is below the swelling of an abscess hot, because the head of the scrotum comes away.
And the sign of him to whom it comes outside is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front is that he has his leg well set according to completion; however, he does not double over his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, it passes above the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the scrotum is at the level below the ribs.
The remedies for this likeness of dislocation are that you should treat it if the dislocation is old and remains in its condition, without any care; and there is no need for him to have presumptions.
And in that of whom the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of three manners of dislocation, hasten to return the joint to its place, stretching within and without, and moving to the right and left; by chance it will recover, and there is no need for any other care.
And if it does not recover in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare one strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands or with one strap tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in the same manner that he puts his hands under his elbows, then tightens it with a soft strap above the scrotum; and another takes hold of the head of the strap.
and they all stretch up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has recovered, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it is necessary to apply a cure to its likeness. When the dislocation is at the parting, you should strengthen the patient on his sound side, then put the strap on the root of the scrotum, and the head that is below the ankle, then stretch the strap up towards the ankle, and towards the calf.
then take another minister's arms, and encircle the thick head of the diseased scrotum, and stretch it strongly outside: thus it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft strap on both heels and knees, and the diseased leg should be stretched one and a half fingers longer than the other.
then be suspended on the head of a beam, and be above ground two arms long; then command one minister to encircle the head of the scrotum, and have another minister hanging with the patient, who will encircle strongly the scrotum, for the jointure returns now hastily.
And when the dislocation is outside, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one with gilboesite, and stretches one strap properly on the diseased leg, and also on the buttocks.
then put two pokers, one at the head and another at the buttocks, then insert one poker between the patient's thighs in the middle shape. and have moistened cloths wrapped around so that it does not hurt the patient, then each minister stretches towards him, and the surgeon puts equal pressure on his hand with the dislocation.
If it recovers, that's good. If not, put on a table and press him thus as we have said in the gilboesite, and let the patient lie down on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg hastily and according to what I said; and put the surgeon's hand on top of the diseased ankle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is outside, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down or lift him up on the ground, but rather he should be as if his hip were dislocated outside, as we have said about the lying down on both hips. and be on his face, and the strap stretched as we have said before, and he must not press on the joint at the table.
and it will be so when the patient stretches his legs and they will be equal; then close the thighs and put the poultice and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if he rests for three or four days, then release him and put the poultice on; and if you see that they are equal, strain it as before, and leave it. For three days; then release him and let him walk gently until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated according to three manners: that is to say, within and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg to their scrotum, and if it does not bend to their scrotum, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and have them put their foot on your feet.
Then take the kneecap in your palms and bring it between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the kneecap strongly; and another assistant stretches out his foot, until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that he has well bent his leg slightly.
and apply the poultice on top, and make the leg stay at the hip, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release him; and do not trouble the patient to move, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not set right, then administer extension strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes swollen and sometimes completely dislocated, and inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is inflamed, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
the remedies are gentle, and one should stretch them gently with the hands when it is only swollen.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you should make the patient sit straight, and have one assistant hold him by the leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot to you at your right hand, and then to your left twice, then stretch it upwards, and thrust the foot well upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, by thrusting and drawing the foot; if it returns, it is well; if not, then restart the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and place one strap firmly in the earth between his thighs, and tie cloths around, so that he does not hurt himself;
then hold the thigh with one assistant, and another assistant stretches out the foot to their hands or to a cord that they tie on the ankle of the foot; then each assistant stretches equally, and the straps be thus between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when one is stretching;
then place the fingers equally on the dislocation at their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, then apply the poultice and bandages on top, and bind strongly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
then let him be for two or three days, and if the ligaments have loosened, then release him; then release him on the third or fourth day, and keep him from going out for four days; and if he goes before that term is reached, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come forth, then it is necessary that you heal them, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
knees
When the knees are dislocated, then they should be well stretched without trouble, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in some part of the back of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one level or on two boards straight up, and place your foot on what appears to be this joint, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns.
and when it is equal and there appears nothing, then place a board under the sole of the foot two inches thick, then bind strongly, and let him be for three days, then release him; and make him rest, until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not unassuming in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, nor overly hasty;
and use at the beginning gentle and soothing remedies on abscesses that are hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset now the member in its place, so that the hot abscess may come;
and when the member is in place, then administer soothing remedies to hot abscesses, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with dried ointments.
and if there is a break with the dislocation, and small bones separated, then extract them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
and take care to enter the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth it to you as ordained by your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and body. Amen
