You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of medical knowledge collection and compilation, finishing it through its explanations and declarations. And in my vision, I thought of completing it with this manual tool, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is highly practiced in our region and spread everywhere, if the science has been lost or abandoned, there are no longer any remnants from it other than small descriptions found in books written by the ancients that were used with the hands. And because of this, errors and vanity have arisen, and closed minds occur, causing the loss of knowledge.
It seems to me that I can revive this treatise together with its arrangement, according to the path of exposition and declaration, and abbreviation; And I will bring together the forms of the metal cauteries and other tools of surgery, along with their appropriate arrangement and preparation for use, as is necessary.
And because no skilled physicians can be found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost. It is necessary that one who interferes in this matter become proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they understand the position of the limbs, their shapes and connections and separations, have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, know the number of bones, the movement and location of mobile and stationary veins, and the origin of their exit.
And this is what Hippocrates said: we lack nothing with knowledge, and yet we are poor with work; In the art of manual skills as well.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is unaware of what has been said before, they may fall into error and misuse others;
Just as I have seen many who interfere with this science and abandon their studies without experimenting;
For I saw a foolish doctor who treated a lymph node or sore throat on a woman's neck, and also cut her arteries from the neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
And saw another doctor treating a stone in an old man's kidney, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and he died within three days.
And I have already been called to draw blood, and saw the arrangement of the body part and the size of the stone, and if he had let me cut him it would have led to his death.
And saw another doctor who treated our local duke whose leg was broken, and with the breaking there was an injury;
and the doctors, full of ignorance, allowed the breaking to occur on the wound like it was done by strong joy, and did not allow any healing for the injury, and let this end.
And he commands not to dislocate it;
And wait like the leg was fully grown and the feet, leading to destruction.
I hurry to come to him, and quickly rush to dislocate the leg; And when I hear it dislocated so smoothly without any pain being felt.
But all the corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be cured;
And the corruption continued to spread through the member until the limb was completely lost.
And there is another mark that collapses an abscess, then inflames it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For a gangrene, when it is full of melancholic humours, it should not be touched with iron if it has not been cut in such a way that all that is corrupted can be removed.
And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the art of surgery is divided into two parts: that means, surgery where there is danger in multiple positions;
And I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you keep them, so that the foolish might not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in caution, and treat your ailments lightly yet firmly, and employ the best means so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and remain healthy;
and leave the terrifying diseases without relief for health;
Remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galien declares in none of these admonishments: Never take a remedy for an illness when you're not called crazy by your fellow villagers.
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medicinal cautery, and are arranged from the head down to the feet;
and the shapes of the instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything else that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and these chapters are arranged with the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
And it is organized according to the location of the head up to the elbow, and regarding the shapes of the instruments.
Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is fitting that I describe the quality of each remedy and its harm for each constitution.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, is the longest speech and subtlest science and the hidden answers;
And many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it;
And they find my words insufficient, for I fear the length of it.
I say that the cautery helps universally in all constitutions where there is matter, for there are two types of constitutions: This means knowing that the hot constitution has matter and the dry constitution also has matter.
In the combination of hot and dry constitutions with matter, they devised something and said that the cautery is great help; And the other said otherwise: that the cautery is only good for illness that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with hot illnesses by heat or dryness;
And this person who said the opposite states that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come from within the body. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the condition of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true every time by experimentation.
And through any means, do not interfere except for the one who has experienced it, and who knows from long use of the chapter on cauteries, and the variety of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and duration;
For other complexions we have nothing more to say, especially in matters of cold and wet illnesses. And all of them gathered together with the fire cautery.
And know, my children, that the assembly of a fire cautery has secrets in healing, and brings more benefit than a burning medical cautery.
For fire is simple, and it only affects the limb that is being treated, not harming any other limbs if properly done.
The hot medicines spread from one body part to another upon application, causing diseases if not properly treated; and by chance they bring the injury to the patient.
The fire for its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not do this thing if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, it was based on the truth of things;
And for this I apologize for the length of my words, because it does not please me to disclose the secret which is revealed by fire and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating; Receive it in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they agreed on what times the cauterizations should be made, and set fire to them.
And I say that the cautery is suitable in all circumstances, for the nuisances arising are greatly mitigated by the aid of the cautery; And indeed, if the cautery is for necessary pains beyond and after which cannot wait until a greater mischief befalls the limb.
And never think it, dear boy, as do those foolish lookers-on; for the disease that is cured by cautery does not recur; and he says it thus;
and he says it thus; But it is not as they think, for the cautery is but a medicine that modifies the complexion and dries out the fluids causing pain. It is worth more than medicines due to its speed in enhancing its value and the virtue of its work and authority.
And things that can happen is that the disease will come at any time according to the composition of the patient's body and the location of the illness and its nature;
And it happens that excesses accumulate in him through the acquisition of meats and similar things; if this is not treated with a cautery where there's excess moisture or dampness, such as hot cauterizations for pain, and similar things, then such pain does not return. But this happens rarely.
And few understand why cauterizations are called the last of medicine; it's something to be seen.
But they don't believe that cauterizations are to be used after medicine; their understanding is false. Cauterizations are the last resort in medicine because when our methods of treatment fail in any illness and do not work, then we administer a cauterization, and it proves effective.
Therefore it's clear that cauterization is part of medicine, not according to the thoughts of ignorant people though.
The old ones said that cauteries of gold instruments are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated this because of the quality of gold and due to its high quality substance;
and they said that the metal of the cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not visible; it's just a statement because I have experimented with it and found out that indeed it becomes visible in some individuals.
Gold cauteries are better than iron ones, as they said. And yet, when you heat an iron instrument, you may not notice it being heated by the color of the gold, and then suddenly it cools down.
and if it is overheated; if they use the fire; And thus I have enough obstruction.
And you have ordered this chapter on the animal's head up to the nose, because its visibility is easier to find.
The olive cautery is effective against moisture and cold in the brain, and there are two ways to do it due to an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothaches, throat pain, and especially all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be cleansed with a solvent medicine, altering the body's three humors or four, depending on how well the properties and heat and habit of the patient can endure it; and then restore the head of the patient.
And then make them sit cross-legged between your hands, and place their feet on a hard surface;
after place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his second fingers; and when your thumbs reach there, if blood flows from the nose then warm the cautery called "olive" which has this form: And place it at its proper position with ink as a mark, and make your way down and hold your hand gently and gradually while adjusting. Then ease your hand slightly, and check if you can see the bone when it moves a little; And if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have instructed;
After taking some wool, prepare and make it soft inside, then place it at its proper position, and let it be for three days;
After put butter on moist cotton; And leave it until the scab is completely dried off; After treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmac', until it heals properly.
And those who were of old would say, that when a wound is left open longer, more purges out; and because of this, the help moves.
And they say none of these that we must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then reset the one that has been burnt by the bone, and treat it.
And those who say otherwise state that the cautery should be applied and pressed as long as necessary, and push so hard on it until you can displace bone like a finger that women use when they are pregnant; because fluids should flow out from this.
And must the wound be left open for a long time; After that, one should clean and dry it.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good for all purposes, except in certain cases where there is a risk of infection;
And it seems to me that I should let it alone;
because the head of the shoulder is weakened by continuous exposure to nature's substances, as we testify regarding other members.
And indeed when the shoulder head is weak due to nature, and the first sign of a cautery is more healing for me, and from this I work thus assembling together a cure.
When chronic pain in the head occurs and lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's ears and pills which are called "couchie," and also perform cleansing of the head and ears and apply bandages; And if one performs the cautery as we have previously mentioned, it does not work. Take care that the shoulder of the sick person is of strong constitution, and do not let it be too cold; Therefore, treat with a small fire cautery as we have described above. After you perform the cautery on each hoof up to the bone, as we said before, and do the cautery where the bone is called 'vessel'; and place there what one uses for suction cups; Move your hand so that you do not see until the bone: The patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery compared to others, and I will speak about it elsewhere;
It is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
The fire cautery commands the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When pain suddenly comes in part of the head, and extends to the eye, and the shoulder is cleared by purifying medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the section on diseases, and nothing benefits: Therefore apply cautery according to two methods, namely using medicinal heat and fire.
The cauteries using medicinal heat involve taking a dose of oil, and removing the bark and coating it over the two heads, then apply it around where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the oil right under the skin.
And when it has been placed, if it adheres well and you keep it in place for twelve hours; Then remove the oil bandage and remove the garlic oil, and leave the wound for two days or three; Then place a butter poultice on it until heat comes out.
After the ointment treatment as long as it is effective;
And if you see it necessary to use some of the burning medicines that I have written about or described in the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery follows this method. Heat the cautery of which I have described:
And it is called "closed" because the head takes on the shape of an oxen horn where there is a slight curvature at the beginning and a small appearance in the middle;
and place it in the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron, until half of the tip of the key is burned;
and let your hand rest so that no artery burns and it opens, allowing an abundance of blood to flow.
After placing cotton in a sailcloth, place it on the wound for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then apply ointment to the wound until it is clean;
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the fire cautery called 'cultellare', do it across its entire tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
Of the headache
When you treat a migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't improve, and you observe that the cauterizations mentioned earlier from medical knowledge do not affect this migraine, then you should heat up the cautery called 'cultellare' until it becomes white.
And so begin in such a way that along the length there is half an inch line, and hold your hand once, making sure you do not cover the artery and go up to the bone.
And be wary of the jaw that clamps shut when chewing, and ensure there is only silence in the mouth, with no spasms affecting the patient. And beware of bleeding from the artery when it's covered, or if the covering causes great fear and similarly for those who are unaware of this practice, and have not studied nor experienced it; and let the work continue within my path;
but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not heal the disease, and the patient is suffering, then apply it to the middle of the head as we said, and treat the wound until it heals;
And if you see this, apply the cautery that we said or from the chapter of artery extraction, with the cautery that has two knives; and these cauterizations are better and more helpful than others.
of the pain of the ears due to cold
When cold causes pain in the ear, and we have applied remedies that dissolve it as well as other treatments that we have mentioned in this division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called "points", its use is as follows:
After pointing out the whole area around the diseased ear, or around both places where pain is felt, and then moves away slightly from the base of the ear after you have indicated its place. And has X points within each ear;
after the treatment until it becomes healthy.
of the torment/pain in the mouth
Treatments that should be cured with cauterization are not limited to those that move with the bloodstream, as we have said in our divisions of diseases;
and do not apply cauterization to swellings that come from seborrhea and pus of nerves.
When you treat this type of treatment that moves with the urine and bodily discharges and gargling, if it doesn't respond, then it's necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three applications. One in the root of the ear, and the other slightly outside the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips;
And place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and apply heat at the head of the ear somewhat below the horn of the head, and another near the temple as long as a hand. And leave the cautery in place until half of the ear is burnt.
And that is the shape of the cautery:
And it resembles the scissoring instrument that we placed before, but it's a bit more refined, and you should use scissors that are slightly thicker;
After treating the wound as I've explained previously, do so until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and if it doesn't benefit, and the patient doesn't get fever, then apply four cauterizations: On the second horns of the head, and at the base of the head, and where the neck is called 'wattles' as we have previously mentioned, and at the back, the cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
And so treat it in the way that we have said before.
of liturgy
For this illness, you should give the patient large years and almond pills to clear the brain;
After rinsing the head of the patient thoroughly, and place the plaster of saffron on the back of the head as is written or as a treatment for plasters;
and this is the way to perform the cautery: do it as I have told you.
If they do so thus, well done; And if it is not so, have three fire cauteries applied halfway down the neck until reaching the collarbone, and leave an interval of about two fingers between each cautery.
And treat it in the same manner as the others; if you find that it is fitting, and the patient is suffering, then apply a fire cautery halfway through. And if further treatment is needed, two more on the two horns (likely referring to areas or parts), and treat until it has healed;
And let the cauterizations known as "olivar" be those that I have described earlier.
It is necessary for the head to be cleaned of years and what we have mentioned before.
After removing the head of the disease, then apply a fire cauterization halfway down the head and on each horn, and once at the back and three times near the spine of the neck;
And if you need more expertise, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease has been expelled, then perform four cauterizations on the spine at the back; And let it be as gentle as possible until the best warmth remains, and lift your hand; After the cure as long as it is clean, and let it be the cauterization which is called "the olive" that we have mentioned before.
From the cautery
The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the body parts suffer from medicine's effects.
And if it's an infant who cannot endure pain, then perform gargling and chewing, often mixing the brain with good meats;
After the king in the middle, and I perform a cauterization as we have said before, and one cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; And if the patient is in pain and suffering outside their body, apply cauteries as I have instructed for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine in the back and neck area. Follow the olive-shaped cautery method according to the way I've described it.
If the patient is young, apply a fine cautery according to this method:
When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or fluids are corrupted and thickened, then apply a partial cautery as we have described for the person who has paralysis.
And if it is due to melancholy that the excesses decline into melancholy and the body is wet with malaise, then let them drink something so that the brain might be purified, as described in the section before on purification.
After the head of the disease; Afterwards, make me a linen thread well done, like a circle, if you place it around the head;
And let the patient lie still, and ensure that all parts are well supported;
Afterward apply the liniment, and rub in with old beeswax; And heat it on fire moderately, so that the warmth can be tolerated by the patient or the pot can be placed comfortably; After emptying the cavity from within through the mouth, and leaving it to cool.
And do this to the patient once every week with another form of governance until it has healed.
Or if you wish to cauterize him, do by making points on all parts of the cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain more significantly;
Then place damp cotton, butter, and grease from gelatine on it.
regarding the treatment of eyes When the eyes start moving according to the signs I have mentioned in division, then begin and continue to give something purifying to the patient for their head, protecting them from all moisture. Have them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After instructing it to raise its head, and have it apply the cautery to the head, and apply two cauterizations on the two temples where the decrease in awareness is at the two eyes together, or if the decrease occurs in one.
And apply the entire cautery to all veins and arteries that are around the core, and make sure to apply the cautery long enough according to the width of the temples;
And you must know of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it by pressing with your hand as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and how to apply cautery, and how to stop its bleeding;
And never do you apply cautery or heat near the two bones behind.
And it's seen that they are cold damp excesses, so I have him apply the cautery that I mentioned at the start when descending on the eyes: I apply cautery to the forehead, and two applications of cautery on each temple, and two near the two bones; And if need arises for more, cauterize him wisely above the eyebrow with every small cautery.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and if he does not benefit from it, then give him three large pots of water. After the king (presumably referring to the patient), and I make him cauterize or midway between the cauterization with olive oil; and do two cauterizations of the cauterization which is called "claw" on the two eyebrows, a little above the hair;
and be careful not to cover the artery as you do this.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "claw":
When the paper of the oil has been softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this type of cautery called "olive". of which I have described:
And if you see that two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as they reach the eyebrows;
And do not let your hand rest until a third of the paper is burned, according to the method that I have said.
of the hair that touches the eye No time has it happened that the hair of the oils turns into fat and grabs the oil, and then one performs cauteries according to two ways: This means knowing either fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then instruct the patient into their healthy position; After writing about the eyes on a piece of paper, there should be a figure that looks like a leaf of myrtle, and this is where the beginning of the sign indicates the presence of hairs.
Then I place moist cotton and quail's egg mucus with garlic oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery which is in this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure you have indicated slowly and slowly just a few times, so that the scars are at the exact spot;
And the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the edge of the eye;
Then lift your hand and leave it like this for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the scab is removed; After the oil cure while it is still ointment-like.
And when this has been done and the hairs appear, and the skin is softened then proceed with the cautery over that same area, just like you did at first;
And if the hairs have fallen out, apply the cautery until the skin rises to its natural position and evenly, not prickling the hairs with the tool.
The hot medical cautery you instructs the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even; then make of parchment the shape of the bay leaf.
Then take French soap and fresh lye, from each one use half spoonfuls, and grind them together well; And make haste, so that it does not cool, then blow upon the shape you have made as if it were a leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper with the eyes. And if the illness lasts only in one oil [a unit of measurement], then one should open it there, and if it affects both similarly; And place damp cotton over the oil as you would an egg;
And the head of the disease be in your health and place your hand on the medicine, and press the paste onto it every time that the disease feels the medicine's bite, for it feels the bite as if from fire.
When you have done this for some time, apply the medicine to your finger. And when the bite is gone, lift up the arm from there, and reward you if you see the paper lifted just as it was lifted by the constraint of fire or through an incision; And if this is the case, then do well.
If not, then try applying more medicine to the affected area or wait for the medicine to take effect, until your operations are equal and your eyes set right;
Then apply moistened cotton with butter until the oil in your ears is absorbed. After that, scrape off the ointment from the affected area which is called 'dyafenis' and other substances, while keeping it clean.
And if this requires that you keep well to your work by great care so that no medicine leaks into your eyes.
And if the paper becomes oily and the hair sticks in the oil after that, if you have to apply medicine again on the area that has been properly softened by clean paper, do it in the same way as before; After scraping until it is clean.
And this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
Know that eyes in humans vary greatly in size and smallness, and according to this, your instructions should be made.
And do not let the right way be answered by him who studies this art.
On the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your good health; and guide the surgeons' heads between your hands in such a manner that they do not move and do not lose their heads;
after this, put in an egg or myrrh juice on the eye;
after heat up the cautery which is made of metal:
and place it on the head just like the shape of a feather from a rooster, ensure that you apply the cautery;
If you see, it may appear from one side head to the other, and if you see, it may also look like a tent;
but still, this is what should be done for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it's opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it; and if it's closed, let the work proceed, and remove it from the bowel;
after placing the fire cautery in position, hold your hand on the fire cautery at the part close to the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not do anything foolish; and place the cautery in the oil's fat, and corrupt it.
If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then apply the fire cautery again once or if needed, and leave it for three days.
After placing damp cotton on butter, and apply the ointment remover cure until it is clean. If more than thirty days have passed without improvement, then apply an astringent liquid medicine until the bone is exposed; And follow this according to whatever comes in his chapter.
And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand the fistula, and let it heal; After that, place inside the cut a finely sliced piece of the substance shown here: and do it in quantity of three spoonfuls of honey; Hold your hand or the substance firmly, and do not allow the patient to move, ensuring that the honey melts properly into their mouth;
And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient a moistened cotton ball, like an egg or an oval shape:
The surgeon operates on the diseased area, while preserving healthy parts marvelously through surgery.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery method we have described, it's good. And if not, then it is necessary to apply petasite to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body under the nose according to what should be done in its own proper place.
of cuts in lips Many times, cuts occur in the lips that are called "whiskers", and also in children's lips.
When you treat these cuts using the method we've discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't work, then use this: apply a small surgical torch on the size of this form:
And he quickly places them in those cuts until they grow to the full size;
After the treatment of the area, until it is fully healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the kidney, or under the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after causing gangrene and swelling and becoming infected, it develops into a fistula; And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all: So, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the ulcer; after the mouth or recess of the ulcer, and hold your hand until the iron turns red at its bottom, and onwards;
and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, as long as it is clean;
and if it is treated like this, it's good; and if it is not treated like that, then you must expose the bone and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then apply the head of the patient in your healthy state; After heating the cautery until its form comes thereafter as follows, you place a stick near the tooth;
and place inside the cautery until it's hot quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after you slightly lift your hand, and continue with the cautery according to your desire.
after you fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and leave it there for an hour, then remove it.
And in this manner the tooth which was moving is now fixed, and the softened gums are held back, and the moisture that caused damage becomes dried.
from the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or fever, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it requires cautery according to two methods: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
The fire cautery made from butter is such that you take cow's butter, and at the tip use a spoon made of iron or anointing stick; Take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, soak in butter until it's saturated, then place it over the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down.
And do this often until the butter's properties reach the root of the tooth. If you see wet wool and cotton saturated in cold butter, place them over the aching tooth, and hold it on hot iron until the heat reaches the gum around the tooth.
The fire cautery made from iron or anointing stick is such that you take it, and make it large enough so the heat does not reach the skin of the patient;
After heating the cautery, from which its form will come afterwards, place it on the teeth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be alleviated either that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patients fill their mouths with good butter in anticipation of the heat of the cautery, and then quickly remove it.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And make the cautery according to how much you desire, and according to what you can do;
and this is the form of the cane:
regarding the pock marks When the scrophules are of cold phlegm and moisture and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with that which comes after in form, and have it open two openings for the steam to exit from the other side of the cautery;
And apply the fire cautery to the abscess once, or twice as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it in place for about three days; And cover with damp cotton saturated in oil until the splinter is extracted;
After treatment of local inflammation and tenderness until it heals.
When the moistures overcome in the channels of the heart, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be purged first with diuretic medicines;
After applying the cautery to the base of the throat, and be careful not to come all the way up to the throat, and don't burn too deeply but just a little.
Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint of the neck with respect to the base of the spine, and it should be understood that this type of cautery is known as "the clavicle", from which we have a depiction before us.
and treat the shoulder in accordance with what I have previously stated until it becomes healthy.
When all and the diseases of the womb are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or dryness, and it's an old disease, then perform two cauterizations on their legs at their knee joints; and do another cautery right between the two breasts near the buttocks.
And make sure that you use the cautery known as "the clavicle" according to the form described beforehand.
And if you see, make the cautery by touching with all the point of the fire tool which is named 'point' as it was described in the disease of ears;
and let there be points up to XXX, or at least that many.
After treating the area according to what has been described, perform three rounds of cautery following this pattern:
And because of this they are performed with a lighter cautery, for you do it three times over each area.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, wrap the patient's back and sides; Afterward, lift the stone inside the prostate with your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, rub the fire tool which has two prongs as shown here:
and apply the cautery to the stone until it touches the side, and make a shape with four cauterizations together.
and for this, use the fire tool that has three prongs, so there are six cauterizations in total.
And the nerves are arranged like the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery which has three nerves:
And fix it on this one nerve because there are seven burns in relation to this.
After placing the cautery on, grind with twigs; After having him rest, do not let the patient's limbs be strained for too long until they are well supported.
And if it has been dislocated there, with very little happening, then perform a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or do a few cauterizations.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is expelled from it, and the patient's injuries are treated.
For when colds and moisture reach the stomach while it is in harmony with its constitution, they increase the production of phlegm within him. These conditions are multiplied by over-indulgence in certain treatments that he follows without benefit. Therefore, it's necessary for the patient to wear a cloak on his back, extend his legs and arms. From that on, I apply three cauterizations over the heel area by the quantity of two, for each cautery at the wrist, and two cauterizations below the two sides as long as the pattern of cauterizations forms three angles, and they have space between them so they do not stick together when they develop ulcers;
And let the cauterization be done sufficiently that it reddens the two parts of the knee, and let the pattern of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
And if you see it being cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
And the one who feels fear from this cautery, apply it firmly and strongly to the stomach I point number 1 according to the amount you see of its application; Then cauterize with all the cautery which is called 'points'.
After the treatment we have discussed previously, as long as it remains clear.
As for the liver, it experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, and excessive wind; until its natural constitution is reduced by excesses. And the patients are treated with what we have discussed in divisions; but if it doesn't help them, it is necessary that the disease be surgically removed from their belly. And the sign of its application is three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, between the hipbones, where the stomach's pain originates.
And let there be space between each cautery as large as two fingers; And have the cautery as long as your arm, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
And let only half of the coal be heated, and have the patient lie straight on its feet;
And if they cannot, let them sit up, and extend their legs, and lift their arms;
And if you wish to, apply these cauteries with a surgical knife, if you are skillful and careful in the art, take care not to burn all of the coal, for you would dry up the whole body; And let it not come all the way to boiling, for their ears are very delicate in that place, and you need knowledge to see.
When it has advanced to the liver, and you know how to determine if it is in the liver tissue or within the membrane: If it's in the tissue, the patient feels moderate pain;
And if it's within the membrane, the pain is more intense.
And when this treatment affects the nodes, it is necessary for the patient to rest with their head elevated;
and then guide your hand over the place where the node is located, and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as this is its form: And apply the cautery to it until the roots are blackened, and go up to the groin, until the pus is completely out.
after the treatment following the treatment of boils as long as it remains clean;
And it is not proper to use any other cautery except the one who has studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through these hands such diseases have never been corrected.
Therefore it can be boldly opened, and every time I think that movement is worth leaving to.
A cautery of rue oil
The old ones said that one must make hot irons from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristolochia, the longest that you can find, let it be dry, and also make it as thick and long as your forearms; And the moisture in the air, and it catches fire, and burns the cautery between the strength and your neck, and two small cauterizations a little lower in the part that is under the beard;
And two more cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, behind slightly. And one cauterization on the belly button, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two below the ribs at the location of the cauterization which is between the shoulders.
And do not squeeze your hand, instead perform it openly as when smelling.
And it was said by some old men that no one uses a fiery cauterization halfway through shaving, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; And when the pain jumps out, as we have said about the abscess on the liver.
But in this chapter is fear or the illness has now ended, or there appears a fistula which cannot be cured.
from the mouse
When you treat the disease 'la mice' in those whom we have spoken about with regards to our treatments and nothing benefits them, then they try three methods of cautery which are all good.
From which there is a method such that you make three or four cauteries, according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before;
and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, and may the patient be accustomed on their back;
and another way to perform the cautery is to heat the cautery with two rods as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and gently heat the part of the mouse where the disease originates from the left side, and may the elevations that you heat the part according to the area, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After heating the two wicks until they are felt on the other side, and then remove the cautery tool, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, apply to the entire cautery with three wicks.
After the treatment when it has eradicated the putrefaction for a long time, and this is equivalent to changing other treatments as were mentioned previously.
The cautery does not work in dry conditions, except for the method that is called "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we have discussed in sections, and if your treatment doesn't benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries inside the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one under the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place in the buttocks; and make sure that the cauteries are very close to the internal organs of the knee.
Afterwards leave the cautery open to promote healing for a long period, and do not cease the treatment of the illness after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and both intentions together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the cleaver that we have demonstrated before; And for the back it's like an olive, as was shown previously.
When the joints are inflamed in someone with dropsy and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the cautery on the back of the joint between the thumb and the index finger; And gently move your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deep through this part, so it would be like leaving the liver, and thus follow this form for the cauterization:
After that, do two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the knife blade; And make the cauterizations long, one over the knee joint in front and the other behind, midway along the leg;
And let the cauterizations burn for a long time without treating them, until the disease comes out.
after the treatments of other treatments that we have mentioned.
When the belly remedy comes from cold and moisture, as long as the restorative and digesting properties that are in the stomach and intestines are being released, and cannot be treated by methods of treatment; and you see the disease very suffering and of great virtue, if you make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what he spoke about previously or the stomach cauterizer, in the circulating cauterization; and four cauterizations in the center of the navel for each subtle cauterization at the knee, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, and one cautery on each knee, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large ones, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
Of treatments for hemorrhoids
When the tumors are at their origin or in one or more locations, and they are old with large cold fluids that are moist and corrupted, and if they are treated as we have said in divisions, but no benefit is gained, apply cauteries. At the spine of the back, choose an area entirely removed from beneath the ribs with a little by little process in triangular pattern, and place the cautery at the spot where the back is divided into two.
And if you believe that the stomach has cooled down and the meat is not cooking well, and you notice swelling in the abdominal area, then apply a large cautery to the stomach as was explained previously, and another one on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with all the other parts being treated using the same cautery technique. And leave the application of the cautery until it is fully done. After treatment until it is healed.
When you are working with the metal tool, if it appears to be a fire cautery, and then set it completely ablaze and place it directly on the metal tool being worked. and let your hand remain as long as the fire goes to the base of the vein, from which blood flows;
Do this once or twice, and if there is much metal, apply the fire to each one as we have said; after the use of poultices until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large fire instrument, it will provide more help.
When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening (operation), which we will describe in its proper place, should such a disease occur that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
If there is no瘘管, it becomes old and festers with corrupted moisture, so you should thoroughly inspect the area for any sign of a subtle change. And remember that you need to know precisely how far up the test needs to go.
After applying the fire instrument that seems to be a rasier, place it along the fistula according to the amount that fits into the opening and repeat the process until the inflamed and rotten parts are burned out. Do this once, or twice, or three times, depending on how much you need.
And you must avoid burning the nerves which are sensitive, and large veins.
If the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestine, if you encounter these situations, and do not perform this elsewhere but in its normal place, and consider that it is not in a sensitive area;
After the treatment until it's clean, and if the area is swollen, and the contents are solid for a long time, then you can be sure that the area is completely healed;
And if the contents aren't hardened, know that the area is diseased, and the bone has corrupted at its root; And thus like one of those we will mention in its proper place.
When abdominal pain comes from the lungs and large winds affect a woman, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery on both sides of the lungs and also to the wrist, as we previously mentioned;
And if we burn it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide more help.
From the bladder When the bladder is thick and moist and has poor heating and moisture, so that the kidneys retain urine, then you should cauterize in the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, both on the right and left sides. Each cauterization should be as long as one inch that we give.
And make me cauterize behind the back, or two if you need them;
Let the cauterizations be in the shape of a clavel (a small metal loop or hook) as was described before.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are decayed and their ends are delayed; And when they come, one feels great pain: And thus, it's necessary to do three cauteries in the mouth region, as we have said or a bladder cauterization, and two outside the back;
And let the cauterizations be on the clavicle, as we have said.
When the mucusy fluids descend into the buttocks area, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that one limb is longer than the other when measured together;
And you will find the bones at the start of the buttocks region, so it's necessary to cauterize the hair on the buttocks area with one cauterization resembling a circle, and mark in front of the bones inside the buttocks area where it turns, so that the buttocks are within the circle;
And if so, let the cauterizers be such as those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
And if such cauterizers are not at your disposal, make three olive oil cauterizers large, and let the cauterizers be well made just like all the rest;
And let the cure as long as it is clean.
From thigh pain When pain comes in the thigh region, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient's condition has been treated as we have described in the division of diseases and treatment does not work, and the illness is old: Therefore, it is necessary that you cleanse the patient of large excesses with putrid pills, or other good-looking pills. Afterwards, make the cauterization;
And the method of the cautery is according to two methods: Here is what you need to know, it consists of hot remedies and fire cautery.
Fire cautery has several methods, of which some are like this:
You should apply the cautery on the hip's bony prominence with three triangular cauterizations following this shape. Make sure they are well deep and large, with an area of about two between each cauterization, and use olive oil as the cauterizing substance;
Do not apply the cautery in the middle of the hipbone, because there are four cauterizations according to this shape:
And if you see, apply the circle-cautery that we mentioned earlier in relation to hip dislocation;
But do it in this manner so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the nerves leading to the heart be cut.
This is the way it's done in sciatica, when pain stays in the buttocks and doesn't reach up to the thigh or leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there or where the patient says the pain is held by the disease, and one cauterization above the ankle four times, at the left part a bit.
and let them be made with an excision knife cauterization, or burn away the fat leading to the heart;
and if the disease feels that the pain extends up to two feet or near the knee, cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four in the cauterization which is called "points". And if more work is needed, do it as necessary;
And if the pain is around the knee towards the thigh, then you do the cautery with a cutaneous or circular fire iron and make sure to take great care in all your cauteries that you do not allow the heat for too long, burning nerves and major arteries, and that you cause no more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle up to the knee, and they only allowed it until the leg was completely swollen, and also all the feet, causing them to be pierced and corrupted throughout. After an abdominal treatment that led to their death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on each one, according to this manner.
And the surgeon said about the cautery of the hip, as follows: make it such a device and have its head as thick as a finger joint, or slightly less, and let there be crosspieces and place them from one crosspiece to the other distance equivalent to the size of a small handful.
And let the crosspieces be made in two parts and also be like knots, and it should have a well-made iron handle;
And this is its form:
And heat it until it becomes a deep red and starts emitting smoke, then place it over the affected area of the buttock flesh, and twist it towards the healthy side.
and apply the cautery once when the fire has heated up and leave it for three days; then cover it with butter bandages, and keep the wound open as long as necessary; after the ointment treatment until it is healthy.
Albucus states that we use little of this cautery due to our fear of his doctrine, and few people actually use it;
yet this is considered to be a good cautery, which one can tolerate, and applies where it becomes effective.
The medical hot irons are such that you make an instrument of interweavings in which descends the edge of the door, and may be of iron or steel with one long surface, and at its height have two holes, and between each have the size increase of a finger; And let them extend forward and upwards, and join together in this form:
After placing on the hip of the lying patient near his intact side, press your hand quite onto the hip bone; After heating the second circle of the hot ash to the fire's first point for an hour continuously, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burn.
For it finds burning akin to that of fire;
And when the mordications have passed, raise your hand with the tool and lift the buttock gently from awe, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scalding is over. And let him lie for three days that decay may take place;
This would be the last aid after the removal of ointments until he is well.
And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even down to the leg, you should do the same with this tool on that area as you did on the buttocks.
This is the way of hot application, and I have written it down as an appendix to this medical treatise. Take ashes and quicklime in equal amounts of one to the other, grind them together, and put them into a new jar. If there is a small notch out where, so that the tip of a razor might be able to enter;
If there is a small notch out where, so that the tip of a razor might be able to enter; and put another pot well leaded under it, and place an alkaline and salt and sweet water above, as long as there are two layers of the powders on top; then you will have grasped it well in your hand.
and leave it like this until the water and slime or grease comes out under where the lead was, then take all that water, and pour it onto the salt and the alkaline as before.
And then there will be plenty of water and administered in motion of medical operations and in cauterizations of other limbs.
And it performs equal work as fire, and for other medicines which are used in cauterizations of the hip like mustard oil and resin with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment in which an honored person was treated for the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and with great relief. He says that no other treatment was done, and that it cured him completely in one fell swoop when this treatment was performed, and he bathed himself as he instructs hereafter.
And instruct them in this manner that you take green, fresh and dry lead tar, grind it very finely with a little fat, and spread it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and bind it;
and leave it for three hours, and by the quantity that the disease no longer feels the burn.
And then make them enter into a bath as long as their body becomes somewhat refreshed, and make them enter onto bed, and the pain will disappear completely and they shall be healed.
Know that no one should use such medicines as a cautery, if it isn't after the removal of flesh.
And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is treated with donkey's bile, then it helps greatly;
and the fire cautery should be done in this manner. Take lard and mix it with old oil, and place it on the hollow area between the base of the thumb and the other that is called a flexor.
After taking dry donkey bile, immerse it in fire until it turns into charcoal, and place it on the wool, and leave it until it becomes soot.
And do it again this way, and never stop doing it until you think by sense that it will reach the hip, and the pain be gone.
And this method of cautery is called "goat cautery".
The pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact, or due to too much evacuation, or because of cold matter spread out, none of these occurrences warrants cauterization, rather it is for someone who has come from an infusion of cold matter.
After that, when the patient is void of foul pills or other similar things, one should perform this on their back, at the spot where the pain resides, three lines indicating across, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity the illness can withstand;
And the cauterizations should be done according to the method called "points" for the cauterization.
And if you see fit, perform three or four cauterizations at the middle of the wrist cauterization in this manner:
This illness often befalls young children, and the symptoms of its onset are that they have pale skin when they stand up, and fear. and you find in the last spinal vertebra of the back and with us the appearance that comes over other vertebrae.
When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this form. If the fire cautery is applied to each part of the spine equally.
And if you see fit, apply the fire cautery to each side of the spine with two or three lines of heat, and ensure the points are close together.
After the treatment until it is clean according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat in a state of fever where there might be nerve inflammation.
of joint pain
When joint pain is due to moistures that spread throughout each body part, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call 'gout' properly, and when it's caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicine alone, but must be treated with cauteries in this manner:
Make the mouth of the cautery at the joint of the foot, and apply the olive oil in this form:
And if there's need that you touch the back of the foot, if it is heated to the full heat of what we call 'a point'. And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then apply cautery on each knee for three or four of them, using all olive oil;
And if you need to do more, then do so, but don't let your hand stray beyond the point until the wound's healing is complete.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then do points within the inner forearm lines;
And if there remains any pain in the elbows, then do points on each joint and on the back of the hand;
And if the pains come up to the shoulders or down to the elbows, then cauterize each part, and give good guidance to the patient and prescribe medicine.
And if you take good care of him and cleanse the humor, he will be helped by God to recovery.
When the stomach is upset and the bile descends into the kidneys (indicating dyspepsia), if it's a new case, you must ensure that when you see them to cure, they should not fast on that day; And when he eats things that ease his stomach, so that his insides descend from his belly;
After you have him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to mark his armpit until the hair is repaired, then pinch it with your fingers, and watch for signs beneath the wound on the bone, and at every sign make it resemble half of a circle above the chest;
Then prepare the cautery as described:
Until it is white and emits pus. Then pinch the hairs at their base; And have the attendants mark his hand so that it does not turn back;
And work well on the thighs with the assistant, and place wool and surgeon on the thighs, and another near his anus so that he marks his hands;
Then place the cautery at the sign on every part of your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you touch the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, try again several times until you arrive at the bone. and remember that the oil should not spill when you apply the heat of the cautery; so as not to burn it; and that through this the patient does not die, or suffer from any other ailments.
And know that when you do not reach bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
It is necessary that the cauterization for children be subtle according to their size, and likewise for adults as large as their size allows.
After three days, cure the wound with butter until the scab is removed;
After performing other treatments until he is well, let the patient rest for forty days on his back so that the wound heals properly.
And it is necessary that these purges be taken for a long time, so that the urine does not overflow when he wishes to go into chambers.
And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, have him wear a well-made bandage, and let him do this for another forty days;
And have him get good rest, so that he does not overwork himself and avoids excessive drinking or eating, as well as shouting too loudly;
And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
And I will say after about the treatment of tailoring in this chapter.
When abscesses occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, apply the fire cautery gently according to its quantity, and make it heat for one third of the cup. After the treatment according to what we have said;
And none of the old ones said that one should use the cautery at three angles according to this form:
But the first sign is the beginning of an infection and draw a line across the width above the incision, and another below, and hold your hand in contact with the entire length of the cauterized area.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moist.
from old pain in no limb When pain comes to any limb, or due to falling or being hit, and this pain lasts for a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and apply the cauterizations according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its utility, and its location of twists and its pain.
If it is correctly done with the first cautery, it's well;
If it's named, start with another cautery on that one, because such injuries are accustomed to cause movement in the body part closest to them, so you should apply the cauterizations as long as the patient is still.
The remedies are administered once per heat treatment by great help, and similarly, the disease comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Can't you see the cauterization? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in this section, without spreading or remaining, and you fear that the infection will spread throughout the patient's body, then apply five cauterizations on its head: I lead the head to nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. and II above II horns, and I behind on the hinder part;
and I let my hand remain as the cautery comes until it reaches the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large fluids can escape;
and apply cautery to the mouse according to how it is in front.
And if the infection is spread everywhere; And when it is clearly spreading, it is necessary that you apply these cauterizations with the cautery as we have described: first to the head and then on the neck spine, two on each shoulder blade, six on the back spine, one large on the rump and another behind, and two on each of the two shoulders; And on the heels, and on the tendons beneath the foot, and in each joint of hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands;
And guard against the nerves that lie under the heel part, so as not to burn them;
And never apply the cautery to the bone of the hand, and once on the bone of the stomach, and another time on the liver.
And know that with every application of the cautery, I am aiding it more, and it gains from that use;
And know that the patients do not feel pain during the cautery as those who are healthy would, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
And it is necessary that the size of the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in methods for metalworking.
After treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals properly.
When any part swells and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not improve, then I make cauterizations to the limb according to its size and the extent of the swelling;
And let the cauterizing fire slightly penetrate the skin of the scrotum; Then apply the salve until it heals properly.
And one should cauterize with the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that makes the limb move. In this way, the swelling is released;
And yet, do not interfere with it unless you are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medicine does not help, then cauterize with a slightly intense fire according to the amount of scrotum skin, until the swelling is released, and its color changes.
Then apply a paste of flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from hog and blood from dove, using equal parts of each. And mix all together, and bind it with a bandage, and let it air on the wound until it heals.
The treatment for a pustule by cauterization
When the gangrene begins and you see it stop, if you notice it, then apply the cautery to the point that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the gangrene.
And indeed, they advised that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
And indeed, I do not think this is good either, for fear that it might become ulcerated and decayed, and I have already decided never to try this method;
And more correct is to cauterize internally, with the cautery that is called "circular", as we have said in the context of various cauteries.
When some have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays death or due to the excess it makes or because of age during illness (that means too old), when there is little blood, or due to the weak health; and you see it hastening towards death: therefore, apply the cautery around that area with small fires and pressing on them; afterwards let it be this way. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it being pierced through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterizing instrument as described here:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease that is called 'adubelati' until the cauterizations penetrate the body, and make the cauterizations such that the patient feels an escape in this manner that the process of decomposition be relieved.
After the treatment until it is completely healed.
Another way of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's not another thing but a member infirmity, for it causes members to behave as if they were dry branches that the fire has burnt.
If you see this disease in them that can endure a combined fire cautery, then apply small and large fire cauteries like a chain link, according to what is needed for the area or where the illness is;
After applying the cautery from all sides until you remove all the corruption, and leave nothing of it, that every part which is corrupted be removed.
And let it rest for three days, and apply soothing ointment with oil on the burned areas until the scabs from the fire have healed, and ensure all the corruption is gone.
After the cure of ointments that produce pus.
And if after three days you see that there is no sign of health emerging, this is good;
And if not, reapply the cautery to what remains of the ear that is decayed.
And this cure has been treated with medical remedies instead of a fire cautery;
However, the fire cautery is much more effective, and I have already discussed the use of medical remedies in that section. Take what you need when you need it.
Of ulcers that come on bones Sometimes, when there is an opening in the foot, it leads to a disease that we call "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large hard lump that causes pain in the foot.
And the cauterizations for this disease can be done in two ways. This is to know about fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
A fire cautery if you're using it should be shaped like a needle, just as one would draw with feathers. Make sure it's well made of iron to the size that it can accommodate nails in every direction, and ensure it has small edges;
After warming it all up on the hot iron, and turn your hand completely around the iron rod until it reaches to the very end of the rod. and let it like this for three days until signs of putrefaction begin; then make him a poultice of powdered wild mustard with vinegar, and let the poultice on overnight, and nail it firmly so that it is uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the wound with greasing until it is clean.
And if they turn from the back of the heart, and it happens many times in both hands and knees, then you should bring them a hot water cautery; and is done like this: take an arnica stick or a iron rod, or a feather of a goose, and place it on the stake and the althelul, meaning for warts; And place the torch on it until it blackens all around, then I put a little hot ash, and keep your hand firmly, press your hand as you turn that the edge of the torch turns towards the base of the nail, and then find the hot water's deep passage to the root;
And let the patient endure a little bit of the hot water's burn for an hour; Then leave it like that, and it will uproot completely from all its roots.
Do this for one after the other, until you have cleared all those that are in your body, then treat the sores that generate pus.
When there's a trembling due to cold or nerves, or a fever of the fourth kind or other maladies, it is necessary that you perform four or four cauterizations on the spinal column of the back, one cautery between each vertebra. And for the fire cautery, place it on the stomach with the olive cautery;
If it causes trembling, and hasten the cure of the cold illness.
In every instance where a dead body is exposed or oozing sores, or pus-filled bumps appear, these come from large putrid materials.
It is necessary at the beginning when they appear that one applies a cautery to each head of the pimple: A fine cautery of elm wood, whose points are taken by fire, or from the root of the asarum long, or with the lentis-shaped cautery.
And each time they cauterize, at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow pus forward but remove the excess that comes from them, and become healthy;
But it must be done after the blood has been evacuated.
Many times great bloodflows from the artery which is cut at the wound, leading to backflow or at the incision of an abscess, or during the application of a fire cautery on the limb, and similar situations; and it is very difficult to smell such things.
And yet, when such an event happens to none of them, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound in the vein, and press it so that the pulse stops under your finger, and no more drop comes out.
Then apply several small and large olive fire cauterizers until they turn completely red;
Then take one, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you have your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the pulse stops.
And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and once the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauterizing tools that are at the fire.
And do not stop performing this one after another until the skin is completely healed;
and see to it that you do not burn the nerve beneath, and that no other mischief befalls the patient;
know that when blood flows from the artery, it may not be possible to heal it properly yourself even if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned is used: or by cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or by the tight binding of a thread, or with medicines applied that have the power to heal blood. and bound and kept in place.
Who will administer the tying or binding with cloths tightly or by putting heat-bearing things thereon, or other similar actions, if it doesn't prove effective.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no medicine present, then they should place their finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until the skin is completely healed above the wound and above the vein. And do not let it move, but moisten it with cold water often that it is very cold until the ice stays and grows and remains frozen;
And make incisions in advance for those who need cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases for which fire cautery or burning medicines are required, and we discuss their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery.
And I have covered this chapter up to the elbow, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same manner for what is found more easily and what you desire.
And when I begin this, it is important for you to understand that in this chapter there is more risk and fear than in the first section about using cautery, and for this reason, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening veins, and incisions over abscesses, and treatments for wounds, and removals of arrows, and cuts into stones, and similar matters; For there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake foolishness. For many ways of people come to treatments. If they come from those who so suffered with their illness that they died lightly due to the anxiety they found in their sickness, and the severity of their disease; And out of this comes fear.
And from these it is that you give its meaning, and say: Wait, I am a bear"; And the illness is frustrating.
It is not right that you agree to those who come to you in this manner, but place more restraint on your honor than on your greed, and do not open rashly but wisely about what you are certain of, and for which you can take and leave.
And use diagnosis and guidance in your treatments for your illnesses where health may be transformed.
And this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory.
Dear child, our lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or I have instructed this chapter according to its chapters, following what is before it in the section on cauteries, which I have outlined from the head down to the feet because you will find them more easily than those you need.
Know that this disease often comes from the child being born in childbirth, and when the mother holds the head of the child too tightly;
And never does it come about due to an unknown cause that we know not.
And I have never seen this disease occur in anyone other than children, and among all those that I have seen, it hastened their death; And because of this, it seems to me that I should break off the work in parts of the treatment.
And I saw that the child of him, the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer be borne;
And so much moisture had built up that he died, and this moisture was collected around the bone near the shoulder blade, between the body and the bone;
And the operations are like this: when moisture is between the body and bone, and the abscesses are small that you cut through the head with a wide slit;
And it should be as long as two of our fingers, so that the moisture can flow out.
and this is how the pus looks:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two openings in a manner like a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening from every part, and when you press it with your hand internally, there's a sharp pain that doesn't stop: If you must split through the head's middle, three cuts are necessary in this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely. After binding the incisions with cloths and powders, then I put wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day;
Then remove the dressing and treat the wound with tents and treatments, and let the head heal evenly, then give the patient dry meat from a pig of water until the limb is strong and healthy.
And another method of incision is that you look at or expose the opening of the abscess, and join with water;
for it does not always present itself; nor is it behind every time; None of these times to the right; and none of these times to the left.
Therefore measure the cut or the incision, and fill with water, and do it according to your ability;
and be careful not to cut the artery; and allow a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
When there occurs a disease which is called "catarrh" to the eyes or at the bottom (of the body), and the disease is old, and the treatment with medicine doesn't help, then the last resort of treatment could be cautery using what one would cauterize their two major arteries.
Therefore, as soon as you see them cut, the patient should bleed after its head; After rubbing the injured area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck to all parts of the cloth; Then look where the veins are located, and where the hands of each are after the ears, and that's how they're positioned;
Then mark the hands of an eagle, and cut both of them with a sharp knife for two parts, as long as the vein extends to the bone, and do this along the width of the head.
And if you see it, stop the bleeding from beneath the artery and above the cut, by making a cut also like one inch through.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously from up top.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you should measure the length of the space to three inches, then cut deeply into the eagle and proceed up to the bone;
And what needs to be removed of the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance slightly more or less, depending on how the patient can endure it, and the filling of the artery;
Then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone tip of the spur, cut off the abscesses if none are found. Then suture and bandage the wound, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
Of the removal When old age comes, and acute cough, because of the moisture from tears and heat in the temples and lower back that is beyond endurance and similar things. Medicine is treated with ways of medicinal cures and all this does not help him, so we extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have reported.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient feels behind their temples and listens for the artery that emerges at the temple, because it opens well through its beating, and has little response beyond in some people who are too cold;
And if it is responsive, then suture the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub their head with a coarse cloth, and submerge their head in hot water until the artery appears clearly; Then take the spatula with which this form is made: Start by lightly scraping the skin until you feel the artery, then guide it upwards with forceps, and carefully remove all the tissues that are under each part;
And if the artery is delicate, guide it to the tip of the distal phalanx, then cut that portion according to the size of both fingers. For if it isn't cut, or jumps not all at once,
And let blood flow from six cuts, until three;
And if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it in two loops with a strong double silk thread, to prevent infection before the healing of the wound, and also to prevent continuous bleeding;
Then trim the excess that is between the two threads at that moment. And if you see fit, then cauterize with a surgical cautery until it reaches the bone as long as the shoulder head is trimmed;
And this is a surgical procedure, if the patient doesn't have fever and has warm constitution. For the cautery helps to finish off moisture: because it is of greater help against moisture.
It is necessary for the extraction of arteries where you fill up half of old cotton and place it under well-made tents;
And when they are released, if you apply dry medicine substances that produce heat and tents until it is healed;
And if you are uncertain about the location of the artery as far as your skill allows, use caution by fire, or fill the area with vinegar and squeeze it with your hand until the skin is tightened; And if you do not have this tool at hand, you should immerse your arm up to the elbow in cold water until the ice melts, and lift it from cold water continuously while holding it as necessary;
And there should be about half a finger's width of space between the two knives. And when you signal to continue with the two of them, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, then cut the vein into two parts; And keep them apart on the shoulders because there is no welding with this cauterizer across the entire length;
And it is the form of the cautery:
And the one who is slippery and more easily extracted from the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this tool by cutting it in two parts, but make sure the cuts are well spaced to retain heat for longer. For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are draining from the veins that are above the test of the head's neck, and no cure with medicine works there, then you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel or perceive on their forehead as if they were trembling; And wherever they are touched and moistened so that the paper hairs fall, and the papers heat up, and are scorched by the heat of the tears, there is need for this treatment. And they called the old "treatment for burns", and when you do it again to the patient who has this illness, have hairs on their forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length;
And they called the old "treatment for burns", and when you do it again to the patient who has this illness, have hairs on their forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; And let one of the slits also like two all around on your forehead when swallowing down until near the nose, and the others two under the ribs by over the papers, and beware of the incisions of the arteries which are under the ribs by over the papers;
And keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have the size of three doves crossing paths;
And have an applicator of a sponge and cloth to dab it so as to wipe the blood, then pour the sharp spatula from two parts in which its form is made:
From the incision that is behind the temple up to the second incision; And scrape off all the keratin between the two slits across the entire surface of the skin that is on the bone, then make another incision from half way through the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. if you ignite in the first gap the tool called 'cultellaire', and it is very sharp on one side, but blunt on the other, it has this shape:
And make the cut towards the fatty part of the meat at the bone, and the cut should go towards the bone from the flesh, and stop when it feels halfway through the skin.
And take all the vessels that descend from the head with their eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens on the wound, and then proceed elsewhere in the middle crack up to the other end;
Then remove blood evenly, and express the wound for the contained blood;
Then place a piece of old cotton in each crack, and lay wet cloths with wine, oil, and asphodel over them; make sure no pus remains.
And on the third day remove the bandage, and apply great plantations of tepid water, then administer a balm with basil oil and other treatments for wounds, until it heals.
When there is no usual cough and you see the eyes become red and small, and weaken vision, and burned papers; And the hair grows, and one feels pain to fever, and the patient sweats. Therefore, know that these occurrences show that those matters and this putrid fluid come from many veins, and the wet treatment that it is, if is such.
And it is that you instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one somewhat wide below this. And begin from the left temple groove to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with chewing;
And when the bone is revealed, let all the blood drain onto an sponge, and then dress between the two edges of the cut, placing old cotton and linen; Then cover with wrappings moistened in wine and oil, and guard against pus formation;
When it is being extracted, it must be that you rub the bone until the blood begins to emerge, then it is treated with excitative things, which make blood emerge.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of comfrey, and make them into a plaster; and apply this to the wounds to promote blood flow everywhere.
From ear piercing
Everything that has an effect on ears is one of the four things: it could be grains, or an animal, or rock from mining, or something similar like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or anything that flows, like water and oil, and similar substances.
When it leaks through the ear hole or in any other way that doesn't fit with the ear or doesn't grow inside the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, if any purple or pine oil drops out, then proceed with its extraction; and have them sneeze with consideration, and block their nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and keep the ear above.[/em]
Many times it succeeds through this treatment;
And if it doesn't succeed, proceed with the delicate extraction using forceps, which is described like this:
If it jumps out by means of forceps, that's good;
And if not, proceed with the extraction using a small sharp spoon.[/em]
And if it does not spring from this, make an armpit needle and pinch the tip of the needle or earache plant strongly, and apply some waxy substance to that part inside the needle so that the wax cannot enter with the needle; Then proceed with the treatment, because many times it goes wrong as we have said.
And if it doesn't come out in a proper way, take glue from its own and use its claws, put some instrument that is suitable for this task, and place a little cotton inside; Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and proceed with force.
And if it doesn't spring from all these things that we have said, hasten to pierce the ear like an abscess should be found there, and proceed with caution.
And the way to make an incision is that you first cleanse the patient's forehead and then drain out any blood according to its strength. Next, allow the patient to be held in your hands, turn the ear upwards, and create a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs down. And make the incision like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone. Then scrape with your tool according to your strength, and suck quickly into your mouth;
Continue the treatment as long as it is effective.
And if there are grains and they swell up, administer an extraction;
And if it cannot come out, perform the puncturing with care according to this form: and make an incision on that grain.
But do not undertake this when you believe that the grains are damp due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces of work;
then apply gentle pinching and suction, just as we have said, so that the extractions are done smoothly.
In cold thus that the ear discharges, then the patient should use coughing with warm liquids first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And be lying over that same ear or where the cold is. If she jumps for heaven, it's good.
if not, take many stones according to the length of your nose and gently, and heat them a little on fire; and place the heated stones in or near her ear, and push out one from each foot, and use another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and continue to alternate using stones from one another until the pain leaves entirely, and then she leaves all her pain.
And if you see this, take the small stick and place one of the bones in the ear, and place the other bone with fire until the largest soft joint is burned.
Then do it again with other sticks until all the sharp end comes out, as we have said about stones.
In the extraction of the bug, if it is of small size like a mite and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is of large size that one can feel, then perform extraction with pliers; and the thing to be removed more easily is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and with distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sunlight: If there is no opening, then use subtle needle pricks. And if you cannot see anything, take the wax from where the form is located:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And apply the most subtle pressure in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then gradually shape all the wax; Do this often until all the wax comes out.
And if they do not want to come out, then immerse cotton into the wax as I have said for in the ear;
And if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find or seek guidance on distillation treatments;
And if you drip your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, as it is shaped here as you see: And whether made of silver or of iron, place it near the small nozzles, and above it to allow for distillation;
And to press within the distillation with a well-made iron tool for this purpose, and if you see take the wick and wrap it around the cotton tip; Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the reed, and let the reed be inside the ear;
Then stuff all the cotton inside the wick, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or up to the length of the ear; And within it the sick feels pain, and if you warm a little spirit on fire like this one you distil it into the ear; And remember that it should not be too cold, for the medicine would then not be as good.
From ear piercing
No child is born without any wax in their ears;
The same thing happens to adults through the impact of wounds or a fetus being born inside the ear. These impacts often enter the ear uncontrollably, unless one can see them;
And never does the liquid overflow the wax, and it is seen clearly.
That which comes uncontrollably, if it cannot be seen, is often due to an imbalance in several conditions, and this is where one should understand that you should place the ear towards the sun with the sick person. And look inside: if you see the external manifestation, if the work has all this substance from which it is formed:
And be both digging in front and behind completely flat, so as not to damage the ear;
if the external manifestation is of newly formed flesh or parts of the ear, and you have delicate needle-pricks, then gently scrape it, until that flesh is completely removed.
And if the pellets are inserted fully into the ear, take a fine, lightweight rasp and gently scrape it on the fire, then place it inside or near the ear.
if you feel the external manifestation to which the ear is strained from its pain, puncture gently, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear;
then place in the ear a tent according to its width of the opening, and moisten with Egyptian ointment. Let this continue every day until the wound is healed. Or you take a tent and soak it in pink water, and sprinkle on powdered vitriol;
And if you see the ear swelling up, then you should take off the tent and replace it with another wet tent made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling subsides; Then continue to cure as long as it is sound.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a cloth and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding which are known from distillation processes.
This should be done each day when the eyes are moist and then dry. It is necessary to spread them with forceps and tweezers, and scrape the root of a snail's shell; Then place sulfuric acid powder on it.
And if you cannot remove it by scraping, then apply a delicate round-hot iron for the cautery, and the cautery operator should perform an incision afterward.
And many times they return, yet nothing remains from their roots; And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the gravel Many times, in papers, come things that seem to be gravel by their shape and hardness, and because of this is this disease called 'granuloma', and it is a gathering of thick moisture on the surface and beneath in the paper. The procedures are as follows:
The procedures are as follows: Take care so that the granuloma does not move on one or both sides, and it is a simple matter to know this;
Stretch out first from a large area, then lightly cauterize each part, followed by pinching and pressing it.
If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, but do not harm the patient;
And if there's a large tear, join it with stitches, and treat until it heals properly;
And if it's small, don't apply too much force, because the ointment will quickly restore and grow new flesh.
And if it's large and descending into the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, place the granule on needles, apply them from one side to the other;
And if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not harm anything.
And when the large ice has been broken, remove the salt water eye, and cleanse the place from that which infects flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the granulomas Exinach is a type of fat that is found in the weaves of paper sheets and this happens more often among children than adults. It causes much trouble for their eyes, and it comes to them at dawn, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;
And because of this, they lie down on their faces for a long time, and sleep on them, and have the paper sheets under their eyes wet from sweat that causes puffiness and an appearance over them due to the Exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press on the arm with your fingers and feel the pulse between them.
And the way of treating it is that the patient puts their head in your healthy state;
And then take a linen sheet, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount that escapes from each part, then place it on him; And press with your thumbs on both sides, so that the escape is gathered within the circle;
Then in the middle of the moisture on the skin, cut a slit about as wide, and not more than the wound one makes in the cleansing of veins;
And let the skin be in place until you see the escape. And from many dispositions comes escape from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove then with one piece of cloth between your thumbs at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses;
And ensure you do not adjust within the fissure, that you do not reach the entire spleen up to the eye, that you do not pierce it.
And if they emerge not at the beginning of the fissure, then widen it gently until it opens;
Then pull it out as we have said, then moisten it with oil and water, and place it on the head, and stretch it with bands.
And if there are such individuals who grind salt and place it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then the doctor should treat as long as they remain healthy.
And if pus starts to form in the arm, so the doctor uses plasters that soothe until they remain healthy.
The phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates directly to "the hairs of papers". This might refer to paper fibers or could be metaphorical depending on context. Without more information, this is the literal translation. When hair that is not naturally born appears and ages, if it harms the eyes, they can lead to diseases like habitual watering of the eyes and degeneration of the papers (possible typo) and impotence, all of which can be a cause of eye damage;
and the treatment follows four methods: Using a fire cautery, using medicine according to what is described in the previous chapter on cautery, and doing it through cutting and stitching or by ligature, as I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the head of the ear in your health, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
If it has turned, it is good; if not, then insert a needle through all the threads; and whether that goes across the edge of the paper where the hair grows beneath these hairs, and pull the thread upwards through all the paper, and then trim it with scissors;
then do it in the part under the paper, under the closely fitted hairs, all across the nostril opening, from the large tear to the small;
Then extract the thread, and place on the paper a small cotton ball and gauze tent, then mark on the paper an oak leaf shape, similar to the bay leaf, and always ensure that the figure matches the amount you see when lifting the paper which is placed underneath.
And if at that time it has need for handling paper of large quantity according to how the paper is softened;
Then make along all the veins above the two lines you have marked, and start with large drops until small ones; Let it be one of the splits near the natural hairs in growth as large as a root, then place the comfrey at one of the two corners on that side, then scrape thoroughly.
Then gather the two lips together using a needle with all one thread of fine wool. Clean out the blood, and remove excess thread on the two corners at any sticky areas. If you see fit to do this;
And if that doesn't suit, if you don't mind it, then leave the stitches and threads for up to three or four days;
Then cleanse the wound without using wet or sticking materials, for paper burns upon contact with the wound and its assembly, but the stitches rot (as the old ones said), and it is work without fear; And if there's another way:
And if there's another way: And if you want to cut paper into a shape that is as round as the leaf of myrtle, like we have told, in three inches square according to the form shown here:
Then take what stands above the smaller forces evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you do not have the ability to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or where there is thread, and stick it through at the tip; and pierce another thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and join the threads evenly between your fingers;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have incised, just like we have described, then join the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes the hair of the paper gets converted:
It is necessary for you to use what we have instructed about incisions;
but the suturing in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment for scabies follows this form: and you should cut the paper and make an incision according to what I have said, then create two canals by hand, and also sew two fine threads as long as the paper and as wide as the needle is; and tie each of the two ends with one of the threads;
then delicately join the two at what is above the paper of the eye, and tighten the two canals from each part forming; And let it remain for a few days, and the skin which is restricted will die and decay, until it escapes through itself.
If it drags on, if the condition persists with strength, then treat him as long as he remains sound;
And when the wound is healed, and if it lifts the paper, and no more hair will grow;
And this is the form of two cauldrons that you will make according to this diagram, and according to this size in length and width:
The operations are such that you take a fine needle and thread it with silk string and it is strong and fine; Then join the ends together and tie them finely, and let the length of the threads be half a palm in length;
Then arrange for the hunt another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the knot of the thread.
Then place the patient's eye on healthy part;
And let the sun down so that the works are clear, for it's an intricate and small work. Then fix the needle all through the hunt in the root of the well-adjusted hair, and pierce on the paper quickly as you pull it above the natural hair;
Then remove the hair up to the hunt, and fix that hair in the hunt if there is one, two, three or more;
Then remove your hand until the hairs remain out all through the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase (presumably referring to hunting or tracking) has been treated and the hairs do not grow with it, then pull the chase away from the wound up until you ordered it to be placed, as long as the chase feels forceful downwards and when you see this through your eye's vision;
Therefore, pull the chase and the thread, and cover the eye and leave it covered for two or three days, as long as the hair grows in its place and the flesh starts to grow.
And if the hairs are small, then accompany with one long hair as found naturally on a cow, and raise it along with whatever you leave or allow to remain, until it is lengthened, then raise it.
Regarding eye infections When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or eye putrefaction occurs in the eye, if there are two ways:
One is natural, and the other is unnatural.
And happens suddenly due to an injury or surgery, or from similar things.
And the way to work on it is that you split this seam and open the lips of it, and put linen cloths inside, and bind it until it's healed;
And it is not right for you to use in its treatment things that dry out and restrict. For if you do this, the sickness will return worse than the first one;
but use things that soften, such as fennel; And let it be rinsed with hot water or oil and linseed oil, and apply garlic poultices in none of the oils, and wrap it in a cloth, and treat it with this.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must beware so that it does not join without regard to its former shape;
And the remedies that we have described do not exclude directions for this illness, so that it does not recur according to its former form.
This disease, which truly is called 'dislocation', and it is natural and accidental.
Accidents arise from wounds, tears, cauterizations, and similar things;
And in executing the procedure for this you take a needle with two threads, insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right eye socket so that the thread passes through two parts of the flesh.
Then the flesh is stretched above all the needle, and it cuts across the wide space of the spatula. And if the figure on the paper returns according to what is appropriate, it's good;
And if not, then take a ruler and place it in the groove, turn the paper, and cut two grooves where they would have been inside the paper;
Let the ends of the two grooves at the two corners of the cut you made be arranged, and make an angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is as that of a letter which forms a 'G' in Greek;
Then shape that flesh according to the size and thickness of its edges as they were before, based on where the paper was, then align the two needed parts, and stitch with a thread like yarn;
Then follow the treatment we have discussed for softening medicines and ointments, until it is healed.
And if the disease originates from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary that you make an incision full of hair along the lines of the hair on the skin, and according to what was mentioned before; then sew between the two leather panels of a tent, as I have said;
then sew between the two leather panels of a tent, as I have said; and you should perform the operation according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the skilled surgeons prepare all kinds of tools so they can return the form to its natural state;
and even for patients themselves, according to what needs treatment and the use of various tools in multiple configurations.
When this bonding occurs in a manner between hands where the paper above is bound with the white of the oil and cannot move or perform its natural operations, then it is necessary that you bind the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it up;
And extend with the pincers, until you hold what is disturbed under the delicate point of the cautery, which must neither be too hot nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the heat being too intense and scorching their eye;
And make your cut, from which you sear that united one lightly, so that the skin heals according to its natural form;
And heal the whole united part, and do not perform any sharp operation in the eye, and use sweet water for washing, and wear a collar;
Then place between the skin and the eye a linen tent, and put wet wool from an egg over the eye; And after three days use hot water and other warm things until it is healed.
Know that the nail follows two ways: It is nervous and appears like hard leather, and another that is not nerveless but appears like white moisture frozen, such that when you touch it with iron and treat it using hot needles, if it doesn't hurt.
Both of them begin near the large tear duct, and grow slowly, slowly until they cover all the eye and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is that the patient places their head in your healthy position, then you operate on their eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then bend the nail with small hot needles, and extend it above; Then take a needle, and I put horse hair, or cow hair, or bull hair, and strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and insert it into the nail, then pierce through the entire length of the needle, attaching the nail with a thread and extending it above, then scrape off all hair from the base of the nail that is under the cuticle and up to the hair at the base of each hair follicle and skin, leaving the natural tear by the tears so that upon incision there is no usual body discharge;
Each time you extend only the nail to the cuticle alone, and with the thread, as we have said; Then scrape off all hair from this area: it is the form:
And ensure that the splinters do not touch the fatty tissue and break it, and that the thorns do not pierce.
And after the incision pour some of the pus in the eye, and make a spoon from silver, and leaves it until another day; Then treat as needed so long as they are well.
And if the nail is not made of bone, and you cannot push in the needle, and the crescents cannot enter it, this condition is treated many times with medicines;
And it grows in the way I have described in the division; and if you see it swell, this creates an eye problem from a disease, and take the splinter lightly sharp according to this shape: And remove the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and your reason presses on, then drip from your mouth into a ring-like eye made of stannic oxide and red and white amalgamated, and bathe the eye until another day;
If there is nothing against your vision, like pus-filled blisters, then you should proceed, and first treat the pus-filled blister until it's cleansed, then restart the procedure as described previously, until it's cleansed.
Then repeat the other operation according to this same procedure, until everything is excavated.
And if the appearance of the tissue from the lacrimal gland causes harm in the eye at night, then suspend it with honey, and take only part of it and not all, so that no tears may come;
Then drip into the red eye ring which is made of stannic oxide.
There are some people who do not grow red eyes, and cover the pupil, restraining on papers and turning outside, and seem like a candle flame;
And the operations are such that when one's body heals its head, then it opens the eyes, and all of that flesh to an extent suitable for this, and supports it with strength;
Then remove the first layer of flesh, and carefully shave it all until the end, and ensure you do not irritate the eye during the operation.
And let the incision be gentle as we described in the section about nail incisions and using small forces with it, just like the form shown after this chapter's demonstration.
And when the incision is completed and all flesh has been removed, apply oil of sulfur or distill a red colander and similar corrosive medicines on it. Place cotton soaked in egg white over this to protect against pus; make sure there's no open wound that could cause infection.
And if it remains motionless, and the patient sweats profusely, and you suspect an abscess at the spot, then let your eye observe and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
Then return to your work as long as it is safe, and thus make four cuts and join them together in the eye according to this manner.
But nevertheless, it must be that you adapt the treatment of each natural weakness in the eye; and of the accidental path through which a metal object has passed;
And do not leave your hand in any of these incisions until you see that this limb endures the cut.
When the veins are red that cover over the eye, and cause harm to sight for days.
So then the task of the first one is to look at where the eye is, and if it's dislodged, or outwards, and there is no other disease besides the dislodgement; Therefore correct this as follows:
Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position, then suspend all those veins according to their wisdom for as long as possible. And make sure that each pulse is doubled according to this shape:
And let there be two inches by degree on one side according to this shape:
Then work on these veins subtly, and see the blood flow hour after another, until you see those veins being removed from the eye;
And make sure you don't burn the eye at the ends of the spatumiles, and do this operation at midday in front of the sun, and be very zealous in your work so that you only handle those veins;
And when you have done this, if you distill into the eye a collar of green and red for to corrupt that which remains under the inflammation.
And if you do not have the strength to perform this all in one go, make a plaster with things that soothe the pain from the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and there's assurance of no abscess formation, then continue according to this method as described until recovery occurs;
And these are the forms of strength:
The wound is called "arissati" in this context:
When you treat it using cautery and hot medicine as I have described previously, and if it does not heal, there is a place within the wound where an abscess forms, near what should be its point of entry. Remove all the moisture that's there, until the bone is exposed.
And when you uncover the bone, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take all of the instrument that is formed here;
And it is called 'hard leader', and may be made of steel indented at the tip, and should be pointed like a file as it is in this present shape:
And place on it the tip of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a bit until you know that that corruption has been removed;
And do this once, then restore the head of medication-drying.
If the joints are joined, and scar forms, and the body of the bone is joined, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal and does not become pus-filled, and no bad incidents happen, you know that it is healed;
If not, if there is no other organ except to bring the sinus back into its place according to this form: And when you uncover the bone for the second time with a metal tool and by using aqueous medicines; and if it has been uncovered then take your axe according to this form, and secure the piece of iron with three angles, and let the handle be thin until as far as you see depicted here:
Then place it against the bone near the eye socket, and keep your hand away from your eye just slightly, then turn your axe until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain in your ear as long as your hand is on your nose;
Then restore the area with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when the heat starts and hardens your hands, take the material to your nose; If something is lighter for the patient.
When the eyes open completely everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the heart or diminishment, it is necessary that you bind the patient;
Then heal him, then apply suction cups or bandages without piercing to evacuate it, then place over the eye I a bandage made of acacia and aloe and incense and gallows flesh, and then release the eye, and plaster it with strips and cloths;
And the method of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each one into four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount that the eye needs;
Then apply by means of a hard binding above, and reapply the suction cups to evacuate without piercing;
Then apply the suction cups and keep the eye restrained day and night, and if it starts to close, you must keep it closed.
Then loosen the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye heal, that's good;
If not; if you have to re-wrap, bandage, and apply the eye patch along with the bandage and suction cups until it is healed.
At the rupture of the ovarian membrane When disruptions come in the vitreous thread, then open and comes out force of paper like resin bits, and it is observable;
Therefore, if you see it covered, the operation is like poking an awl into the root of half above the lower part, then poke another awl where there is doubled thread at the tear part; And make a puncture, and let the first needle according to its placement;
then place a loop of the thread double and tie part of the eyelid from inside outwards, then tighten it well. After that, remove the needle and place a wet wool on the eye with plenty of egg mixture;
and let it be until the thread has healed with the eyelid; then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
and afterwards, each part of the wound is held in place by one half of a circular piece of cloth until it has healed.
And if the eyes do show a prominent appearance, then puncture through the thin membrane that comes under the eye, and dry out the moist pus and allow the eyes to sink in quickly.
Take out as long as it remains healthy.
This disease which is called 'alcunnati' can only be found in bile that has gathered in the gallbladder, resembling a pointy object descending, and it is not an actual needle;
And the way to observe this process is that you make the patient sit on the operation table and have them face forward straightly. Then hold their head with both hands at two points, and move it until you see the needle coming above your eyes; Then either place it there and keep it from going down until the light is gone, and see how things are happening as they should;
And if it doesn't descend anywhere, know that it is a needle, and when the descent of the needle isn't as we have described.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and perform on the corneal surface an incision from point I to the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the blood flows;
And when it has flowed out, if you distill it into the eye with hot water mixed with honey, or hot water with boiled fenugreek and honey, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Of the waters of the eye We have the appearances of the waters in the division, and what needs to be pierced; if done according to health.
It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light towards the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly.
Then place the paper of the eye on your left hand where the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand where the eyes are on the right.
Then take in your right hand, where the eyes are on the left, the tool that is called 'almagda', or in your left hand, where the eyes are on the right.
Then place the tip of the tool beneath the cornea at the thickness of an eyelash in that corner of the eye to the part below the minor tear duct, then force the tool called 'almagda' vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces through the corner of the eye, and feel when almagda reaches the empty space.
And it must be that the size of the almagda's passage matches the size of the space from the cornea to the edge of darkness. And this is the crown of the eye;
You will see the bone inside through the transparency of the cornea paper, and then place the tool until it reaches where the tip is, then express out one after another along a path.
Let the patient now see his illness before him and the instrument in their mind.
After laying him down, and if the tip rises up to the second path, apply force with the tool, and when it is securely in place and no longer ascends, gently remove the wax by turning your hand back and forth.
And then place a small amount of beryl in the water, and remove the eye from inside it. Then place the oiled or greased eye shutters or wool soaked in rose oil and a plenty of eggs, and bind it with a healthy oil.
Yes, and those that belong to our time should be placed on the common broth with plenty of eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, as there are some people whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary for you to take the tool called "alberit," which has this form:
And therefore pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too far around it, but make it subtle. Then pour out the wax, as we have said;
And upon completion of his work, the surgeon, accompanying the patient, instructs him to sleep on his back in his dark room;
And avoid all movements, and please eat light meats, and do not move your head to the right or left. Secure him accordingly until half of the day;
Then release him in that dark house itself, and test his vision. Make him see nothing, then reapply the bandage until seven days;
And it is not advisable for you to do this during the treatment or after incision now. Instead, apply this method because the wound has swollen rapidly.
When it comes to discharging pus, you should release the eye before the seventh day and apply treatment to him who relieves pus.
And when they are calmed down, open the eye and place an ointment on its lid for a few days to cover it, and be in that dark house.
And then leaves the house little by little, and transforms into its place;
Know that no one should intervene in such cases. And one came to us who was from the Iberian Peninsula, who told us that there they used a type of garlic called "almagda," which one bathed in water, but still we have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; And by chance, this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of almond shapes, because those who do not know them see them;
and be of good arane properly: And indeed the head of such from this same subtlety, and the rear end in three angular pains.
No birth or creature is made from various connected fleshes, some of which appear to be scorpions with the legs of a bird;
And if there are such creatures or one has flesh with dark color and if there is flesh with good color. From those creatures that have good color and not dark, it is necessary for you to place the patient between your hands facing the sun;
From those creatures that have good color and not dark, it is necessary for you to place the patient between your hands facing the sun; and breathe through his nose, and apply vinegar to those creatures, and remove them. then take what you can hold on the sharp fine point of a needle from one side, until you know that the creature is entirely made of bone.
And if there remains any part we cannot cope with, if you expose it to the operation of all the delicate instruments gently, so that nothing stays behind; And if it's not covered or if there is an abscess pressing outwards, if you support it as should be done;
And if it's malignant ulcers, if you act quickly and cauterize as long as the wound is bleeding and all the muscles are cooked through, then pour or flush it with cold water or wine. If the wound heals and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is clean;
And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh under the bone, to which the instruments cannot come for cutting:
Therefore it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, and have your hands tied together, and there should be between each knot the space of an inch or less; and place the patient's head with the thread in their mouth as much as possible, and pull it out until it comes through the nose inside the mouth;
and many times this is done with children at school, and it is a simple task for whoever wishes to do it;
then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after another while being guided by us who are holding the thread.
Do this until you know that the thread has corroded that flesh, then pull out the thread, drain the blood, moisturize the thread with Egyptian ointment, and quickly return it to its place at the nose as before.
Make it for three days or more, until the ointment dissolves all that is buried in flesh;
And then apply or inhale a row of opium for several days until it heals, and if there is need for dried medicine substances, use them accordingly.
And this is the form of the tool for purging the head, with which one distills oils and medicines or inhales them:
And whether it's made of silver or arsenic, resembling an open lamp or like a cane, guide it in the same manner;
And if you see fit, make a closed cane, and ensure the tools are full for purging the head;
And have your hand ready above the head to hold when one heats the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh around the nose
Many times a disease is born at the nose which is called 'Toul', it grows and becomes large until it reaches something to be seen.
And thus it is necessary that you start by covering it up, and let the bone fully heal, then place your cauterizing tool or hot medicine.
And if you delay covering it when it is large, take heed if it's hard, if it changes color, if it shows poor sensation:
If you don't touch it with iron either because it's an internal abscess; for when you cover it once, it brings great trouble to the patient;
And if the abscess is due to heat rather than change in color, and you see that it can be completely covered, let the patient drain and cover without fear, and treat with dry and restraining remedies.
Know that when solutions for prolongation come into contact with one of these venous loops, it benefits little, because in some people.
Therefore it is necessary to avoid any such situation, so check if the wound is fresh at all its blood; And then adjust the two lips to suture them, then treat until they are cleansed;
And if the lips have dried on both sides, it is necessary that you scorch all parts of their keratin until they heal. Then adjust the two lips with a stitch and tighten them, and sprinkle repeatedly with powdered dragon's blood and ground incense; And place the powders on a plaster of great strength or another adhesive plaster, and let it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until it is cleansed.
The method of suturing is that you adjust the solution: by needles, as we have said about the stitch for the belly; by thread, as I have informed you.
from abscesses of the lips
Within the abscess inside the mouth, one finds hard lumps sometimes, smaller and larger.
So you should open the mouth and cut into each lump, take it with forceps, and remove it in every part;
Then use the mouth after the vitreous incision as long as the wound is bleeding;
and then wash with water, and cleanse the wound of dry substances until it heals properly.
Many times there grows on the gums a grayish deposit that the old call "albula";
It is necessary for you to hold it with the tongs, and cut at its root, and allow blood or blood flow to continue.
then place sulfur or the vinegar poultice, or other drying and restraining powders;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, and this happens multiple times, if you cut it again, and apply the cautery: if it does not return after the cautery;
They are gathered at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and they consist of ugly and hard scabs; And in no instance do you find black and yellow teeth with worms, until the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth smell;
If it is necessary for you to have the sick person sit between your hands, and his head be in its proper place, and touch both teeth or skin until there is nothing remaining. And thus make of the blackness and the greyness, and of the yellowing and other discolorations, until they are completely gone;
And if you remove what is at the primary cause, it's good; But if not, begin again on the second day and the third, until you have taken everything;
Know that teeth require various types of instruments to be extracted, according to what the work demonstrates, because the remover used for taking out teeth at the surface has other shapes than those used between the teeth; And these forms and others are equipped with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you delay the extraction for as long as possible, because it should not cause any harm. because this is such an intense substance that one would not have any excuse for scratching it.
So when the patient is constrained to bleed, it's necessary for you to know exactly where to puncture. Many times the pain moves through the body, and beware if it's toothache or a disease of the teeth, then extract the good tooth; and still do not leave the pain alone until the bad tooth is removed, for we have already wanted to do this for our soldiers;
And when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, it is necessary to incise around the tooth all the way through two or three millimeters to keep the gum from spreading in every direction;
Then guide it to your hands or with the use of delicate forceps at each poke and poke, until they are well dislocated, then firmly secure the forceps. and have the shoulder of the patient between your knees, and keep it steady so that it doesn't move.
After extracting the right tooth straight without breaking it, and if it doesn't spring back, take none of these instruments and insert them gently into each half, and move it like you did first.
And if there is a hole and you can feel it, then it's necessary to fill it with cloths, where the holes are; and if you squeeze gently with the forceps, so that it doesn't break while squeezing.
And it must be quite carefully open in the gum to remove the tooth.
And be sure to handle it well so you don't break it, and if any part remains, inform the patient of the greater pains caused by the remnants of the root after the initial extraction.
And beware that you do not do as the ignorant surgeons do, who break the bone every time out of their haste and boldness, and they do not bring to completion what we have told.
But one comes with each time by the action of this great disease through the roots that they endure, or through the matter that they break, as we often wish;
And when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine or brandy and vinegar;
And if there is bleeding which often occurs, when treating it, fill the socket with powdered vitriol;
And if that doesn't work, apply cautery to it.
The forms of the tools by which you first remove teeth should have long points and thick handles, such that they do not bend when you are pulling out teeth;
and these are their forms: And may have large limbs that do not bend while being used, and be made of strong iron well-crafted, with teeth for gripping.
from the roots of the teeth When the root stays during the extraction, it is necessary to put in the socket wet cotton soaked with butter for a day or two until the joints are softened. Then take out the forceps which are called 'algefri', as the patient seems to require care.
And be sure that they are done as with a file and it is this shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out completely with these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh up to the root, and place the instrument known as "althali," which means palmache, as it is formed thus:
And be sure to make them strong and thick so that they do not break at all, and if the root jumps over this, it is good;
If not, assist with all the instruments from which the forms come next:
And if help is taken from this tool which has two points, as it is formed thus: and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and this tool which seems like large pliers, as it is formed thus:
And be sure that these instruments do not break and know that many instruments from the socket exist; And also other instruments, which are not even mentioned;
And the wise surgeons find their tool by themselves, according to what their works and diseases show them. For there are some illnesses where the old did not teach any tool because of the diversity among these, or when it breaks part of the bone or from others, or it decays, if they search for the tools that suit, as I have said, and help with gestures, which is described here, concerning this form:
And let them be thick and well gripping to hold the bone, so it doesn't slip but can be held and removed;
And then restore the area with suitable medicines for this, and if there's decay in the bone and it is small, take it all with this tool:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural course, and its form is ugly, even especially in virgins, you should know that it has been born after the tooth, and isn't properly placed, and one cannot take care of or sharpen it.
therefore the fold; and if it is in line with the tooth, take this tool as described, and let its shape resemble that of a small beak, and make it from iron that stays sharp.
And the tooth is ground slowly with my hands day by day due to the hardness of its root, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then I file it in a single piece like this:
and is also like the awl's file that one uses to make needles;
and carefully file the tooth a little bit by bit with your hands gently, until it doesn't move as long as you continue;
then in the end smooth it off with a scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, you should file down the roughness until it's even, so as not to hurt the tongue or impair speech.
When it comes to the front tooth or by tapping or striking, and if a patient cannot press on what they are eating that they do not defecate, and you have treated them with constrictive medicines, then this is ineffective.
if they need to be restrained with an golden thread, for silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never changes.
and let the thread neither be too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the gap between the teeth;
and if you see to straighten the teeth, take the thread and hold both ends between the two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated tooth between the misaligned teeth, whether one or more, as long as you can feel it properly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; Then resume the covering until you have reached the part where you stopped, and apply your hand skillfully and carefully, until it does not move at all.
and bind your floss to the tooth root so that it cannot escape.
Then hold the teeth with forceps and join them together; place them between healthy teeth, making sure they do not irritate the tongue;
and leave it like this as snugly as possible while still allowing movement, and if it dislodges or the string breaks, use another string to tighten it again;
if it allowed for movement and remained like this throughout its use, and that is the shape of the teeth and the position of the two healthy back teeth and the two front ones as you can see:
And when the jaw is dislocated, if it is placed back in its position, repeatedly freshly, as we have said;
and do not interfere with it unless you are cautious and endure pain, and no time is made in the shape of an ox bone tooth, and we place it where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Not once is it possible for the strings that come from under the tongue or the jaw to form this way; we do not create such things. or by chance due to a healed wound;
and the operations are such that you work on the mouth with the aid of medicine, have its head in your healthy position, and lift the tongue;
Then connect the nervous cord across the wound, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or swelling, and this is sudden injury, if you break the hook and reconnect it firmly;
And make sure that the cut isn't too deep, for there is an artery underneath;
And when you have done this, if you raise the wound to the pink water and cold air, or to cold water, then place a linen tent over the tongue;
And treat it with herbs every night, so that the wounds do not heal incorrectly.
And if there is blood leaking out, put vinegar over the wound. And if it does not stop bleeding, cauterize with the slow cautery, which is good for this purpose; Then follow another treatment as long as it is salutary,
And if you see it is reddish or black or hard, even when the patient doesn't feel it and there's no touch to it, for it indicates a putrefaction;
And if it is decaying into phlegm, and there's moisture, then let the pus flow out, and make a fine incision, and discharge it from both sides; And if it doesn't taste good in your work, then put vinegar to boil until it's thoroughly infused, then return to your work as long as you're using the entire strength;
Then lift up the limb and the joint, and follow other treatments as long as it is beneficial.
From throat abscesses None of the time comes within the throat valves which are called 'godath', and they should be correctly known as the two almond shaped parts. And when you treat them, as we have stated in the division, if they remain unsanctified, take care:
If it's hard pus of small sense and with a woody texture, do not touch it with metal.
And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch it with metal either, for fear of bleeding. but leave it until it is healed, and then you will remove it, or it would burst on its own;
And if it's whitish in color and the root is delicate, prepare your instrument properly but first check that the pus bubble rests and calms down.
So have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be upright, and let him open his mouth and hold the surgeon's knife between his hands, and press his tongue down until it meets the entire instrument, this is how it is done.
And may be made of silver or finely crafted iron as sharp as knives:
Can't you press the tongue to this entire instrument, and can you see the abscess? If so, take an ounce and pierce it into the almond, and force it upwards more than you can.
And pull nothing from the threads with it, then place the cap on the instrument, as described here which seems like force. And always the head is bent, and one place to another, and it's very sharp, made of iron or finely crafted metal:
And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then shape it with pliers, which should resemble the form described above: And being cut from one side, and from the other side name;
And when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after cutting gargle the raw wounds with hot water, or hot and mild water. If there is bleeding during this process, continue to gargle with cold water, or slices of cooked pomegranates peels, or mint leaves, and similar things until the wound has healed. Then continue the treatment as long as it is effective;
And no new abscesses form in the throat other than the two almonds, so cut them similarly as the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely the small one;
And indeed I had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage and could neither eat nor drink, and she died if she remained like this for one or two days.
And the abscesses were so high that they had required two drains each, at both nostrils of the nose.
I acted quickly then, and struck one of them with an axe, and after that, the other ran out, and I cut out a large portion of the belly;
Then I cut into that one from its other nostril, and I looked inside, seeing the tongue and pressing it.
After I struck them in those abscesses and scraped out some parts, only a little blood came out. And thus the woman's throat passage was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, not stopping her until I continued to cut into that abscess for a long time.
And the abscess would reappear immediately, filling up again the space I had emptied, until it reached a size that was not very large;
Therefore, I gaged and cauterized inside the throat: Then it would not re-grow;
And I left those parts alone, may only God have made them after me.
from the eye
When the rumen descends to the ovum, and it is elongated and long, it is called "perpendicular";
And if it is outside large and round, it is called "ovum".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the ointment for the abscess has calmed down, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to take her.
And the one that is round assembled and isn't far; And if it's reddish or has a coppery hue or is black, you should consider making an incision on it. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, of its blemish and length, you should make the patient stand in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we described earlier; Then insert the onion in the belly, and guide it along, and prepare at the location of the two instruments I said about in the incision of the two almond-shaped glands.
And it is necessary that you do not remove more flesh than the excess beyond the natural boundary;
For if you do more, you harm with your voice, and by your words;
And after the incision, apply what we have advised about incisions on the two cheeks, and treat until it has healed.
And if they are in danger from excess, you should apply the instrument of cautery to remove them.
And the method of cautery is done with an incision tool. And when the patient's head has reached your health, then press their tongue with the instrument we have discussed in the section on fire cautery, and use it with sharp steel blades, so that they are neither too thick nor too thin; and in using the power of this tool, as it is described here:
And let your head receive a hair or where you place the medicine, just like the movements of a spoon, and put the tool over all the medicine on the wound;
And the patient's sides are so sore that he can barely breathe and move his muscles from within his mouth to the medicine, so it doesn't descend into his throat, and he sweats.
Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the wound, the amount equivalent to half an hour's dosage, until you see the medicine bubbling and the agitation of the medicine subsides.
And when you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, soak the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool with all the cotton on the wick above, until the cotton burns out over the wound.
And do this often, until the cauterizing agent is perfect, then let it dry, and clean after three or five days.
And if you need to restart the fire cautery in medicine, then do so, and after the cautery, press inside the eye with a cotton swab soaked in butter, and clean the area that was treated by the medicine;
And you should rinse with cold water, or perform gargling until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, without using the cautery;
If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile and parsley, and any similar herbs, gather all of them or some of them into a pot, put water in it, and bring it to a boil;
And let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place the tool for burning according to this manner: And whether made of silver or iron, and whether one of the shoulder blades is placed in the mouth of the patient until the steam rises from the wound through the nose, until the wound has become necrotic;
After the process often repeats, until the wound dries, and remember not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's development, for many things happen; And don't do this until the abscess is ready to rupture.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cloth and place an eggshell inside the patient's mouth, so that the heat of the wound does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not allow heavy steam to enter the mouth, and this is a good treatment that promotes healing.
Many times a foreign object is inserted into the throat bone or spine of fish, or no thing;
So it follows that you should extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
And what does not allow you to see and is found in the throat, it follows that you should make the patient vomit this way so that the meat becomes cooked in the stomach; By chance if the thing is expelled by vomiting;
Or the object ingested might be an sponge piece, or a belly button piece, or a lettuce root, or a chunk of dry bread; And you attach the thread to the sponge, and then swallow it. And when she comes to its place, if it extends, then pull with force;
And if she does not come by means of what we have said, take the plumb instrument according to this shape:
And have the instruments bent at its head so that it may enter more easily into the throat, and raise the head high; And be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it does not harm him, nor should you push any bone inside;
And if the patient pushes the instrument, that's what it means when he moves or if something is slippery; If it pushes into the mouth, or pulls forcefully with all the instrument equally until it is strong.
of the substance of the throat
No treatment is given to those without blood, as I have said in the division, through the cure of medicines; And if this does not benefit, then look into the mouth of the patient towards the sun, and when you press their tongue with the instrument I have told you about.
And if you see the vessel, guide it with all your skill, or use delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
And if this doesn't suffice, take a hairy stick and place it in the throat of the patient, then press where the hair of the stick bends, and do this often. And if you wash the patient with water every day.
Then take a full cup of cold water, and open the mouth, pour it in gently so they can swallow, and move it often with their hand; And if soon after the water reaches the blood, it causes them to vomit.
And if it does not vomit as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
Do this many times, for it will succeed without fail.
And the method of fumigation is as follows: you take the pot where there are burning coals and place it under a closely fitted lid in the middle, with the head of the instrument in that space;
Then pour in the fumigation, and the patient places the tip of the reed in their mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes but goes all the way down to the throat;
And now the saliva will flow out, and if it does not, you should repeat the fumigation many times;
And let the patient feel thirsty, and have them consume salty things and such, but do not give them water to drink;
And thus, it is necessary for her to depart through this governance.
And the shape of the instrument used to extract gallbladder bile, if it is seen, resembles curved scissors for moving into the throat; and has the appearance of a surgeon's knife, and it has the roughness of a rasp, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave;
No exact descriptions of pus are given, according to what memory brings up after one and another in this book, they vary in perforation and size;
and there are two ways to do this, one being in its own appearance and the other due to moisture it holds.
And the second way is for those who have them within their body.
For the abscesses in the head are different from those on the foundation, and the abscesses on the internal muscle are different from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in action.
And if dealing with abscesses one must not pierce them until the wound has fully developed according to its natural course;
And for such cases it is necessary to pierce when they have grown and do not heal according to their development, like abscesses that lie near joints.
For when abscesses come below joints, if you leave it ripe inside by chance, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes a contraction in that member.
If the abscess lies near the main limb, and if you delay the puncturing until it is dead, it will harm the main limb;
If it lies near the root, if one pierces it or in such a way that it is dead;
And it is not appropriate to pierce a growing abscess without its natural development being completed, except for the one that lies near the root, which should not rot internally and extend inside, resulting in an internal passage; And cannot heal properly in a large extent.
And it is necessary for you to know the time of the abscess perforation which happens with completion, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of the fever, and the reduction of the pain and redness, and the beginning movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
And it is necessary for you to position the puncture or more according to the location of the abscess, and wherever it opens moves;
And let the puncture be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or joints and necks and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no curvature. In such cases when they bend, according to that limb.
And when abscesses are within the fatty part of the body, it is better to wait until you have completed digestion before making an incision as we have said.
For if you pierce him before it, so it penetrates his body with the venom from him, and is full of maggots. and by chance harden the lips and you depress under them.
And if at no abscesses they puncture across the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
And it is necessary that you remove small pus pockets, small cuts; and in large pus pockets, large cuts, and many wounds according to the size of the pus pocket;
and if there are such pus pockets or it is necessary to bleed it, and cover; when it has become as white as a cloth, and is softened, then you must do the same as when dealing with boils:
and if there are such that are split into three corners, and if there are such as are treated like the leaves of myrtle, like boil-like pus pockets;
And if such occur or one makes a round cut, and other cuts and seeming slicing.
Those without heads, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them completely;
And when the abscesses are large, and they have grown significantly in size, if you pierce them, do not drain all the pus at once, but remove a portion of it; Then numb the abscess up to the other side, then leave nothing untouched thereafter; Do this repeatedly from large to small portions until all pus has drained;
Similarly, if the patient has weak immunity, or is pregnant, or young children, or elderly and feeble individuals. For when he tries thrice with the release of the bow, that perhaps kills the patient, and you do not realize this.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have identified your abscess, if it has ruptured, observe the wound, and check whether the abscess wound is small; And if it's a flat stitcher, try using linen or vegetable cotton. And if it's a large abscess and there are many cavities, it is necessary that you insert a needle in each one so they press against each other;
And if you have removed a portion of the skin in the abscess and sutured it inward, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen thread ash, and bind it up until the third day;
Then the bone, and treat with ointment as long as it remains healthy.
And if blood should start to pour out from your vein, cool it down with cold water and ease it off gradually, and hold the wet cloth there for many times.
And if blood loss continues persistently, you must administer control and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned with your hands in this book, and if it's near a vein, or the place where an abscess is, being mostly nervous, then it is necessary for you to put moist tents and cloths soaked in wine and heated oil on them;
And if it's in the body, and the affected area is fleshly, then it is necessary for you to place moist cloths on them, either in water or oil, or wine and cold oil, up to three days, as we have said.
And then remove and clean the abscess, following as it should be done, until there is no more pus.
And this knowledge should be universally applied in treatments of abscesses:
Or you have been told how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and this chapter explains it.
In the head region, small abscesses come about, and their manner is like those on cloths, similarly to a jeweler's work with a catkin, and many have similar appearances.
There are some that are fat and such where there is moisture as well as pus;
And for those that are hard and stony to the tailor, and there is no doubt that they have arteries not otherwise.
And the work of the scalpel is that you must prove it with every instrument which is called 'intermediary', from which the form comes after, something it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then make the cut above for its length.
And when the moisture is drained, one scours without leaving anything behind the skin containing that moisture, for it returns immediately once nothing is left.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it's present; If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; And these run those who remain during the night.
And repeat the cotton process, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure it does not remain overnight;
Then apply ointment to the wound with what is suitable, until it heals properly.
And if the abscess remains without pus, shape it according to this form, along its length; and remove your doubts, and burn all around, and apply your entire treatment to the area where it is located;
and if it goes against the artery, do what I have told you after.
And similarly handle the abscess if it is made of stone, and cut and treat it as I have told you.
And when cutting on the stone-abscess and the wet one, it is lighter because they have little blood. And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or heads, and for the pus-filled abscesses that I described or from an old woman;
And I found the abscess just like a soft stone, hard, rough, and white, and could not break it; And if we had missed any, we would have also made the wound just as well like in cutting through a stone.
In other abscesses coming or going, it was necessary that those coming from the neck and the roots of the ears have their incision open for as long as possible depending on its healing, so that the blood may come out;
And treat them according to what is appropriate.
Many times this abscess occurs in the throat, and close to the glands, and in the necks, and do not come to any other parts or on the body, they are hard, and are entangled with each other.
And each scrophula is properly within its coat, just like the node and the abscess at the neck, as we have said; And the appearances of these scrophulas are many.
And the appearances of these scrophulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to submit to health.
In that situation where you see good condition at the throat, and it appears like the color of flesh, mute from each side and not strangled around the neck or to the artery nor in the duct, and is not deep;
It is necessary that you treat it from above, and excise each part of it, and have the two lips of the throat at the angle where they meet, if you need to do so, just as we explained in abscesses of the head;
Gently and carefully remove it, be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, nor make too much of a mess with blood, let your hands stay in control, do not advance too far, so as not to remove more than what you should.
And if you have to remove the vein or the artery and it doesn't allow opening, apply vitriol or any powders that coagulate blood to the wound, and restrain the wound; And let it (the patient) until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound begins to soften, and heal.
And when the boy has been healed, then return to your work, until you finish it;
Then follow the indication of whether there are any small scabs remaining, if you clean and remove them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scab, it doesn't suit to clip that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself without harm;
Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then proceed with treatment.
And if you are dealing with all of the ulceration, it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound, and now suture them, because there should be no excess remaining due to the size of the ulcer. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into it, drain the pus, and suture it, just as we have said.
It is necessary that you understand how to cut into it, drain the pus, and suture it, just as we have said. Those excess scabs that remain, pierce them wherever they have opened and let them heal;
And dig as was said before, while depending on it, then he administers remedies with ointment and similar things, so that what is left of the decay can be corrupted. And when the wound has been well cleaned, let the ointment cure the flesh, as long as it is healthy.
The old ones spoke and discussed about the surgery of the throat; But I never saw anyone do it in our land, and that's how they wrote their words.
For those with strabismus, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "the epiglottis" be avoided; And do not seek help in this way because all the veins and the heart are near to those with abscesses either inside their mouth or in the throat or under the two kidneys.
When the disease is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis in order to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to incise the epiglottis, it should be cut through at three or four small cuts in between two circles. By the size of these cuts according to their depth, not within the cartilage;
And such cuts are compatible for the division of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the blood vessels are long along it.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all the inch, then cut out the lump until it reaches the bone; And avoid blood vessels, if you see nothing, then cut out the sore, as we have said;
And it is demonstrated by the rupture of the stream in the bone that leaps out through the limb which has been broken, and due to the loss of voice;
Leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the time has passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound like a mouth, and sew it all smoothly without touching the cartilage;
Then administer medicines that promote strength until they become clear.
Albacus suggests that one should not perform this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged dead, and the deficiency has been made. Therefore hold the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally, and they are breathing through the wound, and thus is protected from death;
And because they were commanded by the ancients to leave the wound open until the illness's malady passes, and it passed in three days or four. And then they ordered to stitch up the wound and clean it, while it was being cleaned;
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a maiden took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, and cut some of the channels leading to the heart;
And I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and it was well that she did not have a cut vein or artery but rather the wind flowed through the wound.
I rushed, and treated the wound, and cured her until she was healed;
and only had to rest for the maiden's voice to recover, and she returned after that to her usual state of health;
Therefore, I say that in the surgery for the tailoring of the epiglottis, there should not be hesitation.
These abscesses are called "neck hernia", and they are large abscesses in the color of a chestnut, and are very common among women;
And according to two ways: naturally, and by chance;
or natural has no illness.
And the accidents occur in two ways, of which one is similar to our fat and the other way is like an abscess that comes from our blood. and there is fear, and it should not open for surgery except in cases that are small, and the proof and search apply to every intervention: if you find it as large as our fat and cannot reach any vein, cut it out, just like we would cut out our fat, and treat it with all its boundaries, if there is any part; and search thoroughly immediately, then treat as appropriate until it is completely healed.
Many ways are available to us, of which I will say all the equivalents;
and it is necessary for me to explain all the differences that exist between us and them.
I say that disease is characterized by fever and warmth until the ebullitions have passed and putrefaction has been completed; So, the fever and heat then subside.
With the healthy body has no heat, fever, or pain, and contains lymph, which is its own sac and follows the color of the flesh, and begins also like a boil, and becomes swollen;
and according to two appearances, or fatty, or moist, and much of the color is as I have described in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new injury, that you first test and inquire about all the instruments which are called 'intermediary', according to whether their shape appears or after chapter which follows.
And the method of incision into abscesses is that you take or more moist than you find within the abscess, and move your hands little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then proceed according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the pus, and take care that no spill occurs.
If the moisture is clear and of what color it is, cut it as I've said for other abscesses;
And if no pus comes out after the pus, know that it is fatty, then cut it diagonally, and take hold of it with forceps, and gently scrape each side of it. Keep the cloth where the pus lies to pull out a healthy one with the knot;
And if you cannot bring it back healthy, so take it piece by piece until nothing remains.
For if there is nothing left, the body will return through many times;
And if only a little remains and it doesn't bother you, use some corrosive powders on the wound, keep the wound in place, apply things that calm abscess heat, and treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the body is large, so cut both lips of the wound, and treat with those who are in charge of surgical procedures.
And if the vein is too small or another if you hurry, use the inside of the ashes in powder form, and let it sit for 2 days or 3, until the wound heals, and rest with blood boiling. Then return to consider what has been delayed by the new.
Here are the forms of the surgical instruments that are used together, and they are in three ways: large ones and medium-sized ones and small ones;
and there are three sizes of them which are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and they come in three ways: large, medium-sized, and small ones, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like needles from which one sews veins, and they can be of citrine quill, or iron, or silver, and golden ones are preferred because black wax is more effective for encircling the bends of a fistula;
And there are three ways: Large ones, medium ones, and small ones, according to the amount of width in the cuts.
The forms of the thorns are like some resemblance, as you see here:
and if there are thorns with two curves in three ways such;
and if there are thorns with three curves, and they are also in three ways;
and if there are thorns with two curves, and single-curved thorns only, and they are in three ways;
All of these are necessary in their place.
The head of this one to whom you make your cutting tool, and there are such who do not cut force but from one side, which we burn the skin, because here one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
And these introducers have their handles attached with clamps, so that the patient does not lose them during the opening of abscesses;
and there are three ways: largely, small, and moderate, as you see;
and none of them uses force only in the lower part, such as legs and arms, breasts, and joints, and similar body parts;
and there is no other small instrument similar to the surgical blades, resembling stumps of nails, according to this shape, with which one stops bleeding: And it should never be placed at the site of a healthy artery or veins, and under no circumstances follow this large form:
At times, the nipples of some men swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like female nipples.
And remain disfigured and swollen. If one wishes to treat them, they should do so according to this form of this line .b. until .g.. Then strip the fat, apply medicine to the wound that promotes healing, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and continue treatment until it is healed;
And if the nipple leans downwards, and is flattened due to its size, like it happens in women, if they divide it into two parts above, by two similar slits; From which one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.; Then burn the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in treatment, as long as they are healthy.
And if it is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient cannot rest, or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive salve; And leave it as long as it can chew with the mouth and swallowing the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
Wounds that come from abscesses are manners of hard scrophules where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g:. And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, you should fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment until it heals.
And if the abscesses resemble scrophules, cut them as we have said in cuts on scrophules, and if the wound is full of pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
When the artery is cut and the skin above it has been sewn together, there are many times when abscesses occur, and similarly, this happens with the drained vein and abscess.
And if one knows it thus when it is due to an artery, then are the abscesses long and filled completely; And when you feel it with your fingers, if there's a constriction;
And when it's due to the vein, then expect discolored fluids;
And it's madness to cope with this abscess, and similarly when it appears on the sides and at the angles and under the collarbone and in many other parts of the body, and is very large. Therefore, one should avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head also needs to be avoided, and for him who has an inflamed artery, do it above the skin until long;
Then work on the twelve inches, and beautifully remove the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
Then take out of the person a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer until blood flows from where there was a clot, and release the abscess;
Then apply the treatment that requires blood flow, as long as the knot is present; Then treat this with ointment attached to it, until it becomes clean;
And if the abscess is as large as the vein, you should mark with your hand what part of the abscess you can reach on the skin. Then take out the needle from the area held in your hand and make it pierce through, using a doubled thread, so that you bring it to the other side; Then remove the abscess, as I told you, or tie one of two parts at each shoulder with a string;
And if you doubt that the threads will hold, if I sew another needle to each end of all four threads across the entire abscess at the incision point for the first needle, and secure the threads in four places;
Then cut the abscess as much of the excess comes out, then trim away the remaining excess carefully and leave what is tied up;
Then place on the cloth a moist mixture of wine and oil, then administer treatments and ointments until it is healed.
Similarly, when an abscess forms in the artery and vein, abscesses also form on nerves when they are cut, or due to excessive labor, and similar conditions.
And this often happens with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are present, it's the case for abscesses, and its color seems like flesh color, and is felt in various positions without pain;
And when it is constrained to form, the patient feels great pain, and is not satisfied by the fullness of the body, but rather experiences discomfort in the belly;
And moves in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and the one in joints does not fit to be covered with iron: By chance it would undergo contraction; And that which is in the head or forehead, makes the skin sweat out.
And that which is in the head or forehead, makes the skin sweat out. If abscesses are small, then with your forceps, you grasp them at their base;
And if it is large, then suspend it at the anus, and cut it open, and remove the muscle, then sew up the wound when it's clean, and continue the treatment until it heals.
No matter in which parts of the body or anywhere else, this is a disease that is named "fungus" due to its appearance, and it has a delicate root, and large heads;
and there are some small ones and many large ones;
And I saw two homes who had them in their stomachs that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no distinction, they were white, had a small root, and split open, and within they corroded due to moisture.
I copied them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces in the other six. The organs at the incision are such that when you look they see that the flesh is moist, and the appearance of the inside is white and wet with a delicate root; If you seize the broad spot, and have the fire cautery present.
If you seize the broad spot, and have the fire cautery present. For many times in the barber surgeon's work there are too large bleedings, and if they overwhelm you, then quickly use a cautery;
And if you see the patient alarmed and afraid by the iron incision, then take a well made thong of hemp, and bind it to the handle as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then bind it firmly, and do not stop straining the hemp thread until you feel its tension, and notice that there is no pain.
And if the roots are large, and you feel fear when seizing them for the abdomen, but you might well seize half of it, then apply a cautery so that they do not regrow.
Then treat the wound, and ensure you do not disturb the pustule which is of a reddish hue and has little sense perception and milky appearance.
For this is an abscess that's been incised, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after this.
When the boil burns Its appearance comes from the cautery of wounds or fissures in syphilis, and is on the belly; there are some ulcers like this, as happens with other cuts, or bleeding from veins or arteries according to what has come before, or from windiness.
And if it is through the cut in syphilis and through the exit of the ulcer, its appearance resembles that of redness, and it is a light thing without much pain, and opens from various exits. And if it's due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it returns, and then comes back again, and by chance it might swell, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining.
And if it's due to blood, open through these signs big and hard abscesses, and place them according to a quantity; And if it's due to winds (or风气), there is a coughing sound at the chest, and the veins so you should observe whether their appearance indicates blood of an artery, or of a vein, or winds.
And if it's due to winds (or风气), there is a coughing sound at the chest, and the veins so you should observe whether their appearance indicates blood of an artery, or of a vein, or winds. If it is necessary for you to allow the treatment. For there is doubt and fear involved, as I have told you or in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if its appearance is related to the intestines or the bladder, you should instruct the patient to scrape their urine, and make sure it flows straight, then strike across all around the scrotum; Then command the patient to relieve themselves between your hands, then proceed into the area where you indicated on the entire abdomen, and leave half of the pus above the entire large curve. Then bind it around with a strong thread or tightly with a sturdy silk cord, securing the tie firmly.
Then operate on half of the abscess extended over the tie, and place your finger tip, and inspect the intestine. If you find it caught by the tie, remove the tie, and push the intestine out of the belly opening;
And if you find it to be swollen, take hold at the knuckle, and remove any excess;
And if the artery or vein is contrary to you, or a blood vessel, then insert them firmly through, and return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and place the two needles through the structure where you pierced.
Then clamp the abscess with three needles above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the area until it heals, and discard any dead flesh by itself. when it becomes fine and reddened, then treat as appropriate, and cut the abscess as we have said.
when it becomes fine and reddened, then treat as appropriate, and cut the abscess as we have said. and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat and heal according to what is needed, and stitch the area.
and gangrene As we have said in the section about the signs of gangrene, and how it should be handled with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment;
And we say that gangrene can spread in the arm, and great caution is needed in treatment. The old ones said that when gangrene is on a limb or able to be removed such as gangrene on breasts and cooking, and any similar limbs, it must be entirely removed once it starts.
No one has ever been cured in front of me.
And the operations, when it is in its place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you cleanse the patient of black coagulation without exception;
Then make the surgeon if it shows fullness, then prepare the patient well for the operation;
Then remove any abscesses or ulcers, and clean the hair from all sides, and cleanse the bone from all sides without leaving anything behind;
And let the blood drain completely, and wash well the area with your hand or without anything, and if the bleeding suddenly stops in contrast to the incision of an artery or vein, then apply cautery until the wound becomes numb; Then continue with another treatment until it heals.
Regarding dropsy We have discussed in detail the symptoms of dysentery, and how the assembly (or collection) of water occurs, and the signs for each symptom, as well as the treatment done with medicine, and what is treated with iron.
and iron should not be used in these two symptoms: which means, peritonitis and typhoid fever, for they are deadly conditions;
therefore when you use medicine to treat this dysentery symptom called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment doesn't help, then observe if the patient is weak or has any other illness besides dysentery, as well as things like solutions for an upset stomach and similar symptoms; If you do not touch with iron, because there is doubt;
And if you see the liver is very green, and it has no other illness except ydropisia only, and it is neither too young nor too old, then I should operate as follows: Lift the liver straight above your hands, and have the ministers press on the belly from behind with hot water applied at the lowest part of the foot, then take the sharp spatula in this form: And may you have a depth of two parts. At the tip, and it must not be so narrow that it can come up to the intestine when inserted, but cannot be too sharp;
Then look to see if the ydropisia extends towards the intestines: It is necessary for you to cut there on top of the breastbone three inches below the heart. And if there is jaundice due to liver disease, you should cut on the left side of the breastbone three inches below.
And if it's about the lungs, on the right side, and it is not good for the patient to have the wound over the cut area so that no excess flows into the weak one.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, pull it and lift your hand throughout the fat area between the skin and the chest bone as much as when searing in a quantity of one nail or more.
Then pierce the chest until the fat turns to oil, and this is the time of cold water, then pull the muscle, and take this instrument which I have described: And it is like a thin silver rod, or a slender nail or rivet, and in the part just below the larger end there's a small nub. and on one side, it has three nubs; and two from another side, and one more from another;
and the shoulder is cut as if it were a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers describe when cutting the feather:
at its apex is the armpit, so that when the instruments reach the water, they now descend upon the instrument;
then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than it should at this hour, by chance the patient might die from the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he might faint, or he could approach death;
But adjust according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the virtues' dispositions signify in the patient, and its pulse;
Then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held due to the cure that numbs the tip which is on the tongue, as I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
Then continue with the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small quantity of water;
Do this for any day, and refrain from letting it stay but just a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient and leave much water, if the cure for the burial or sand heats up, and through a little sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it turns to drinking; And the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of pus, as I have said before.
No child is born without defects in the penis, or if the defects are small, or it doesn't stay in its place.
If it is necessary immediately when there isn't much pus to drain at all, very finely according to this shape:
Then apply or attach thin strips of linen, and keep them in place for three to four days. When it wants to urinate, remove the bandages, let it urinate, then put them back on;
And if there is no need for that, because the urine that comes does not allow it to be closed.
Those who have lost their teeth, if it has a remedy with a poppy's root, as we said, should increase its dosage.
Those who do not have the linen around their groin turn blue, because none are born with the linen at the tip of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting up their penis; And they cannot copulate because the matter cannot come up to the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
And the way of this work is that the patient lies supine on their back, then have the head of the penis and the tip also as long as a feather's width, so that the torn flesh hangs in the middle, just as it should.
and protect yourself from the multiple times bleeding occurs, and if it happens, have the person who stops bleeding attend to it, and treat the wound until it heals.
The pimples of the penis Many times, stones come down in the penis, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
and among them, some are harmful and some are not.
It is necessary that you extract them at the finest point, and treat and cleanse them all, then place on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; Apply the ointment treatment until it has healed completely.
And if the infection is malignant, with pus and discharges, it's necessary that you apply a cautery to it.
When you have completed it, and if the bath is in his thigh where the testicle, and part is inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the bath which is inside first; And when it has healed, address the one outside.
For when you treat them together, make sure that the head of his penis does not get pierced and comes blackness and decay in his penis and anus;
So you must remove everything that is black and corrupted. Then cover with a paste made of chestnut shell and vinegar, as well as honey and flour. Once this has been done, continue other treatments until it heals completely.
And when the bleeding ceases, if blood drainage is occurring, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The fire cauterizers assist through two arrangements together: It means, regarding blood discharge, and decomposition;
And if the testicles are corrupted and removed, it is necessary that you use a fennel rod or lead them out from the testicles, and let the patient urinate.
And when the hair grows around the tip of the penis for those who have not undergone circumcision, or due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you cauterize with a small tool until all the ligaments are freed and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it is to discuss such things, then you should cauterize near the tip of the penis and foreskin;
Then take two pieces of fine linen cloth that have been treated with oil and watered down cold, so they don't stick together.
Circumcision is not a surgery of continuity like other wounds; However, whenever we perform this work of our free will, and for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and make it the lightest on their health.
I say that old people did not advise circumcision for their children, as they did not practice it in their law, and we only have this knowledge through our acquired experience.
For I have consulted with most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around day three, and for all purposes, up to the entire foreskin;
If it was just one layer because there are two layers of skin, and by chance if you cut through both, this leaves the other below. Or they receive a copper, and there is doubled pain, and at the amputation where it is done not well the point of the limb;
And in the amputation of the nail by chance the metal escapes and runs away from the operation, and many times it grows as if it does not need amputation and I have noticed this.
From the dissection done forcefully at every part of the thread I found out that it was good to experiment, for the force cuts as well above as below accurately.
For when you squeeze your hand, if cut equally like an 'I', all the tension is relieved; but ensure that the thread is well inserted within the skin;
and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the penis just like that, and then make them exercise in all the ways you can;
Then make him stand between your hands straight, and place the strength in between your hands or over your feet where the child cannot see it, nor any of the instruments.
Then place your hand on the penis and blow or pinch it, and guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it thoroughly of the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its waist with a doubled thread, and tie each piece to another link;
Then clean it thoroughly of the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its waist with a doubled thread, and tie each piece to another link; And hold it with two fingers by the second layer to the pocket and at the second index point, place your thumb between the two threads, then lift the pinch upwards quickly and guide the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow gradually and gently, for that's how it should be. And put powder here and there on the powder I spread glue with half a yolk from a cooked hard-boiled egg mixed in rose water, seasoned with oil that is good and fresh, and leave it like this until the next day, and apply further treatments until he heals.
The forms of the forces in universal transformation are as follows:
Let both shoulders be held and cut, and let the shoulders also be as large as the arms equally:
The error in universal transformation occurs when the kidneys flee during incision;
Therefore, it is necessary for you to extend until your nail, so that the legs perform an incision;
And do it evenly, and if you cannot hold it at your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then proceed.
And if they pierce through for three days, and the one who is beneath the member swells, you should let it be until the pus is calmed by exudation, and lightly scrape it.
And when you can endure it, protect the part of the member, for this will not harm him.
So treat the burn of wounds with powder, as we have said or discussed about powders, and if you exceed due measure in heating it, and it goes beyond, it will not cause harm;
Treat accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
Regarding the retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to the obstruction of stones, or blood that has frozen, or bile, or pus, or similar things, as we have discussed in the section;
And if the patient is not relieved of his urine, and you see that it is being held back by a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it's necessary for the patient to be raised on his knees; And have his feet placed under the back, and extend his stomach from the part above the back, and hold the patient so that he cannot move until he can. And then the necks of the bladder must be forced to express the stone above, so that the urine is relieved.
And if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe", which here is its form:
And may it be fine silver strands of light hair, such as those of a bird; And let it be the length of a palm and a half, and fine at its root.
And for the passage of urine, take a double thread and tie it around a small part of wool or cotton at its root, and keep the root inside the syringe with the thread.
And cut off the excess of the wool and keep it until the end of the syringe, then smear the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit down, and squeeze the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and vinegar.
And gently place the syringe in the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the anus.
Firstly, insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and guide it until you feel the patient's urine coming to the empty thing; this does not follow the exact order as some might lead her in a twisted direction.
Then pull the thread until all the wool is done little by little, and the urine follows the thread. Then pull it out, making sure to properly drain the urine.
And keep using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient of their discomfort.
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or corruption is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it has this form:
It's closed, and if it's been three attempts: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
And let urine flow through where the medicinal cure should be such that it numbs the penis well without additional substances. If there is moisture to expel, allow it to flow out as needed; and push if necessary.
And when you see your medications flowing into the bladder, place the end of the catheter in the moisture, and pull at the one who is attached.
if you pull on the catheter at the other end, then firmly reconnect the catheter afterwards; if moisture enters from there, and goes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of subtle colic in which one irrigates the bladder:
And made of silver or horn, and the shoulder is higher;
and downwards to the back or under the armpits;
Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to irrigate the bladder. Then tie it between the two breasts in a good double thread, and heat one end of the moisture over the fire;
Apply the blistering agent to the head of the bladder in the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder until all moisture accumulates there, as long as the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, piercing it roundly through. Then insert a strong thread into these pustules, then join the circle just as one would tie a knot, and put inside it what you see of pus, moisture, and water, and secure it with the tool.
Do this just like you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have discussed the methods of stone treatment and extraction together with remedies;
And I have explained the difference between a kidney stone that has been attacked by rain, and all the signs, and in which kidney one should open for size; And in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will explain it clearly and succinctly.
I say that the kidney stone within the bladder usually occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that an infection has spread from the bladder similar to one that spreads subtly;
And when it is in the urethra, and affects the urinary organs of the penis, and it passes many times, and then becomes hard; and at the end of these infections, the kidneys
and the healing of children is lighter until they are four years old, and there is much complaint in the elderly, and it's moderate for those between middle age and old age;
And the treatment is more gentle for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by purging, in order to extract all the pus that is inside. For it clogs up every time when trying to cut into the stone.
Then take hold of the stone by its edges, and pull it out while moving downwards, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and emerges only once from its upper part;
then have him sit between your hands while preparing everything, and his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is fully hanging downwards;
then seize it and feel inside;
if you sense the stone in space, cut immediately on the stone now.
And if she doesn't pass with the touch along all of it, wet your index finger of your left hand with urine, for if the stone is young, or with half your finger, for if the stone is a mature adult; And dig until you reach its base, aim for the stone, and when you feel it under your finger, if it touches the neck of the bladder;
Then press towards your finger, and dig further in the place where you see to cut.
And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to spread upwards both legs with his right hand, and hold the skin that covers the legs with his left hand in the area where the cut will be made;
Then dig into the fatty tissue, which is its form: And make an incision between what's in between the legs and the base, not in the middle but at the edge of the left side of the bladder;
And be straight on the stone, and your feet should lie on a base or foundation, and be made to span across it so that it is wide outside but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance if the press needed which is or foundation, that it may jump to make sense of work;
And know that there are parts of stone where there are angles and edges: if it is torn to exit;
and if it is at parts that are under, resembling a walnut, and round, whose exit is light.
And above where there are angles and edges, make the size larger;
And if it does not jump, then you should tighten with the tongs that are like a file at their tip, to force out the stone so that it doesn't escape; for you thrust out of it with the slender curved instrument to the head;
and if you cannot work it like this, if it is large but quite small and rough, and if you do not debone it, then season it with vinegar;
and if there is more than one stone, if you remove the largest first from the neck of the bladder, then cut upwards, then force out the tract, and afterwards the smaller ones if there are any.
And if she is very large, then one must cut her out, and create a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out immediately even if his legs cannot be sewn together;
but strive nonetheless to pull or break it with forceps until you extract it piece by piece;
And when you have finished your work, cleanse the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it. Place a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and cold water and rosewater, to soothe the inflamed area. then straighten the hair up on his neck, and do not loosen the tie until midday.
And when you untie it, be sure to raise the head and torso very well with oil and water, then wash with ointment of laudanum and ointment of basil until it is healed.
And if abscesses come into the wound and infections occur, or blood clots in the bladder, causing retention of urine, which is known to behave like this: without urination with the urine. So then burn your tool in the wound, and remove that blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder;
Then cleanse the wound from water and slime and pus, and assist with all methods that you know, until it is healed.
And ensure that all the remedies you use, you bind his two legs together, and apply the remedies on the affected area.
And if his stone is small and it's led by the penis, and stuck inside, causing inability to urinate; If you follow what I say as such, that you trim many times and excuse the loss of size due to this treatment. I have already gained this experience.
Take one piece of iron according to this shape, and let there be three pegged points in it.
Then take thread and bind around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
Then gently push the stick in the penis until it reaches the stone; And turn the drill to your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
If it comes to an end quickly, then press your hand onto the one that is stuck of the stone which is inside the penis. If it breaks soon, and jump with the urine, and the patient will be freed;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread over the stone and another on top, then place the penis between the two threads, then pull hard, and release one of the threads, and cleanse all the coagulated blood in the wound; And treat it as long as it is clean.
From the stone of women
A stone may become lodged inside a woman, and if it happens even once, the treatment is exhausting, and must be resisted for three reasons:
One reason could be that perhaps the woman is still a virgin;
And the second reason is that it might be difficult to find a woman who would willingly reveal her condition under scrutiny, especially if she is pure.
And the third way could be that perhaps it might be hard to find a woman who knows this art well;
And the fourth way is that perhaps the stone in a woman's body might be deeper than in men's, so it requires deeper cutting; and there is great fear involved. If you must resort to this, then seek out someone very skilled for this task, and guide her hand well; if you can't find such a person, you might not dare let a pure person look into this matter further.
And there comes a clear insight into the life of women, where a woman who understands some part of the art is instructed and commanded to do what you command concerning the inquiry of the stone. And carefully observe whether that woman is a virgin:
And carefully observe whether that woman is a virgin: Then it must be pushed with force or at the very least seek out the stone;
And if she finds it, force her with due measure and seek the stone, and I advise that she push her effort or press against her hand on the bladder's formation with her left hand and presses firmly.
And if she finds it, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the entry of the bladder until beneath, as far as she can reach the root of the thigh;
Then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh over the middle of the femur, where you can see the bone, and feel the bone in that part. and do not move his tool above the stone or nearby it, but make him small at the beginning.
and do not move his tool above the stone or nearby it, but make him small at the beginning. then pinch the vein at the opening, if you feel the bone increase the wound as much as the bone can be forced out, and know that many types of stones are:
which means, small and large, hard and smooth, long and round, and those that have grooves.
If you understand the symptoms to know the outcome.
And if it doesn't hurt you, then put vinegar in the wound and keep it there for an hour until the skin becomes numb;
Then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have at hand the instruments I told you about in removing stones for home use to help you with your task;
And if you can't do it without it hurting him, and the artery has been cut off, then apply the powder on the wound and hold it tightly with bandages and don't try again. Leave the stone alone and don't remove it by force, lest perhaps the patient dies; Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has calmed and the wounds are healed, return to your work while the stone remains intact.
Gelatinous moisture is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white grease, which resides in the belly of cows, that contains the egg;
And it is called "grease," and there is no clean egg fabric within the shell if one believes that this is another egg; And this is the skin around the scrotum between the white testicles that we have described;
And it does not contain any small opening. And the formation of these blisters is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
And never let there be a percussion on the testicles, and this moisture takes many forms: or it becomes yellow like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this condition; for if it is white like we have described, then it indicates an abscess formation, and extends as long as the shape of an egg, and does not affect the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it indicates an abscess with part of the egg, and because of this, we think it's another egg;
And if moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white bone, you will feel it well;
Therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, if you test all around the involved area, from which its shape is as described. According to this following text which comes after the introduction, judge based on what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, it must be cured according to our ability and the restoration of their body;
then place him on his back, on something slightly raised, and cover him with wool.
then sit to his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right, spreading the leg out to one of the two ribs near the joint.
then take the spit iron, and place the skin of the joints among it long from head to toe until under the knee, and make a straight cut all along cutting the skin of the joints up to the white bone, and gently cauterize slightly according to your ability;
Then pierce the eye fully with a sharp needle, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers on it, making the eye go up.
and do not touch the root of the hair follicles, but only the eye. take it all or in parts as best suits you, that if you do not take it carefully enough, it will return to be watery.
and if the egg jumps to your work, once you have completed the operation on the eye, reset it in its place.
then sew the two edges of the hair follicle together with one stitch, then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the egg spoiled by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the veins that are suspended, worrying about blood flow;
Then cut above the pubic bone, and remove the fetus, and clean it as we have said.
And if the gall is gathered into two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part in the same way you did the first equally, then let out the blood, and put wet wool soaked in rose oil in the wound;
then cut the other part in the same way you did the first equally, then let out the blood, and put wet wool soaked in rose oil in the wound; then place another wet wool soaked in wine and oil above the two heads, and place them on top of each other, then cover with folded cloths, and fasten it all together according to this shape:
Then take two cloths and fold them with torn wool according to this appearance so that they are joined by sewing in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the shoulders is placed up to the back at the bottom, and the other at the part near the elbow;
And the other two heads on the two angles, and all together restriction is confined to the loop of the binder;
And each time the rod of this cautery is treated like a metal tool, and you should take the fine fire cautery instrument, and peel the skin off the joints, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white liquid contained in the water becomes revealed;
Take the cautery in this form, and puncture the white spot like bones, and burn it with this fine fire cautery instrument:
And peel in all ways that you can, until you remove everything;
and make sure the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more saved; and while preventing blood flow, and mindful of proper incision techniques;
And if nothing goes against you, or if there is pus discharge or bleeding complications or any other issue, treat whatever goes against you according to what the one in front says.
And if the patient is afraid, and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I instruct you, and know that when you are well assured by our explanations that the watery part is there, make the patient sit on the raised seat; Pierce the abscess at the part below where it is large enough for the pus to flow out, and make the puncture long through the body;
Make the incisions wide enough so that all the pus can come out.
Then place cotton on the head, bind it, leave to cool with water applied, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white pus does not allow water to escape from the wound's mouth, then it is necessary for you to insert a feather or an instrument used to treat water drops from the eye, whose shape is as described before.
And when you widen the wound, know that the water will return, and it will gather after six months or more, and once it gathers as before, then those days of illness will pass.
Know that in this part of the branch there is fear in multiple configurations, for which reason I believe it's best to move when one lets it.
And I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
So then, I say that many abscesses come from horns, and similarly with crows; and it is due to various reasons.
This means that it's because of excess bitter and fever, which spreads among crows, or due to impact;
And the color of the abscess matches the color of the horn; and no pain is felt, and it's an abscess causing discomfort;
And sometimes an abscess forms under the skin and bone, with a red hue, and does not originate from any artery, or swell out of a vein.
When it comes from a blockage of an artery, one can recognize by the shape of the abscess; when you press on it with your fingers; and it should not be that you touch it.
The one made of venous swelling can be recognized by its shape at the expression through touch with fingers, and you can do well to measure it on this resemblance, and on other characte\-ristics; And when you count the knees of cows, then it's like an egg at the top, and the thread is white and tight, and release all suspensions from the egg in every direction.
If the egg is already bound with these characteristics then it should be that you remove the egg and take note;
And if it is under the skin or within veins, it is necessary that you remove all of this tension, and round off the incision.
And if the beginning of the body is or behind the head, it is necessary that you hold it all together and remove the egg, just as we have said.
And when your operations are finished, apply the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then proceed with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess enclosed by an enclosure resembling a collar, with the softening of joints, and when it grows, it causes pain in the patient.
And the treatment for this illness is quite effective as with what was described before, and nonetheless we will instruct you on how to handle it, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull up the scrotal suspensory ligaments with your hands towards the testicles, over all veins near the penis, and pinch them tightly, and extend them.
Then cut deeply and widely through the veins, as far as they are exposed, and then burn from each side, just like we explained in the extraction of arteries which are found in temples.
Then prick with a needle where there is thread, and tie it to the main part where the rod came, and tie it right away to the other end. Then cut straight down the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the rotten fluids.
Then treat the wound as with others or by bandaging it, so that no vein bleeds out either side of the heart;
for nothing ill comes from this, and if all veins go straight, then it is necessary to drain the hearts for all veins; If one's eyes do not maintain their position due to incisions of the vessels, they dry out and cannot be moistened.
The occurrences of this branch happen through the section that comes from being compressed or stretched on the belly in the area of the appendixes, because the intestines descend through this opening to one of the kidneys;
And this opening is from being compressed or stretched by him, and come in these two ways of cause:
or from beating, or jumping, or crying, or lifting the stomach's weight, and through similar actions;
And the signs when it's due to stretching of the appendix, if it happens gradually and over a long period, not suddenly; And the pus is even until near the front, because pressure from the syphilitic agent reaches the intestines.
And the signs are when it's about cutting through the muscle, where there comes a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses show various appearances close to the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body behind the muscle.
And sometimes the loops descend with the intestine and get stuck, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if it's just a pinch.
And in these fevers where there is fear, one should avoid them.
And the way of the operation is that you instruct or direct the surgeon to make the intestines move inside the wound with their hand, if they can fit into it; then sew up his neck. hold him between your hands, and lift the legs;
then place the knee above, and cut all the skin around until long; then insert into the belly's lips according to your need for opening the wound, and make sure it allows the intestines to come out;
then scrape off the syphilitic agent that is under the skin around the anus, until all white spots of the disease are exposed from every side;
Then place your index finger in the one that surrounds the kidney, in the one between the white yolk sack which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second yolk sac, and separate the one behind the egg, and between the second yolk sac;
Then move your right hand inside the peritoneum of the kidneys, and place the white yolk sac at the top of your left hand, and gently lift the egg towards the waist across all the yolk sacs; And command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie the one that is behind the ligament;
And check with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped or white yolk sac hard, and if you find nothing, then proceed to the abdomen inside;
Then take a needle or it has a thick thread made of many threads, and put the bow in the back section near the syphilitic part, which is after the skin of the scrotum; After shaving, then cut the hairs that appear on the threads, until there are four threads; Then join them one on top of the other in a manner of a cross, and tie the syphilitic part, which we have said is underneath the scrotum skin, with a strong thread of two parts; Then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that are carried cannot enter into them, preventing an abscess from spreading; And put the thread down straight according to the first long two dois (units) from it, and after these two threads leave the syphilitic part which is underneath the scrotum skin, allowing a space of a dois roughly; And after all else according to the circle that the eye bears;
Then cut in the area beneath the skin of the buttocks, until you reach the anus, and the bowel, just as we have said previously;
Then apply wet wool in oil and put it on the wounds, and attach the bandage as we have said. And once you have sealed with the white wax that we said, after the incision, due to concern about blood leakage. For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it discharges from itself;
And if it takes too long to discharge, then use hot water, and place on what we have said until it discharges;
Then treat the wound with another cure, until it heals perfectly.
of fatty hernia
In this branch I never see anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
And the old ones said that it should be done as if you are assembling twigs in a bundle, in such a way that you link the vessels after lightly cutting underneath them;
Then cut me open, and cleanse the abscess of the one who works, while the veins leak out;
and clean it as we have said, until it is cleansed.
Never come the rupture in the arms, as we have said, and expose his limbs;
And no intestines come out in childbirths, and if they do, it's rare, and repair them at all times;
And even if he stays too long in this position, the wound or sore is believed to develop, while the intestines are descending;
And this happens through the stretching of the sore which is in the arms, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and swollen his limbs and exposed;
And the treatment involves a cauterization, as we have mentioned earlier;
And it is often treated using iron in this manner: And when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then lift up the area that is swollen wide according to the size of three fingers;
Then remove the fat that is under the skin which follows, then take the tendon and place it in the visible area of the fat;
Then press it down to the front of the belly, then sew the two visible areas of fat under the tendon at the top of the tendon, and sew them together.
Then remove the top of the tendon, and do not cover the fat or spread the yolk or any other thing, as I have shown you in treating the removal of intestines; Then he heals through the treatment of wounds.
Then he heals through the treatment of wounds. And when you hold the children, if they die and treat the wound, until it is healed.
The uterus is constrained, and does not show any sign in labor, and the cauterizations are effective in this area, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin of the heels
Many times the foreskins of men soften in some bodies, because the parts inside them have softened, and it can be seen.
And it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient make the malady spread on his back, and hold the softened skin against the natural skin;
Then join the two lips in one stitch, and if you see fit, make the first cut of removing the excess of the softened skin to three or four stitches firmly;
Then sew between the stitches, and treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of chastity
Know that chastisement and fines are part of our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak about them in this book;
And it is necessary for only two reasons:
And one reason is so that the doctor knows how to answer when asked, and knows the treatment;
And the other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our help, as with goats and sheep, cattle and others.
So I say that castrations are done according to two methods: either through attraction or by making an incision.
In the method where we do it through attraction, we place the animal in warm water until the testicles soften and during that time; then take it by hand as long as they recover and you no longer feel them.
Of the discipline of execution: It is necessary that you dye the animal. Press its belly skin with your left hand, then secure it and operate on each kidney individually, when you have well scalded them;
and leave no small pore or subtle pore that is under the vessels;
And this method of execution is better than the one done by attraction because with attraction there might be some remnants of the intestines left over, which causes the animal to crave lust.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: One way is if between the two kidneys there's an opening as in the natural figure of a woman, with hair present, or sometimes in court she urinates.
The other way occurs in women, and it has something like a penis above the belly button, resembling two genital openings.
And the treatment for the womb and fever is that you apply all the compressed poultices, and treat them as other wounds;
In the second method, for those who have their urine jump through the skin of the kidneys, if there is no treatment.
Tentigene is a compressed poultice placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; And some women have it so large like a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is necessary that you dye away the excess of the tentigene with your hand or tongs, and apply it gently;
and do not go too far around it, lest bleeding occur, then treat with another treatment until it is healed;
And there is another kind that arises at the mouth of the measles, and pustule, and by chance fire comes out, and according to its appearance it resembles a boil, so they called this old disease "boil sickness". If it's necessary for you to handle it, as we have said about the pustule, and the treatment until it heals.
Erratic if the nature of the woman is not completely perceived, or if the pulse is too small; And it's natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that has come about;
And it's natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that has come about; Or it's by a roasted joint, or due to a subtle or coarse syphilis, and appears on the measles, or in the chest, or below, or wherever.
And it involves conceiving, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers to obtain.
And the understanding of this comes through the examination of the hand.
If the strikes are closely visible, one should look at your hands or on the road.
If it is very soft and sensitive, and it's close to the two hearts, if you hurry, and it behaves like this:
Put your two fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spread out her legs;
Then form both hearts, until the subtle syfac is round and covered by the ribs;
Then take wool and the fatty flesh, place it on the heart, and have the woman rest in that position each day until she can no longer heal.
And if it's firm and dense, then you must shape its surface as it appears to be when resembling the leaf of a myrtle.
If they are bone protrusions, suspend them to the ceiling and cover them;
And have remedies for stopping blood, such as this, dragon's blood, incense, mix abundantly with one egg;
then administer a wide bandage, so that the wound does not heal together;
and do this for a long time, and then apply a linen tent (bandage) dry;
then continue with other treatments as long as the wound is clean.
And when there is metal in the wound that's from birth, if it should be treated according to this method, assuming it's embedded foreign objects that need extraction. For an embedded abscess in the wound, one should not apply fire to it.
Regarding hemorrhoids Emmoroydes are openings of veins that without regular care, and when emmoroydes become old they turn into thromboses.
and we have mentioned the appearances of these in the division, and the signs, and I will now describe those that lead to healing.
I say that the hemorrhoids and their chronic issues, when they are impacted by maris (most likely referring to a type of treatment or substance), do not appear at touch feeling, except for the remedy through iron.
Those that are by the mouth of maris (most likely referring to an opening or entrance), can be felt, and those that can be cured are these.
It follows that you should place the woman in a cool house, then set up an altar with tongs, and the fire at its roots, then powder with medicine that restrains blood flow, such as juniper and dragon's blood and incense, and similar items;
Then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
And if blood drainage occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of apple pips and yarrow and similar items, then take oat flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply this plaster to her back.
And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, make her undergo suction cupping on the back and breasts without causing injury;
Take wool, and extract the moisture from plantain or from the juice of ageliet with old wine, and make it strong enough for use on the body.
And when the abscess subsides, treat the wound with ointment until it is clean;
And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles hard white, if it needs to be covered in the way that I have explained for the thelul; And then continue the treatment until it is clean.
Many forms of abscesses come about in the female body, such as gangrene and pearly abscesses, herpes, boils, furuncles, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must describe in this treatise the spontaneous abscess that occurs with marriage, which is not among those that cling to clothing;
And if you know how to handle iron work, observe that the abscesses are inflamed at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever; and if it turns red, then you will be able to see it. Therefore do not rush to pierce, but let it die until the pain subsides;
And then have the patient sit on the stool, and place two small stools under his hips where he leans forward, supporting him from behind and bringing his feet to align with parts beneath the leg;
And spread her buttocks, and place her arms under her knees, and bind them well with a firm ligature;
Then guide the birth towards the right side, and prepare the tool with which one operates in the mouth of the mare, from which the form follows afterwards;
And it is necessary that when you see the tool being prepared, you make the first effort to determine the depth of the mare's mouth, so that what enters inside the tool does not penetrate too deeply and cause pain to the patient; And if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with bandages, so that the tools do not weigh on them.
It is necessary for him to place the funnel of the instrument above and to sharpen the instrument.
And when abscesses open and one makes it with the soft hand, if it is suitable to cover at the head, over the lung.
And when the wound is emptied, it is necessary to put in the wound wicks soaked in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
And place the wick of the wound at the bottom of the bandage, and put it in front of the bandage and against the knife with clean, oil-soaked lint or wool that has been cooked in water;
Then the treatment continues for two days after applying the ointment, as long as it is healing.
And each time she lifts and cleans the wound with a mixture of water and honey, then with water or the roots of lilies and lady's bedstraw that have been cooked; Then resumes with the ointment.
And if the wound is healed in the marron, then you should avoid cooking with iron but treat it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth Knowledge of the natural birth process is crucial for delivery, and you should recognize its signs when you see a woman about to give birth and feel the urge to smell the amniotic fluid:
So the child begins to force its way out; Then you know that this birth is according to the natural form, and is his exit through his head, and the second stage follows him;
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the baby comes quickly.
For when he descends on his head, there is the second with him, and is born with his excesses expelled through good purification;
And this alone comes naturally otherwise does not come.
For it comes only on his feet, and comes from the belly or shoulders, and from his hands, or when it comes on his belly, or groin; and is transformed by chance near his neck, and through other evil shapes;
It requires wisdom and finesse in these matters for the midwife, and understanding to avoid error and deception; and I will show you all the shapes about how one should help with them.
When the child comes forth from its mother's womb by natural means, and the woman gives birth in pain, and her strength is weak, she should be made to sit, or women should hold it.
And from whence comes the essence of something like fennel cooked, and then apply it between her fingers on the small placenta which has this form: And cut the second nail, and scrape under her fingernail until all the moisture that was inside is out;
And squeeze the woman's belly as long as the child descends; and if it doesn't descend, then one should administer a栓塞 of fennel oil with safflower oil to the woman.
Then have her take and sneeze with consideration, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: If you have just delivered the child.
And if they emerge forcefully with two hands, it is necessary that you gently guide them little by little; And if they cannot enter, make the woman sit up and lift her feet high; Then place the stool on the ground, cut the cord of the woman so she does not urinate during delivery;
And if her hands cannot enter and the child is dead, take the knife that was prepared beforehand, cut her hands, remove the child, guide it equally.
From the birth of the child at its feet When the child comes down with its feet, it is good to push them up; And then turn them little by little until they are equal;
Start by rubbing some pieces gently and gradually.
Can't he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and make himself sneeze from consideration; If he can jump, then may God will it.
And if he isn't better as we have said, if it twists little by little, until it is according to the natural figure. And so it becomes slightly easier.
And if he doesn't jump as we have described, say that you should mix altitude powder, oil of saffron, and melted gum, then grind everything in a pestle; and place the woman's inner and outer sides with this ointment, then have her sit in hot water until she reaches her ribs;
and when she is thoroughly moistened internally, have her wear a balsam collar, and place it on her, leaving it for an hour; Then make her sit on the stool, then make her snort and hold her mouth and nose, and touch her stomach lightly, for the child jumps now.
From the issue of the child on its knees When the child takes this form, if someone puts their hands on it gently and gently; Then hold her on her neck, and have the legs hanging down at the back, and let her stand at the bed; And fold her hands gently and gently, then hold her hands on her belly, and remove the pillows underneath as long as she hangs down at the back; And if the child doesn't jump, take her feet and force them together, then move her belly upwards, then start rubbing your hands. And gently guide the child; And instruct the woman to bear up until the child comes forth.
from the exit of the child that comes from a wide hand It's necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then have the woman lie down and walk;
If she cannot walk, make her sit up on the bed, and place her legs straight;
then apply the rubbing technique I have described;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the stool, then study to bring back the hand; And guide the child according to its natural shape, make her sneeze, and instruct her to bear up until the child comes forth fully.
From the birth of the child at its neck, and extends its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary for him to wash his hand with a tincture, then turn it gradually and gradually, and gently lift it.
And when it is even, place him in the natural lifting and oily motion like we said, then instruct him to move gradually and gradually;
And when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and instruct her to pray; And make her sneeze. In this same manner for all the second part
In this same manner for all the second part When it comes to this manner for the entire second part, if you cut the second part up to your nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
And if it falls to its face and neck, cut it from the belly, ensuring it is not held back, so that the child dies;
Then remove the child inside, as long as you have placed them correctly, and instruct the woman to refrain from any action.
from the birth of twins Know that many times worms are born, and every time three or four are born; And this is not an unusual thing, and it does not happen. Two are uncommon things, and do not live if they are not named;
Two are uncommon things, and do not live if they are not named; I know this, that they multiply and are expelled by the sperm which devises them, which is connected to the womb;
And every time they come out just as naturally as one under another, as we have said.
And if they hurt strongly, like we have said for treatment, and if the wound is subtle, then do it promptly and lightly as she does. Do so in such a way that promotes health. from many children
They are not formed in the Marsyas I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen up to XV, and they are all formed like a child by measuring their greatness glorious, and it is necessary that the healer know everything this, for such a thing might happen to them. Do so according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman with a dead fetus or belly issue, as I have said in the division section, and it doesn't come out, and you are forced to operate with your hands; If it is necessary for you to know whether she has healthy virtue, and she does not have an accident or fear of death;
If it is necessary for the woman to be in good condition on her back, and have her legs inclined upwards, and her feet raised;
And the minister applies the tingle of two parts, or if she is tied to the bed so that it does not come off during childbirth;
Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist almond oil and a mixture of coriander and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then smear her hands with these oils and this mixtures;
Then have her move lightly, then when she is ready or when the contractions are sufficiently strong for this to occur, and take care that the child is ready to descend through its head;
If the lumps are embedded in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or under his palate or around the beard or in the armpits or near the ribs, and if he descends into bones, then embed them or grasp them with force towards the middle of the back;
And it must be that you cut the lump with your right hand, and place the bend between his fingers of his left hand, and he pushes it with all his strength with both hands, and embeds the lump in none of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty thing.
Then place against another lump, or make it three if necessary, so that the extractions are equal;
And then they are moved equally on both sides, to allow movement, and so that the teeth might be able to hold in place, as this is their form:
And if there remains any part of it, if the blood has flowed from some of his fingers to that spot, and stops at that part, then pull out the other part;
And if there remains nothing at all, place this tooth or move it upwards further, and do as necessary until the tooth comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, you should wrap around the upper part of the tendon until it comes out completely. Then apply the knife at the ankle joint or on the leg bone, and similarly do this with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is bent at the exit, or if it has a sharp, assembled head, then you should push the spiny thorn between your fingers, and bend the head and remove the sharp part; or you will take it with the tool which is called "almidach", from which its shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one;
and in the same way, make so that if the child has a natural large head;
and then pull with the force using scissors, and if the head jumps out and is held by force, if it breaks, until the moisture or worse comes out;
and if she cannot come out, remove her piece by piece as you can;
And if it is swollen in the belly or around the sides, you must pierce him until the moisture escapes.
And if the child is on its feet, then it has light attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the womb is light.
And if it is swollen in the belly or at the thighs, you must remove him until you reach the fur that covers on the hand; And do the belly or the thighs, as long as the moisture is drained from it.
And if another limb is osteitis, and the head remains, then squeeze his hand all around the marrow, and pull it until you reach the mouth of the marrow. Then he removes the third or fourth bone, and pulls it out forcefully.
And if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed due to an abscess that has come there, it should not be forcibly moved, but it should be treated with moist and fatty things. And he applies plaster, and if he has water that softens and moistens.
And if the child is under his side, and you can put it level, then apply what we have said about live birth;
And if one cannot do it all at once, if you pull by parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about incisions that come during menstruation;
And if the bleeding continues, place it in water restraining and apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whom an unborn child had been bitten by death, then consulted with another on that, and treated the other's bite. After much time, an abscess came in his stomach, and swelled so much that it burst, causing great pain.
I was summoned to the treatment, and I waited for a long time, and could not support the wound.
I placed it on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was very surprised, because that part of the body doesn't have any bones.
I thought it was a bone from a dead child.
I want the wound, and by my hands bone, until the woman was in the best place; And she nurses the long well for such a time until there is a little blood from the knee.
And I only remember this chapter for when masters find an unfamiliar thing, that they should know how to provide aid.
Here comes the form of the presser, which is described in the books;
and to two turns for each of the two shoulders for each of the two ligaments. Always, horns should be more delicate than that of a restrainer, and made from ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the pipe be two inches wide, and the thickness of the bark must be one and a half palms; and between the two ligaments there should be two joints of this same pipe, which must be solid in one and the other, from half a palm or slightly more;
And these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the second horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, may be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pincers; and has two shoulders for adjustments, just like you see, of the length of a palm, and two rods of width;
And when you see the mare open with all of the tool, make her lie down on a bed, with her hips hanging and her legs spread apart, then insert both adjustments together into the mare, and hold the handle of the tool under her buttocks; Then move your hand over the entire tool in the same way you would use pincers equally, according to the amount you see opening the mare's mouth, as long as the adjustment does what she desires.
This instrument is entirely surmounted, and multiplied according to these resemblances; And when you equip the mirrors, the work is faster, and they stand higher for people according to their quantity.
Don't lose hope in the tool if you haven't set it up, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage is retained during birth, it must be commanded to the patient to hold back her amniotic fluid, and then make her sneeze with consideration, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps through it, well done.
If that doesn't work, take a pot and make it cover or have a lid, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calendula, rue, fennel, chamomile, cinnamon, and thyme; All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or boiled over fire;
Then place a reed or a straw in the mouth of the marrow, and put another at the opening, and hold it until the fumes go inside the marrow;
Then make them sneeze, as we have said. If the second tooth springs up quickly.
And if she still does not improve after this treatment, and if it lacks strength, instruct her to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or rosemary water, then dip the cloth in nature, and desire the second one; And when she finds it, take and extend it slowly in a straight line, so that the marrow does not move during extraction;
But you should gently move it to the right and left, and then apply pressure. If it comes back and becomes loose again.
And if the nosebleed is due to anger and stress, as we've said, treat with sneezing therapy and herb fumigation;
And if it is not from anything of what we have said, just remember not to apply pressure when applying pressure.
However, when treating someone with nosebleeds, you should hold their mouth shut and tie it to the woman's waist; then apply ointment from Tetrapharmakon as enemas. If the treatment works and stops, it will return strength.
However, if after recovery there's bad smell in the stomach and head, and it makes the patient feel ill. So then, accordingly, fumigations suitable for this are required:
None of the old have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of flowers and the second stage is as follows:
And to see it as if it were a cane, and place the subtle head in its natural position, and the larger heads above the fire;
And let the fumigations be over the coals, and until it's gone, and start another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but instead have its subtle suppression: So then at the birth, let it pierce that suppression at its due time, and do not have it pierced by a sharp tool, and guard the operation so as not to touch it;
Then apply on wet wool in wine and oil, then the salve application while it is bloodless.
And if you doubt that it will not reoccur, then put a thorn in or near the place and leave the person immobile for some days, and remove it when the child begins to walk around indoors.
And many times come these sudden cuts of wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover that cut: either salve it, as we have said about the elm bark.
Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger than those that come from below or in the space between two parts; if it is one fistula or multiple.
and when that nodulation is old, if it operates, and often causes moisture to produce white or fine pus, and many times these are persistent fistulas;
And are known by him who experiences or has emesis or windiness when the patient expels something, and accidentally moves from one place to another.
And if it's about fistulas that extend up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; And reach up to the juncture of the thigh, and up to the knee.
And thus one knows that there is an internal fistula, but not external: And if you hit your ring or base finger and hit a fine needle-like spider or iron pin into the fistula when there is no winding.
And if it is winding, if you hit a fine tentacle or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair at your finger;
And if you don't feel it, and there is no loss of appetite or wind movement nor vomiting, as we have said: know that she does not pierce; if you hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is almost through to the bladder or where urine flows, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be united by medicine.
If she is pierced up to the knuckle joint, then there's a temptation coming up to the elbow; if there is no curvature and the invention of pain inside, then it's that it's within the elbow bend, and it doesn't benefit from medicine nor soldering by ointment;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no effective treatment but effort, and the vanity of misguided people who interfere.
In those that are neither Persian nor old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced, and it's that the disease lies between your hands on its back;
And he raises his legs up to his thighs, and has his buttocks inclined towards his belly; Then set up a spider's web tent, or a snail's shell if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it at the bottom, then you must place your index finger there, and if you feel that the tent has pierced;
And when discovered where your index finger feels between the anus or the rectum, you'll know that it's passed; If there is no movement, one cannot determine its location accurately.
Yet even so, we can usually determine the location well, but this happens rarely;
And when we assist him/her, if it involves heating the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned; and he/she heats it up until it emerges from the base, and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred parts are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then cleanse with ointments that contain moisture until those burned parts come out, then apply an ointment that absorbs the burn and seals it.
If he is thus healthy, that's good.
If this is done correctly, no other cure can be better;
and if you insert it too far until it reaches the base or foundation, and between your finger and the tent you apply a thick covering of burn or ash, then you will see the fistula through that where the covering is thin. If you operate at the beginning of the fistula, and fix it firmly before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent. And the tent will be removed, and it will heal;
Then remove those thorns that look like a bird's feather, and do not leave any behind.
And if it doesn't satisfy you, and there's a gap between you and the operation, then apply a fire cautery or an ointment with medicinal properties.
For the fire cauteries combine two good things: That is to say, the burning of these thorns until they are joined, and the bleeding from blood loss and the drying of moisture;
Then treat wet tents with butter or ground substances, until the limbs drip blood, and out come the burned thorns in the drip;
Then treat the wound with the application of sticky, hard substances as bandages, and use dried medicines for the treatment.
For when it has been restored,
And if a fistula comes up just below the entire foundation, and is away from the body, then plug its tip or foundation, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tentacle, and inside II is attached by a web or jellyfish or cartilage, or it's about to pierce, if there's only one way of escape for both hope and effort, through administering one of these three methods:
or you cautery it as we have said, or you cut down to the base, or if you can, put on bandages and treat as a first step;
and don't cut too close to the foundation, that you might remove what holds up the structure, and allow for voluntary evacuations by means. then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; By chance if it is healthy, or you remove that covering and cleanse then as she has been cut off from the foundation, either by mistake or by another tool brought near. then wash out that grime which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to heal the wound and keep the pus in the lower part of the foundation:
then study to heal the wound and keep the pus in the lower part of the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
And always make the abscesses in this manner: and when you puncture the abscess from within, and it's located under the skin above the foundation, take a tool to pierce through the head according to this shape: And I bend one thread into an 'S', and place the needle with all of the thread in the abscess until it reaches the head.
If it is perfectly within the margin beneath the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that broken one, as if you bend your hand or base.
and pull the head of the thread, and join the two parts together, and bind one to the other, and leave it for one or two days;
and hold it back each time, until the threads come through these barriers that are between two, and connect;
then treat the wound until it is healed and sanitized.
If the fistula does not perforate, make it pierce in every way you can, provided it's not too deep. For one should not make the incision too deep through the puncture stitch, and then treat it as we have said, while it remains clean.
The form of the spike-shaped sputum that one makes into a fistula is rather thick and from one side and trenching; and on the other hand not, because with that one should neither make nor avoid making it as you see here:
Fatigues are according to two ways: They can be found within the foundation like small and large pieces of resin. If there are many or just one such piece, they adhere to the foundation and penetrate it from beneath and up to the main part of the foundation;
But those that lie outside require very little moisture, and even if they adhere or a bit of lemon water or just a bit of blood, and have the color of brown;
And the treatment for those inside the foundation, you must instruct the patient to expel them through the air in chambers, until the foundations release, and they notice the threads; If you hurry, place them in tweezers or hold them with your fingernail, then remove them from their roots;
And if they cannot hold them by their moisture, then take them in the handkerchief, or on cotton, or from a piece of camlet; And remove them with your fingers, then cover them and dust them with some hot powders that are for the fire cautery; Or you burn them as it is said or according to the chapter on cautery, and treat them with other remedies until they heal;
And if the fundament cannot come out, then treat the patient with astringent and harsh remedies for colic to help wash what is inside or at the fundament, so that it can come out smoothly; If the patient does not improve and if their strength is weak for the fundament, then the treatment should be gentle;
If the patient does not improve and if their strength is weak for the fundament, then the treatment should be gentle; And it is that you should hold them at your nail or with tongs, and grasp them, then cut them in accordance with what we have said, as long as the blood flows, and as long as they fear the incision by iron. It is necessary that you sew according to this manner:
It is necessary that you sew according to this manner: Take a twisted thread and make it into a needle. Then pass the thread through and pierce the needle from the other side, and loop two ends of the thread around the needle. And let them be wide;
Tighten the thread in a neat form, then tie the thread, and remove the needle. Do this for all others, and leave some to manage excess blood;
Then place on the wound a moistened cloth in oil or a poultice, and place it on the wound. Instruct the patient to rest;
And then let it grow until it is complete, and when they have fallen, if you apply ointment treatment and other treatments, until it heals properly.
do drying by sweat or foundation Many times it causes bowel dryness within the intestines, and due to natural constraints, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works. It is necessary for you to place the tip of a needle or on your nail the skin above, which should not be left moist. Then treat it until it heals properly as is fitting;
And if it cannot heal, redo the shaving more vigorously than before, until it heals completely, and is scraped clean; Then treat it until it has fully healed.
with trembling Formications are small irregularities on the skin before a boil forms, and they go deep into the flesh;
And once the vein is constricted, and it feels like shaking from cold, and this sensation can be felt all over the body, especially more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a stalk from a goose feather or a strong hawk feather and place this stick over the twitching area, until the purplish circles cover the entire twitching. Then turn your hand to all the stick until you cover the entire twitching area and place it evenly, and eradicate the twitching from its roots.
And if you see this, do as follows with a spider's hair or iron according to this shape, and let it be slender underneath and sharp above: Don't pierce it, as you must hold with both hands, and gently press.
And if you see the twitching, apply heat to it, in accordance with where or before the section of the cautery method is described.
None of the time make an abscess of silver or lead, or melted spider;
And never use these small and large instruments according to where they should be applied. Those thus take on the task of healing children and those who are weak and painful, being little.
Those thus take on the task of healing children and those who are weak and painful, being little. The form of the bladder is small at the top and large, or the belly is bound in this manner:
And there is a need where the belly might be tied, as you see, and the child pierced within.
And has on one side two missing parts, and on the other one;
And let's put medicines on the belly like from a beast bladder or parchment. It should be pierced all around by small missing parts, and there should be one inch of space between each part. Then insert into these parts threads about an inch long that have been twisted together in a crimped manner, either X times or 9 times around, and sew the belly shut like you would sew a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then proceed to cauterize;
And this forms a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and smear the head with oil from a thorn bush or an egg yolk, or something similar, then gently apply it. Then have the doctors hold their two hands together on it while it is still fully visible, then remove the lump, and gently lift the patient's legs onto the surface, and if the medicine seems to be coming out, extract as much as you can. And if it sleeps through one whole night, that is more effective help.
And if you use it to treat illness characterized by the loosening of abdominal contents, and the medicine seeks to quickly emerge, then continue using it as long as it is effective.
And if it's bleeding from the vein or from an abscess, then let the lump be as subtle as for a baby;
and this is the shape of the subtle lump under whose skin tension exists:
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the section on wound care;
Or we will tell you about hand treatments and medicines, according to their application.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and where on the body they occur, and why they have occurred.
The things that cause wounds are by the impact of a stone, and the cut from a sword or knife, or from a spear or staff or axe, or similar actions;
or when they are caused by the actions of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar parts;
And I will tell you how to treat each wound, and start with head wounds, since the recollection will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and there is no break in the bone, be careful if it's by stone or similar actions, and even if all the skin has been torn open and the wound is large, you might slightly suspect an abscess. If it results in quick healing of the head part itself, even if there is slight bleeding from the wound, and then heal against the direction of the removed part;
And let the patient consume their bodily fluids replenished with wine and fatty meats.
And if they do not wish to heal quickly, let them reduce their meat intake, and refrain from drinking wine or eating red meats;
And place in the wound, if an abscess forms and breaks open, use moistened cotton in oil rose or only in rosmary-infused wine;
And if there is no pus, apply to the wound, if it has fresh blood and isn't disturbed by air, powder, which I will describe later;
And if his strength has been drained, then apply some remedies until he is restored.
And if the wound is large like that of a tailor and similar, and the lips cannot be joined together by stitches, then join them with suturing, as I would say for wounds in the belly, from the suture.
If the wound exposes bone, and pain, but only for a little while, if you can. Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin. Instruct the patient to eat hearty meats such as roasted testicles, wheat, and other similar items.
And if you find or skin is putrefying, and it doesn't reach to the bone, then cut out all of the rotting flesh, and cleanse.
And if there is blood in the wound or vein without clotting, and it cannot be stemmed with medicine, then stop up the artery. If you find an exposed one, tie it with a thread; And if this does not benefit, then apply cautery.
And if the wounds are small and simple, then they require light treatment: and if you mix this powder which binds together like that once the iron has passed through.
And the way of making this powder is: take some frankincense; add two parts of dragon's blood; add three parts of fresh garlic, grind it finely, apply to the wound, and bind it firmly until it airs well and adheres to all its blood;
then mix well, leave it without bandaging if it does not swell; For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And this must be done with a salve alone, not with incense or the blood of dragons, but when the medicine has healed the wound.
And if the heart has made the wound bleed, even when it is in this state, I do not say that one should apply this powder.
but apply some medicated poultices, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, until the bleeding stops; then continue other treatments until it is healed.
And if bone breakage occurs with the wound and it's small, then use delicate tweezers;
and I will tell you about bone fractures later.
from the wound on the neck
This wound originates near the neck and is straightforward, if there's no distinction between it and beneath the chin, but if something within the neck or artery has been cut.
If it's the neck, without any other concern than leaving the treatment alone and not putting anything that might restrict it, because it harms the neck and makes them pull away; And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuity of such things is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But be it under the medicine, such as sage washed in mild water and mixed with rose oil, and also the garlic washed in the same water, and other earthy substances according to this manner, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, bind it tightly with bandages, then treat until it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and there is hair and full of blood, then pierce or further down to it;
And if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, then uncover it, repair it, and cauterize; this requires skill.
And if the esophagus is cut or the windpipe, and the passage is kept, through which the meat goes, then place the windpipe on the thread of the throat, but do not touch the throat, just replace it according to its natural shape. And then he restrains the protruding part, leaving it for several days, then he treats with dry ointments until it is healed.
And if there appears in the bone like a wound, if you find it; And if there are bits of bone, if you can extract them all straight away and cleanly, do so. As for what you cannot obtain, wait until the wound turns into pus, then drain it and heal the source;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, treat it as described in my chapter.
If it's from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, observe if there is wind escaping from the wound; if the patient is bleeding, act accordingly: So you know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep, and it retains all its blood, if one does not apply the powder immediately in the first hour, or bind it with no risk of the blood escaping completely, and returns to the heart, causing the body to weaken, then care for the afflicted person; but apply an attractive balm, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have balm, apply old cotton to absorb the moisture in the wound, and make the patient rest on the wound for three or four days, or longer; if no convulsions occur, nor adverse heart tremors, nor undue strain; and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is saved. Treat with remedies and other treatments until the blood is drained;
and if it cannot heal or work normally, know that there may be an opening.
if the treatment is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then treat as the one in front instructs; and if it's large, stitched;
and if it's small, powdered, and if it's deep into the bone, or has splinters, clean out the wound and remove any external treatments if they are exposed; and if they are not exposed, let the wound fester, and facilitate the extractions;
And for other wounds on other members are judgments so as we have said.
From the rupture of the abdomen
The belly distensions are large, medium, and small;
From a major wound, one might have an ejection of the intestines, or parts of the intestines, through which foreign objects can enter;
And the stitching is more complicated; for once, it's worse than small injuries compared to large ones, because in stitching up the intestines repeatedly over time, one would not risk sewing them back together if they were not stitched step by step.
Because the intestines swell even when they feel cold; if one sews them too tightly again, it's better to make small injuries. Therefore, one should gently stitch the intestines back to their original position rather than attempting to repair larger ones.
And know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four ways:
The two common stitches occur at the belly wound, and the stitch of other chest injuries are associated with other wounds;
Yet they are more precise with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine has been torn out, and if there's something to be sewn back together, this can be done through one of the two methods: Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm him up in this manner: Moisten an sponge or add the salt in water only, or you cook in boiling water with ginger and cypress and thorns, and remove the intestines until the blood is drained;
And once this wine has been reduced, and made thick so it can help in reducing swelling.
And when you see the blood departing, rinse the intestines with water or wine until they are cooked well, because through this, the entrance allows passage of little things;
And if it cannot enter, then slightly widen the wound with the instrument used to remove blood clots;
And the first treatment should be made thick so that there is no unnecessary cutting of the size, because I don't have it;
And these are the tools to split them:
if you cut from within in the bend and not outward, and see this form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines escape, if you can set them back according to their natural shape in their own proper place, because this is what matters, for it counts.
When the wound is wide, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary to have the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; And if it's in the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and bottom higher than the lower parts, and similarly if the belly wound is in one of the two halves, place yourself so that the injured half is higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary to follow what I say for large and medium wounds.
For small wounds use what is suitable to you, then have at your disposal the entire surgical kit that sears the entire wound with its hand and joins the edges;
And this is the common method of suturing, and you take one or more needles according to the size of the wound's width. Then leave about half an inch at the edge of the wound, then you place a needle where there will be enough strong thread. and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the stitch, which is inside the skin, as long as you make it pierce that part, and join the two ends of the stitch together in four.
then take two strands of thread and tie them together on the needle from both sides. Then join the two ends of the wound together slightly overlapping them, and then leave about half an inch, then place another needle.
then tie the thread in the same way you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to your skill with needles until all the wound is restrained;
And use needles that are midway in size, between fine and thick ones, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the overly thick cannot enter well at all. because it is necessary that they be midway;
and it is not good to have the needles too far out of the flesh and skin, for they would cut and widen the wound before sewing.
and when you stitch the wounds with needles, ensure they don't irritate the patient while sleeping, and cover the needle holes with cloths or bandages to keep them clean until the wound heals.
And this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient.
The second stitch is common, and it involves assembling two bones from the skin and two bones from the muscle together on one needle or thread where there is one strong thread midway;
And when you have pierced all four bones together, you should reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner one sews clothes;
and place an interval between each stitch as large as a half of a small coin.
These stitches sew up the wound, and I stitched a belly that had been cut by a sword, which was torn open, resulting in a wound longer than one hand-width, and contained two hand-widths of intestines, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine until it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
And they thought that he was dying, it was indeed a miracle;
And I would not cure it with ointment, because there was none to be found where I was or any medicine; I will wipe the wound with old cloth twice a day, and wash it in honey water until it was clean.
I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle, and pierce from the outer part up to that inner side;
When it has pierced the center straight up and down, place the tip of the needle at the siphon or wound or where you have punctured with the needle, and make it pierce from the inner side to this outer part;
And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew in the same way as the marten furs leather, and you leave once on one side of the siphon, and take it again from another, until the stitching is fully completed.
The second method of stitching, that Galen accurately described, is such that nobody does it. They instead unite the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the thread to the other in this manner:
Stake an awl or stick near the elbow area and make just one hole in that part only, leaving two ends of the needle; Then twist the awl, and make it pierce from the outer part right through to here inside, until both ends of the needle.
Then pierce both from the outer part right through to here inside using two other awls that are opposite to each other;
And this is the way of stitching and it is the most common one.
Galen said this sentence, and nobody denies it; one must stitch the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
and must one stick one needle on the side and the other on the opposite side, like those who sew inlays;
and know that when the wound is inside the belly, the stitching is more painful than in their other wounds.
The assessment of the injury is like that of the assessments of other injuries:
and so that when you find the fresh injury full of blood, just like how heat has treated it, you should return to its natural state, and then stitch;
then put on the stimulating powder for charcoal, and if heat has treated it, then apply no lotion that is available until the injury heals; And heat the needle, and let them sew up the cut, and mend the wound; Then treat the wound as usual until it is clean;
And if you don't have remedies, place them, alternately, until it starts to bleed, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is clean.
But you need no other remedy in multiple forms when the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound might affect major limbs, it is necessary for you to immerse light wool in oil with a moderate heat or in rose oil, and place it inside the joints, and cover the surrounding areas;
And if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and it happens repeatedly, then give them a black wine enema, and similarly if gangrene has reached up to the intestine;
And makes a puncture inside, and you know that when it is large intestine, it is easier to heal than the smaller ones.
The intestine that is called 'the young' cannot heal when it's injured, and this is due to the position of the veins involved, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach of its nature towards nerves.
And if pus jumps from the wound, if it resets behind as with an intestine while it is fresh;
And if it is old and has turned to blood or blackness, you should tie the area that is black, so no bleeding occurs from there, for there are veins and arteries;
Then cut the one that is between the tie, and place the two heads hanging from the part under the wound until past it for easing extraction when pus quits, and the wound closes.
from the rupture of the bladder
When the intestine is firm, and the wound is small, you can restore it in some ways, because I have seen that a brave man's belly was pierced by a spear;
And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, causing malabsorption and flatulence;
I performed the cure according to my abilities and did not stop refining until it was healed, and bound his limbs.
And when I saw him healing, I wondered if the patient might be experiencing pain in their abdomen; And there was no illness, but he improved and ate and drank;
And it is said by some experts that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: Take large intestines, then join the edges of the wound. When the intestines open their mouths, place them on the two edges if they pull their mouth upwards;
And then one grips the head, and it is held in such a way that it cannot be released, after which another movement occurs in this manner right after the first, as before, until the entire wound has healed. and there is the wound.
That is the chief that gets into the intestines, and it causes no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine in such a manner:
Take the end of this intestine thread that is most charred, and then tie it to the end of the other thread made from fine linen. Twist both threads together, sew them onto a needle, and stitch the intestine, then reset it in its place;
This method of sewing is solely done according to the path of engagement and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the intestines, if there's no injury or illness, because of its subtlety.
from a fistula or wherever it may be. Know that every wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally termed 'fistula', and even when hairy and round in shape.
And a fistula is according to the firm and white congealing, where no pain is felt, and it's also covered like the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes it appears clearly white, and at other times it's thickened; Sometimes it's small, and at other times it's quite significant;
And I have spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed and contains no pus, leaves only through one of the eight causes: This means, by the weakness of blood or pus; because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, that does not allow new growth; or it has too much blood; or the ears are infected, and the substance is of poor quality; or the medicine used in treatment is not good; or because of the way it spreads like a plague; or due to its late properties in that region, digestion is delayed and health also lags, fleeing naturally; or it has veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body; because there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the thorax, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if it affects the property of the main member, and exhibits the symptoms accordingly.
And all fistulas that occur in this manner are difficult to heal, and there is no exception but labor and lack of knowledge;
And if there is no fistula that does not reach until what I have said, and you take the care of the cure, and you know how to recognize it; then use a spider web or iron wire tent, if the fistula is straight, then insert it.
And if the fistula is twisted, try to find a subtle path of penetration, for the needles bend and move along the twists;
And if the fistula has lost its ends and you cannot properly seek it through attempts, try enemas through one of the ends, for moisture flows from one end to another, and cleanses;
Then carefully inquire with your strength, to know if there is bone or nerve, and if it feels like hair underneath. Ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press on it, and where exactly that pain is;
And when you truly know the location of it and that it is far from joints, nerves, arteries or veins, or any other places I've mentioned, proceed according to what I've said; remove bone fragments and clear away putrid substances that are inside.
And then the treatment until it is healed, and if a sinus has formed, deeply dig in the correct location. It's necessary that you carve out as much as possible. Then place wet cloths with medical ointment, and let them soak up to the tip of the sinus. Continue until the medicine has eroded away any excess substance remaining at the bottom.
And then place clean dressings, until it is healed;
And if it has not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have instructed, and if the bone is decayed from the sinus, then remove it.
And if the vein or major limbs are obstructed or hindered in any way, as we have said.
And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and darkness, then remove it until all decay is removed. Then dress with clean substances until it heals;
And if there is no healing, and the bone returns as before, know that you have not yet reached your goal.
If it discovers and desires until you reach the bottom, and removes all the corruption, then return the bone;
And if it is already healed, that is well. If not, know that the corruption has gone too far, that you cannot bring it back; if there is no other reason than to abandon it by nature;
And if there is only a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with tweezers, take it using the appropriate instrument for that. If there are many bones, remove them all, do not leave any of them;
And if moisture opposes this against it, with no error or fear, handle moisture, heat, and flesh, and liberate the bones.
And if you cannot extract them within an hour, put something to stanch the wound on it for gangrene, and leave it as long as the flesh is gangrened inside the bones, and then they will remove the bones more easily;
And if it's a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, just remove the putrefaction until all of the bone turns black, then close the wound;
And if there is a large portion of decayed flesh and it has reached down to the bone; And if it suits to treat everything up until the decay, and then treat it until it heals completely;
And I will tell you of a case where a fistula occurred in someone's leg, so that you may take it as an example and seek help for your own work.
He was a young person around thirty years old, who experienced pain in his leg due to an issue inside the body that caused substances to travel down to the leg, leading to a large abscess forming, and there seemed to be no reason for it to open.
However, through their foolishness they opened it as wide as the abscess allowed, and within, they ate away at a great amount of substances, and became a fistula, and he suffered much loss that all groaned over and was affected by body moisture;
And many doctors treated him for over two years, and there was no wise person in the art of healing hands until I was called, and when I saw his leg and the remedies being used to cure him, and that which ate away through the losses by great bodily suffering; And became red the body of youth, and had a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent in one of these depressions, and then searched all the depressions, finding that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurriedly proceeded then, and cut into one of the blisters until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it decayed and punctured, and the decay reached up to the inside of the bone;
I was the part that appeared from the decayed bone, and I thought there was no other decay, as it was only what I had exposed;
And began to treat the wound with medicines over time, and couldn't heal it;
And then I began again, and found the bone in the same manner as before, and found the decay continuing within the bone, and it too was affected, and I removed it, and tried to heal the wound; But I could not do much until I copied about one hand of bone length, and treated it with all its parts, then returned it using medicine; And it healed and fused quickly, and no longer required resuming the operation except for the weakness of the patient who couldn't endure it, and because of my fear of his death. For blood evacuation often occurs, but it was completely healed. In its place of the bone, a hard flesh formed, and it had good disposition and didn't cause any harm or opposite effect at all from beginning to end, neither inside nor outside.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: Take hold of it, and pull at the part of the bone that is exposed, and instruct them to extend it upwards; and place another thread of thicker wool than the first one, and bind it over the flesh that is inside the bone, and pull the contaminated flesh upwards, revealing the flesh on the part you want to heal, making sure not to hurt the flesh;
And place a charcoal or a board under the bone to draw out the putrid flesh;
And it is necessary to remove as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and also remove again later if needed.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and corruption is in the middle or a part, then remove all of the flesh;
Then place charcoal underneath, and then remove the corruption from one part to another, and continue removing the flesh as long as it is touched by corruption, just like we have said;
And if the corruption is in the joint, then remove the corrupted joint, and expose the bone on the other side;
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other way but to cut it;
And if the corruption is or pierces by hand, or by foot, it becomes very strong but nevertheless you should inquire about that corrosion, how it has revealed itself to you. and refine in all the ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve does not hinder you;
and know that the incisors and the knives are many according to the setting of bones and the appearance of bones, and their size and their subtlety, and their largeness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare each kind of work with its tool.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you need according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the manners of diseases; If you consider the tool that you need according to what it requires.
The joints might dislocate due to an internal cause, or due to an external one;
And when you have treated that erosion by the cure of medicines, and if they do not benefit, it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the erosion occurs, so that the patient escapes through death or through malice, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
And the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes this erosion of limb by limb, spreading throughout the body;
If you are to amputate, and if it's due to the impact of certain venomous animal bites, like sea scorpions and vipers and such, and if the erosion is in the head of both legs, then amputate and do not give any chance for them to reach up to the hand.
And if it comes just to the wrist, then you cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend up to the elbow;
and if it extends to the arm, cut where the knife meets it;
and if it passes through the knife, that is death, and nothing beyond its power can save him.
and in this manner proceed whenever the corrosion affects or touches: if it reaches the first joint, cut after the other joint;
and if it affects or touches anywhere else, cut all through that part. and if it ascends to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other option but to allow the patient to die;
And the way to cover or sew the limb so is that you tie it above and below, stretch one surgeon's hand on the lower link and another surgeon's hand on the upper link, and you cut the flesh between the two links until the bone is exposed, as long as the bone is uncovered;
Then cover or sew it, and put one piece of linen from each side, so that the skin doesn't touch the healthy part, and moves to avoid another injury and infection elsewhere.
And when the bleeding starts during your operation, if you should cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some止血 powders;
Then return to your medicine until it's done, then bandage the wound with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened at my house one evening:
It happened to him one night that it seemed like a darkness as if of fire, and this corruption came first to his foot at the heel, until it encompassed the entire foot;
And when the owner saw the corruption, they attempted to cover the foot, and became reasonable;
And soon afterwards, the corruption affected two of his hands, and it came to me, and I placed him on things for reaction after the cleansing of the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
And he urged me to bandage his hand, but I refused, hoping to react the matter; And I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the power of the medicine was weak;
And he utterly despaired, and returned to his land, and held up his hand in grief, and died.
and I have only included this part because someone else needs to do it elsewhere, if needed.
No abscess ever comes in the inner flesh, and stays for so long that it causes a large gathering of pus; and then spreads and forms holes, and the pus jumps out, and lingers in his bodily fluids, just like vessels; And the skin above is as fine as linen cloth, and does not extend up to the bone or nerve, and such disease is also called "sinus", and it is not referred to as "fistula";
But if it is so long that it comes almost to the bone all through, it is called "fistula";
And when you cook, you should cover the skin entirely, and similarly, even when it's delicate like a piece of fabric; and doesn't escape due to its corruption.
And if you have made the skin dry out and the corruption isn't at its limit, with the skin full of flesh, then treat it like this:
Check if the glands are large, and if the one containing it has a rank smell; then use an enema of Egyptian medicine as follows: Take ale, and oil, and silver bangle, in equal parts, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take from this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and with chloride of zinc in the breast, and restrain it tightly. And leave the medicine there for two hours, then remove it by pressing;
Repeat this process as many times as necessary until the breasts are free of milk and the duct is cleared;
Do this procedure every time you lack the medicine, and when this medicine is not available, use water made from ashes. If you take vine wood ashes and add water to them, then pour it in and let it drip, do so until you know that the breasts are well drained;
And if the patient cannot endure it, or if they can't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, use water and honey instead, perhaps with a little boric acid; For you should mix honey with wine that has been well combined, as the honey possesses properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the healthy person flourish.
And when you have done this and ensured that the lungs are well cleansed, if you insert something made from the thing that produces mucus in them, and then take up a transparent plastering material and apply it with rose oil and in wine;
For you should insert certain medicines and ointments with it, of which I have mentioned the properties or treated about ointments;
And if the space in the lung is small and the catheter cannot enter it, then you should widen it with a slightly heated iron, and apply an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment as long as it remains widened.
And if the wound is too wide, then place a stitch and let only half of my length or the lymph node be able to enter. If the pus chamber is above where the boil begins, then sew it higher than I am.
And if you cannot cover the swelling fully as you see it, equip yourself in such a way that the boil flows to the lowest point below me, because when the boil has reached its fullness, do not let pus spill over and if you cannot cover the swelling fully as you see it, equip yourself in such a manner: so that the boil flows smoothly downwards, and do not leave any part of the boil;
so that the boil flows smoothly downwards, and do not leave any part of the boil; and take restorative medicines to place within the healthy part, and apply them on a linen cloth that covers all the healthy area; Then apply force to the small part of the breast that is just beneath the nipple and at a larger area than the first, place oil on each sheet according to the size of the lesion, and put it on the healthy part to ease the bowing, and do not remove the large sheet until after several days once.
And the one around the breast area often needs to remove the swelling, and you should know what causes this swelling: if it's due to poison or pus or a sufficient amount, or digestion or indigestion.
And be vigilant if the patient feels pain or no sensation, and whether there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has begun to take effect in this way and you see the nature that jumps on the healthy part of the breast, then you know that the symptoms are dissipating, and brings health.
And then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you relieve the wound, change to another dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if venomous bites occur after a long wait, don't lose hope for your health, for the healing is coming.
For there are individuals who experience delayed healing of their wounds, and among those who do the opposite;
and if after many days an undigested lump appears in their chest, know that the breast is not growing;
and if the breasts are slow to grow and distant, adjust your remedies with both wet and dry substances, such as oil, for it contains a large part of vitriol, which is the last remedy;
take oil diafinit, and apply it with rose oil, and moisten it with old equal wine in substance;
then he relieves himself and uses it;
And similarly makes it cook more fattening, when no application has been made, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them into a paste with honey once the fire is on;
And then mixes it with a paste, spreads it on the skin, and applies it several times, giving to an aromatologist long stalks, and lily roots which are also like flour of cloves and cinnamon; And uses simple remedies or compound ones: Grind them, make into powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it;
And if the treatment lasts long and isn't helped by this cure, then know that corruption has spread throughout, making an impression in the bone, or causing stiffness in the limbs, or affecting the joints; If you are treating a wound with pus, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the foot or hand, or may accidentally appear on other toes.
And when it grows old, and if no care is taken, then the abscess escapes, and runs and spreads as far as its roots reach under the nail, and by chance may spread entirely.
And the corrosion reaches down to the bone as long as there is stinking pain, and the shoulder blades are wide, and the skin turns pale.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and if the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you remove all the excess from under the nail. Then after that, cauterize the wound. The cautery is very effective if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
And if the nail is too close to the flesh and starts to swell, begins to poke through, and blisters form; it's necessary that you place the rod under the nail where the flesh bulges outward, and push it up high. Cut away this subtle and gentle pus, and place with it an application of hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything. Then the treatment of ointments until he is well.
And if the corrosion has reached the bone, you must remove it and scrape thoroughly, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
And if you see that the tooth is rotten, remove it from both jaws as was explained earlier, then treat until he is well.
And if it is severe and hurts greatly, you must remove it first;
Then cut the nail near the thymus in a crosswise manner, and be careful that the cut does not go down to the flesh under the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
And if it happens, place something above which soothes.
I must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and has thick flesh, and by chance it may have bones or there's none at all times, and often there isn't a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is within any of us.
Those born without any defect do not move, and those born with a defect at the joint, by chance, do move;
The size of one who is muscular appears light, in such manner: Cut it down to the root of a broad spatula.
Those born at the root of the joint require treatment: if you hold it with copper.
In the one who is born or should be at the rear joint, it is necessary that you first handle until you reach the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool according to this, and then treat until it is clean.
The decisions that come together at the elbow arise from birth, or from an injury to a wound, or from the application of fire, or from similar actions.
If it is necessary that you solder that joint, so that it should be repaired according to its natural forms; Then place between two damp cloths or sponges soaked in oil rosin, so they do not weld together; or you place between two thin pieces of beeswax, until they are joined together, as it should be.
When we perform soldering with her palm, if she applies the soldering paste as it should be done.
These are thick veins filled with numerous melancholic superfluities that come from multiple members of the body;
And more comes in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
So you must give them once purging of bile, and then heal them from the basilica.
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: One method involves bleeding, and the other results in black blood being discharged; The other method is to open the vein and force it completely out.
The incision is done in this manner: First apply hot water to the leg vigorously until the large artery is weakened. Then hold the leg steady near the skin above the knee down to the part below the knee;
Then cut the vein near my location, or in II or III, with a broad size, then elevate and press with your hand for the black blood, from one end to the other, until as much blood flows out as the virtues of the malady can bear;
Then let it heal, and instruct them to dip in meat juices that darken this blackness.
And resume the evacuation and cleaning whenever the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The method of treatment is as follows: Warm the leg from the affected area, if there is hair present, then immerse it in water, and raise the leg in hot water until it turns red, and expand the veins;
And if you do not have a cautery tool, heat it on the fire, and then apply it directly to the vein along its entire length from near the neck down to the knee joint, or in the area below the ankle.
Then cut into the flesh with an awl, and scorch each side of the vein until you see it when you touch it;
And it appears red and black, and when it enters the leather, it seems like a white thread;
Then pull out the wire until it is raised above the skin, and then cut into the flesh gently with an awl, then apply it to another part three times in succession;
Then scorch the skin above the vein until you see it, then lift it with the rod as you did before, and cut into another awl, in the same way as you did first;
Then fit another size, or more if needed, then lift it, and fit to the foot of the pie, then guide and lift until the second size fits.
Then stretch it gradually from size to size, until all strength remains, then fit it.
And if you cannot stretch and lift it, insert a pin through the entire thick thread, and bind and guide it, and if there's not enough of it, turn your hand from side to side until there's enough. And make sure it doesn't bind up, for if it binds up, one can neither stretch nor lift it, and this is harmful to the patient;
And when you've stretched it all, place wet wool in the wound covered with wine and rose oil. And treat him while he is still healthy.
And if the limb is twisted and turned into a bundle together, and it's not straight, as we have said, then you must cut through forcefully but do not bend it. And guide it as we have explained before.
It should be shaped like the iron when one cuts with a tool, and you should not slice, so as not to cut through the vein;
And it should be thickly curved; if it were too fine, it would cut through the vein, but make it thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein runs under the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
And by chance it may be born in another place than in legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin, if it comes inside the body as snakes and worms do, piercing between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein so are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then change the blood, and it begins the vein to exit outwards, like the root of a plant.
When you open the joints, it is necessary that you wrap around with a piece of leather half way up to two and a half yards., then tie it off, and leave the leather hanging on the leg, and every time there is a little left exposed, if you wrap around inside the leather, and tie it off.
And if it is too long, cut off some part and wrap again by pulling up the remaining piece, but do not cut to its root until all of it has come out. because if you cut too much, it goes into the flesh and brings about pus and decay at that spot, causing a harmful illness;
For which reason it is necessary that she be treated gradually and little by little until completion, and that she not leave anything or more than usual.
And in this case concerning the vein when it is treated with long palm lengths or ten palms, and one person came to me, whose vein was X palms long and attached from that position. And when you grasp it, if it yields after one or two pulls, and piercing until depth ensures all releases;
And remove the substance within and apply internal remedies to prevent corruption every day, then treat it as for abscesses.
And with this vein, use dry hands, and likewise when it opens at the ankle or foot joint, or when it comes from pulling too much, and without wetting.
Treat accordingly as we have said before.
Worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it has appeared many times on cows, and it's a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down, causing one to feel well at each limb, until it reaches the skin where it was heading, then it jumps out;
and is riddled with putrefaction from various fluids, such as when they come towards worms and snakes and roundworms or hookworms in the stomach;
And there is confusion about its nature, for when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it returns and destroys the eye; And this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and milked, if one cannot expect anything until it is about to:
Therefore, you should bind the head tightly above and below with a strong bandage, then proceed to milk it, and if it does not drain properly into the flesh, and you cannot find it, then apply heat cautery to it while milking, until it drains;
And the greatest troubles it causes, if they flow through the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it approaching or near the eye, then bind tightly over it with a piece of wood, then proceed to milk it and force it out;
It is necessary to use the remedy for cleansing sores of medicinal solutions for the removal of body fluids, and it is important to prevent the spoilage of meats from becoming putrid.
The pain coming from windiness This illness is called in our land 'vakirir', and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and when it leaves one limb, it moves to another.
and I saw what I told you. I was called to help a sick woman, and she showed me her arms, revealing a small swelling in the vein of one arm.
and soon after, it rose as if a worm was climbing her shoulder, faster than anything else, like molten silver when cut from one thing to another;
the pain left that arm and penetrated her shoulder, and then shortly afterwards spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that it was twisting inside her body, just as I saw.
I marveled much at how it moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before. In every way, I wanted many that well had wanted to move pain of themselves to another, but I did not want it myself, as I see in the woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a naked belly and her veins exposed, and for this reason that the constriction of wind became apparent;
And they don't become evident according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have wet bodies and their veins enclosed.
And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, open it from above and below quickly, and then proceed with care until that constriction of wind in the body releases. And apply cautery to the affected area;
And if you don't see it at your eyes, seek the remedy for those who relieve wind troubles, such as stinking pills, snake venom pills, and similar other remedies.
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the location of their impact on the body.
The variety of their sizes is such that some have large points, and small ones, and those with hair, and soldered ones; and there are those that have two angles, and those with tongues, and among some there are pieces;
and there is the one that urinates in no member but does so in two ways: or in the main body part, such as the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it urinates, then in no part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: If you must perform the extraction of this arrow, for death comes later in various conditions. And when this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully removed, you should extract it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces and hits bone, and starts a fluid leak coming from under the head, is when there is paralysis, stiffness, inversion, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms with confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps it stops fluid from flowing out through the nose or ears; And sometimes it affects speech and voice. And from the moist wound, white pus resembling hairs seems to come out, and also like ashes of burnt flesh.
And when you notice this sign, take care with the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it hasn't been removed.
The sign of the arrow is when it bleeds or stops bleeding; it indicates that it's close to the left nipple and feels like it might have been stuck in something hard rather than empty. And by chance, if the arrow stops bleeding like hair and black blood comes out, and brings on coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: So, without doubt, it means that the person will die.
And the sign of the arrow that never lets out pus is when there's no foam bursting from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with a cold chill.
And if the arrow bleeds in the undercoat of the buttocks, it indicates that it is behind the small ribs; And causes great pain and great suffering and sighing; And it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
And if an arrow or stomach is hit, by chance if there's any undigested flesh from the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach is hit, and there's no meat passing through the intestines in the jump, then there's no hope for treatment, nor for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow is inside the bladder, and urine spurts out and goes outside, and the patient feels intense pain: Know that the wound is fatal.
The other limbs, such as the arms and neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, forearm, back, thigh, leg, and similar limbs, are safe depending on various dispositions. When the arrow is within your nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should handle such a situation.
It happened to one person who was hit by an arrow near the nose in its root: I tried it and removed it from the other side of the ear's grease, and it was completely well.
And tried to extract an arrow that had fallen into the ear's grease near the membrane and bone, the arrow was recovered, and one could not reach more than its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow's string, all without hurting his ears;
The body healed well, and no harmful incidents befell it.
And extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was the Arabic one for ears:
I pulled out the arrows, and skillfully removed them as I pulled, making the Christian heal well.
And extracted an arrow from a house, where it was stuck in the stomach, and thought he would die;
and after passing 30 days, if his condition did not change at all; I cut into the arrow, set it free, and pulled forcefully; there was no adverse incident.
And if you find an arrow has fallen on the back of a house, and the wound healed tightly there;
And the arrow stays within, not finding relief from its natural functions or experiencing harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man, who was struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound was sealed; and thus he endured without suffering great pain;
and no other similar cases.
And once an arrow was shot at the king in his palace home, he was caught in the midst of a battle, and was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow had fully entered him.
I was summoned for treatment after it had been three days since he was hit. I found the wound to be greatly constricted.
I wanted to test its subtlety thoroughly, but I could not feel it; and there was pain and discomfort traveling across his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on him a poultice that is adhesive and digestive; because his ears were not inflamed; and it showed me that the ear of the arrow was visible.
and it showed me that the ear of the arrow was visible. I applied the poultice every day and cured the wound immediately. He then stayed with the patient for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose;
and he told me this. I applied corrosive ague medicine to the wound for several days until it opened, and then I tested it, feeling the tip of the arrow that was lodging in his ear;
Then adjust during the opening of the wound through that blood-repelling medicine, until the head of the arrow appears visibly;
and puncture well the ends for three months, and then loosen so that the wound heals to a point where I clip with my forceps, from both sides, and it could not escape;
thus I did not cease to refine and invent methods for tools, until I had one day with properly made forceps, according to what the shape will come at the end of this chapter, whether I use them, and leave the wound.
And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: thus I did so, and healed the wound, and completely cured the patient.
You should know the quality of extracting certain arrows, so you place your treatment upon what I do not specify, because books cannot contain all knowledge.
but among wise masters and colleagues you will find some more precise knowledge, concerning both what is available and lacking in current practice. Discover nine new works, and nine tools for the discharge of extraneous matters that occur within this craft.
I state that arrows are embedded in limbs according to two manners: either by the way they enter or from another side;
The case where the arrow enters through the flesh or where it is inserted, it penetrates into the muscle, and this has happened without any exceptions so far.
And if it doesn't jump now, let it grow until the flesh is thoroughly cooked inside, and achieve its release.
And if it's stuck in the bone and cannot be released, let it stay like that for some days, and remove a little each day.
Then it will jump; if it doesn't jump, drill inside through all the subtle woods until the interior muscles are widened, and then guide it.
And if the arrow has returned inside the body so you cannot see it, then search for it thoroughly. And if you feel it, then guide it with any suitable instrument;
And if you cannot find it due to the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then probe as far as the wound allows.
And if you can guide the arrow, pull it out. If there are ears attached to where she holds the arrow, extract any bone that is stuck halfway between two and your reach limit, then break or bend the ears of the arrow as far as possible until you can pull it out;
And very carefully ensure you do not break the arrow, but pull it out more firmly.
And if you can't achieve it in one go, until the arrow reaches your hand, let it get stuck there, then pull it out because the extraction is painful. And if bleeding during surgery opposes you, then apply what we have instructed about treatment in this chapter;
and beware of incisions near nerves and veins, and do your best to carefully remove the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and guide the patient according to the form they were in before the arrow fell, for this is the greatest aid that it should be possible, and if you cannot do so, then place them according to what the symptoms show you.
The arrow that came from another direction, or if there is no sign of it anywhere, or if the skin is swollen in some place quite obviously:
Therefore raise up, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then restrain: if it jumps now.
And if it is held within the bone, turn your hand around, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then guide it.
And if she cannot come out, leave her still and then restart the extraction until she jumps out;
and if the arrow is inside him, thrust it all the way through;
and if it is stuck and you see that the instrument needs to be applied, if you apply the instrument correctly, so that the arrowhead enters the hair of the tool;
and then thrust forcefully, and if the arrow is embedded, you apply the instrument at its pointed entry to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow has struck him, then it is necessary for you to remove all the tissue around where I am entering or have entered, if possible, and then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow is stuck or in pain or in the abdomen or bladder or ribs and it's close to the vital organs, and you can't see clearly, then cover yourself up, and you do so.
And protect against covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound; that is a task you should undertake. And the treatment until it heals.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows resemble bird beaks, and here is the form:
And in many ways: Large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is similar to the feathers of a bird, for it points at the tip of the arrow, as this shape illustrates:
The veins from which we bleed are thirty-one, out of which there are sixteen at the head, that is to say: Two smaller ones located behind the ears, which are called "the two 'herbaches'"; and the two arteries in the two visible temples; and two veins that are in the two upper parts of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; And the vein that is found at the forehead; And the vein that's located above the nose; And the two jugulars which are in the collarbone area; And the two veins that are located above in the cheeks of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augueherich"; And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins we usually know consist of five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it's under the left rib, and they call this "vein of the head"; And the median is called "fast", and it's made up of the cephalic and the basilic veins, and they call this "vein of the heart"; And the rib is either on the left or in the right side, and they call it by the common folk "lung of the belly", and it's under the ribs, and that’s where the heart lies, which opens clearly above the stomach.
And the artery is the vein that's located between the index and ring fingers, and it has two loops;
and in the leg and at the ankle there are three veins: one is near the curve of the belly on the left side of the rib, and the second one at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nose", which is in the ankle of the other rib side;
and in the other leg are three veins beside those ones.
The treatment of veins that are behind the ears helps with the cauterization of old patients, and aids in migraines;
And the qualities of the surgeon, as I've explained, and that you warm the head of the patient, rubbing the area where the veins or arteries are located with a rough cloth; Then pinch the base of the neck until you can see both veins behind the ears on either side of the head: Place your hand there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, let it guide you;
Then take the lancet, and place it just below the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand to right above the entire length of the vein, cut through the skin and the vein up to the bone well, allowing blood to flow out as much as you see.
Then apply pressure and secure it, until it is healed;
And I have spoken about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The health of the second arteries that are in the two temples, if they are ancient and hardened, and those who have accustomed to eye drops, and on the chest of feverish tears by the eyes;
And the quality of this surgeon is as I say: And when the patient's throat is squeezed until both arteries can be clearly seen; And feel under your finger, and then indicate on the right side;
Then gently place your hand over the artery at your right index, and hold the scalpel under it, then gently lift the artery up top, and cut it, just like you did with the other arteries, and let out the blood according to your need;
Then release the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton; and when the wound heals, leave it until it is healed.
and we have spoken about them and their extraction, or the beginning of this book.
The healing of the forehead vein is as important as the healing of the frontal artery in old diseases, and for migraine, and heat.
And its quality is that the patient twists its neck in pain until the vein appears; Then take the tool called 'digester', whose shape is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and allow blood to flow according to the quantity you see; Then free the patient from the neck, and tie the artery as long as it remains healthy and there is no cut to an open flame wide.
Otherwise, it's not good for the flames to be too strong; And the wound should be across rather than straight, because the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flames might break when they are fine.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with them, and at the nose, and at the cheek, and in the ear by the ear canal, and for diseases of the face;
And the quality of their healing is that the patient twists their neck to tighten a certain bandage, as before;
Then heal it, and make the cut into the healthy part, a little across, one length of a flame's width slightly larger. For there is no flesh there. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they might break;
Then make sure to drain the blood as much as needed, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
The treatment of the vein opening near the nose is valued for fever, and for clear mucus, and for diseases affecting the face, such as migraine and swelling that comes to the face, and also when it's old;
And the quality of this treatment is that the patient tenses their neck and holds their left nose to your left hand, take a thin flame lengthwise, and stick it in between the two nostrils into the gap where the vein isn't opening well, as the vein doesn't open properly there, and blood collection will now begin.
And do not push too deeply inside, and make the incision according to your need, then let it rest for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The hygiene of the two intestines aids in tightening the gallbladder, and at the beginning of mingling diseases, and for many illnesses, and in putrefaction, and corrosion, and in herpes, and indigestions;
And the quality of hygiene is such that the patient tightens their throat from both sides, as we have said;
And let the surgeons be on top of the patient's head, and the patients sit at the edge, then apply hygiene across a broad but somewhat narrow length, then draw out the blood moderately or as much as is needed;
Then restart by making another incision on the other vein, then untie the knot, and hold both veins slightly tightly, so that the patient does not strangle. and let it be until morning, so that the wound heals.
Of the healing of wounds The care of veins in the mouth aids in their condition, and it deals with gum decay, cracks on lips, nosebleeds, and inner cheeks.
And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I said; Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left. You can identify them by their black color, and because they have small black veins around them:
Then tie both of them. If you do not know which to tie and are in doubt, tie the larger one from each side. And treat both veins above and below them in the same way, because it's the same method.
Of healing beneath the tongue The healing of veins that are below the tongue requires assistance after the healing of the cephalic area, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth ailments;
And the quality of the surgeon is such that when your hands are between them before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look down on each side you find a black vein:
Therefore heal both of them, but do not go too deep, for they are near the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly treated are healed according to two methods:
One method is by piercing with all the fire of a broad meridian flame, or with a subtle olive one if it's like a cutting knife, and this is called "aneusil"; And they are broad and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The shape of the flame dart is quite famous and very wide as you see:
And it requires to open the full, bloody veins filled with evident blood, and which contain thick blood and turbidity; and that's like the shape of olive oil flame:
and it is more slender and pointed, and used for clarifying subtle veins, or it has subtle yellow blood.
The purification of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that occur in the throat, and neck, and stomach, and abdomen;
And it is for the surgeon to cleanse it properly, and he should be aware of the artery that's nearby. And if it hits the artery, and there is an outpouring of blood, it should be stemmed, as I have said; And it must not be held by fire, but cut like a hare.
And if the basilica is not clearly opening, it's necessary to extract it, and then use another one; either you want no hair from it, or you cut the vein instead of it with your arm: it clearly opens; and cut it with the fire like a hare, as we have said.
And if you know how to find the place of surgery, it's best that you pull on the arm so that you touch the area until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot where to cut, then tie the arm, and cut the vein like a hare; And beware not to pierce in the artery when you see the limb swelling, for it is from the artery: So then, this is it.
And if you see it bulging up as high as the urine of a child, and if the wound is red and subtle, know that it is from an artery: Hurry then, and place your finger for a while, and if you can stop the bleeding, as many times it has happened; Fix his arm, and leave him like this, do not move the wound area.
And let it be for pain, do not move him until he is well.
And if the wound is not stopped by bleeding and it suits you, and if medicine is not at hand, when you see an artery open, treat it because the head of the patient retreats. And stop the bleeding.
And take an elm bark, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other joint;
If the bleeding stops, that is good; If not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
And the stoppages should not be excessive in multiple positions due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's connection.
The purification of the vein in the middle requires that it treat blood from above the head and below the neck, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the physician to beware of the nerve that is nearby, and if he does not go too far forward, and if he finds the nerve, and it swells and harms his health, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of them due to its subtlety, then you must release the patient from the instrument before it. And listen to the nerve with your power.
And if there's a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
The surgeon for the head helps, leading blood out of the head, and aids with eyes;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to operate near the olive oil flame or the mint flame, because this is the safest of all veins, as there are neither nerve nor artery nearby. Always, it is necessary to use the lightest force, and one should not take distress if the process needs repeating, and one repeats. And by chance the muscles of some individuals swell during the first attempt, but one should not take distress in such cases.
The quality of healing depends on your thought process.
The first thing you need to know about hygiene is that hygiene is practiced solely for maintaining health and preventing future illnesses;
And have the sanitation done in one of the three veins, which include: This means, to be precise, the cranial vein, the facial vein, and the jugular vein; And sanitation should be done at the beginning of Lent while kneeling, in autumn and after meals during winter, when signs of fullness are observed;
And one should cleanse it the first day or the third, after two hours or three full days.
The treatment for diseases should not have a fixed time frame, but only when the need arises from day or need, at all hours and in every situation;
And it is not proper to cleanse children until they are twelve years old, nor pregnant women only for a quarter of the month until seven months. And one should not nurse the elderly who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wants to be treated in any way, it is necessary that they purge their intestines with a gentle enema, if there are remnants of food retained, so that the veins do not attract excesses into the limbs causing damage to the main parts;
Nor is anyone who is too intoxicated with meats or drunk treated properly, whether it be from strength or those with dropsy;
And if you worry about the health after cramps and passion, and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and frequent bowel movements in women, and from work, watching and joining forces, and that too much of the virtue, or due to things from the body or injuries;
Then refine the humours, because if it's large, due to meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the means;
Then in or during a bath, if nothing prevents you, for refining the blood, and healing from the vein down to the bottom of the backside, as we have said;
and protect yourself on that day of work and pain, and excess, and similar things;
and be bound and joined, and keep the shoulders higher than where you heal, and rub the arms two or three times, then gently pull the bandage up there, for when it's too tight or loose, it cannot correct the fluids;
And then rub the arm with hands, until the veins swell, and one feels them;
Then moisten the fire with a little old oil, then place your left hand's index finger over that vein under the arm a bit, where you want to cauterize, so the vein doesn't burst or break upon the iron.
For there are veins that act like strings when cauterized, and some have fullness of windiness such that when you place them over the flame, if they retract to the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus one is among these; And if it burns the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which one must be skilled in these matters when it comes to cauterizing.
And if they operate on the vein for the first time, it is good; If not, then start again slightly below or near that spot, if the limb is swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the body parts feel tender, then let it rest for one or two days, without binding the arm: by chance it may bring about abscesses;
don't enter the bath, then continue the cleaning if it pleases you;
and if the wound is small, or if the artery is subtle and you doubt that it has not come out with as much blood as you see, then pierce that same cut all the way to the end;
And the operation proceeds somewhat hastily, thus that the limbs may swell; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swells, do not repeat the operation again, and apply a little of oil instead, for oil alleviates the body's pain from blood, and it stays in that place where the oil is applied.
And do this for each operation you perform on veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And when you apply it to the limb, this same treatment should be done with garlic and honey. if the veins are too thick they need to be diluted and spread out.
And if there comes about large pus pockets, which happen many times, even when it's not strong enough for that particular time or when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and place on the body a damp sponge in water and wine and a little heated alcohol, and hold it for an hour;
And it must be that you do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any blackness or greenish coloration, if it doesn't harm the individual; And if you see it, place on something of myrrh or balm, rubbed in a concoction of cat's claw or similar substances.
Many times pus and appearance manifest themselves during healing of the basilica:
Place then your hand there, and if you find the neck soft under the pressure of the hand, that is the appearance of malady. Therefore listen carefully that you do not put on any of these things which we have said, for perhaps in the court without touching the artery;
but make him be plastered dry to harden the neck, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
And lead each person to have blood according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
But if his skin is black, let him bleed out until it turns red; and if you see that it's large, let him continue bleeding until it becomes refined; and if he is too hot, let him cool down.
And for the one who is full and strong, needing blood extraction, you must make him have a larger incision, and let the flames be wide;
And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is fitting to make them healthier slightly and often, and they must be made healthier by cutting across, not simply by pressing.
And this method of healing protects against the spread of blood and constriction of nerve, and is preferable to healing from long rather than wide.
And for the one whose body needs in healing, it is fitting to give them moist bread and the juice of apricot kernels; If they are overheated, then treat them with blood three or four times. If they have a cool complexion, serve them moist bread before healing along with syrup made of honey and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup has a pleasant aroma.
And if it fails at the surgery, after a little blood has flowed out, it should breathe in a broth of meat, and an aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter or section on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if they wish to breathe more vigorously in their arm, and seek another bout of sweating, whenever they are weakened by extensive sweating, it should be that they sweat gradually, according to the strength of their constitution, continuously.
And if one wishes to fumigate their arm after the first cleansing, and it has strong odors, if they are cleansed seven hours after the first cleansing, or after the seventh hour.
And if one wishes to cleanse another part, then they should do it on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body which has become heated, causing fever; If large quantities need to be drained, and widen the puncture until it seizes in place; Once you meet all the conditions of cleanliness, and place your hand on their heart when it heals, so that death does not come to him instead of healing; this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
And it should not happen when you see the arm being pulled out, and blood is expelled a second time, and the puncture is closed, that you squeeze forcefully; Nor if it's broken, to extend his arm quickly, for this would be badly done;
But let it grow until it heals for the second time; but when you touch the tip to the flame, until the frozen blood nears exit from the vein, and place it on a piece of cloth submerged in water, and gently press upon it.
And if a vein has been cut, leave it unclosed and do not compress it until the abscess is relieved.
And if there's need to draw out blood the second time, heal it in that same place, or on another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein inside the arm is healed at its own location instead of the neck because it's composed that way.
And for healing this way, the patient immerses their hand in warm water, until the veins turn red;
then moderately tie it up, so that the vein appears clearly, then heal now through it, neither too wide nor too long;
and if the exit is too wide, heal well near the wrist of the hand, and if the blood doesn't exit, then place the hand in warm water, let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough.
And if it is in this state, if you do not reattach the hand in warm water, because you will put it more in winter than in summer;
And the health of this vein is more preserved than any other veins; there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the preservation of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
Strengthen the hand, and reset it in warm water until you see the vein, if it appears; And if it's healthy diagonally, and if you handle it all along completely, without causing any discomfort;
And do not get too close to the fontanelle, for the nerve is completely exposed in the flesh, and then put the hand back in warm water if it's frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place on the vein where and how to sew it quickly to close, and do thus with each case.
The cure of the one in his left hand corresponds to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I told you for the right.
The healing of the liver is valuable for all diseases that occur in the body, such as female diseases, retention of fluids, and kidney diseases, as well as ailments of old limbs and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes in hot water and rubs their veins until they cool down, and binds them over the joint on the foot; And if it's in the ankle, and above the foot, there goes much heat.
So then heal it or more vigorously, whether at the ankle, than the application would be.
And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal it like when chopping wood;
and make the heat last until it heals.
And if it cannot come out without pain, put the foot in water and allow well to drain the vein.
And if healing doesn't occur on the first attempt, try again for a second time slightly higher up, as the legs are salty;
Do not doubt a nerve, as we have said, and thus proceed with the surgery on the other side equally.
The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the knee joint, and its health corresponds to the pain in the hip, when it's due to blood clot.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes or immerses themselves in water, and then twists above the ankle four times, because otherwise the vein will not open;
And if it opens, heal her in all the ways you can, and by crossing over; And it's better if you touch her, because the limbs are without pain, and she responds well to human hands.
And it's better if you touch her, because the limbs are without pain, and she responds well to human hands. And if you cannot find it, heal no part of what opens or behind the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard against nerves;
And make such corrections to the blood that you see, and then release the knot, and put on cotton and tighten it; It is now healed.
Vacuum cups are made from horns, or spiders, or worms;
and cupping is done according to two methods: or by causing blood to come out and then attracting it away, or alternatively without causing blood to come out.
And this cupping done by causing bleeding follows two methods: or it can be done instantly, or without using fire;
and cupping done by causing bleeding and extraction of blood is performed over the four corners of the body, from which one is entirely made of bone; and the other ones are around the neck; and the other two on the two sides of the neck; and the suction cup under the chin; and the suction cup over the shoulders; and the suction cup over the pimples; and the suction cups on both arms; and the suction cups on both legs; and the suction cups on both ankles;
and suction therapy does not deal with blood, rather it's for small veins that are scattered in the body, and because of this it doesn't weaken you at all, just as we do with vein health; and it is not right for it to be administered without fire or in any illness that comes from overfullness, until all the bodies are emptied.
And if suction is needed for diseases or by habit, if we do it every hour at the beginning of each month, or at the end, and throughout and in every phase;
For there are those who, when they have need to suction, if they weigh too much initially;
and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and there is cloudiness around the eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit out blood; and for those who tremble, and see through cloudy blood and veined skin and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially during the last month before giving birth, we instruct to breathe after three hours each day.
The cure of the mouth helps in the relief of inflammation in the head ... affecting the eyes, and it should not be that it comes after the elimination of all over the body;
And this practice of blowing air is in the field of hygiene for the head, and it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who suffer from dyspepsia, because doing so causes great harm to them.
And it should not be used by someone who practices watchfulness, or who has cold head diseases.
And he who often gets relieved from it, becomes oblivious, and because of this one must place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the confusion.
Blowing into the neck is in the field of hygiene for the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason it is useful for squeezing the heel, and making incisions into the channel of the heart, and for everything else, and for fullness;
And it is better to do this with restraint, because if you hold too tightly, it can lead to impairment or indigestion and heart problems.
The practices of blowing into the second ribs of the neck are useful for relieving head pains, eye infections and toothaches, and also effective in cases of stridor, and pain at the root of teeth, and they fall under the field of hygiene of the basilic vein.
And you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand when placing it, not to touch the artery, and not to observe any breaks in blood flow.
The ventilation of the area under the chin is worth to disease of the mouth, and decay of gums, as well as other illnesses that occur in the mouth; and it's part of the health of the inner lips.
Ventilation of the shoulders comes from diseases caused by heat and congestion.
Ventilation of the armpits is as important as three veins in the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins;
And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply because the chest is naked of flesh and contains organs and arteries.
The suction cup placed on the back is worth to bleeding disorders in the abdomen and diseases nearby; it must be large and made of wood or bamboo for better treatment. And perchance, if she were subtle, she would break; and I make great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs are applied directly because they draw blood from all over the body, and help with old pain in the kidneys, bladder, and lower back, also relieving swellings;
They are in the locations of the two shins and the two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and cause fatigue in multiple conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you first place it empty and apply pressure steadily, then move it quickly and evenly, never stopping this action until you see the area turn red and swell, and observe the reddening due to blood.
Then apply fire, and reattach the suction cups, and take care in the positioning of the horns, for there are those with thick flesh, and clear pores: It is necessary to cut only once, and it is proper to make large wounds, and somewhat deeper ones. And suck gently.
And if the one without is large, it may be necessary to cut twice: The first time for the subtle removal of a larger vein.
And if it is very thick without, it may be necessary to cut the third time;
When we wish to drain little by little from the blood, we only pierce once. And if we want much of the blood, then we often reapply;
And if the bone is expected, so firmly hammered, and the ends are such that the joints are pierced suddenly, it fits for those with thick skin and firm flesh, who have been long troubled, that you apply the nostrums of suck bulbs where an opening and disassembling appear: If it's in this blue state, or from sweet almond oil, or from pumpkin seed oil;
And if it's yellow, from mustard oil, or from lily, or from chamomile, or other similar substances.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of melilot, or turpentine, or oil of nutmeg, and similar.
And if the person to be treated has thick flesh and large abrasions, it is not suitable to apply oil at all, but after leeching with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a pumpkin, or water from porcelain, or other similar substances, you should wash them.
And to those who have much moisture, if they rise from sweat, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those with excesses ascend from old wine, or from urine water, or from decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar substances.
And it is not appropriate to use suction cups before or during the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
And do not sleep after suction, it is necessary that he be aware, when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
And watch over those who are being cured and are choleric, and if the patient is too hot and inflamed; It is necessary for them to eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endive and lettuce, and similar items; Eat eels, and pork, and meat with moisture.
Eat eels, and pork, and meat with moisture. And for those with cold constitutions, they should drink honey syrup and fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old and new, eat some porridge, eat eels and small birds and chicks;
And on the day they will be suctioned, they should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give no one meat or garlic or mustard before or after ventilation, in order to strengthen the main limbs; And sieve the flour but it is not fitting that which is hot should drink it.
The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and in gout, and on the belly and womb and kidneys and hip. But this member does not tolerate being irritated by heat, and one should do it forcefully only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do with nipples when the child fails to suck.
in order to thin the viscosity in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the belly and womb to reduce its thickness.
And for pain when there is an obstruction or stone, if it is attracted by its adhesive power to such obstructions, or if it empties the stone from its place;
And thus she does it when one puts her on the liver and on the stomach when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are applied empty for to expel wind alone; And they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in the case of pleurisy diseases, and in such manner one fills the suction cup with hot water or with water that has boiled herbs suitable for this.
The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is as follows:
And it has II inches and a half in length from the tip, and at its middle third it is about as wide as one's finger, just like to insert an awl, and made of iron or steel so that it does not irritate the patient upon being placed on the limb;
And there is in the middle a rod across of an arachnid or iron, for to put a torch in possession, and it is used whether large or small according to illnesses and the age of those who take them;
for the suckling bottles for children are different from those for adults, and those for skinny individuals are different from those for fatty ones.
And one must place this suction cup thus on the limb:
take the wax candle or the heated rod, and insert it through the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup to avoid burning the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and you should do so at the point we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, if there is vapor going off, and remove the suction cup;
And follow the same line as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
Therefore, when it comes to the suction cup which is administered in pleuresin disease, during all types of colds, there should not be any pus or impurities; and it is only used fully once it is filled with coldness, then placed only on the body part.
and this is its form:
Only suction cups are used in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in their naked places of scars, such as elbows or knees, and other similar areas;
and the quality of their application is that when you find suction cups that are in mild coldness without pus, then take them;
And place them in mild water, until they are familiar, with no bulges in their abdomens; and then cure with bloodletting and suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place it on the sores;
and when they are full and weep, if there is a spot where suction cups can be placed, put them there, because this yields little later.
If not, raise the arm then dip it in water well, and then incise;
and if it heals too quickly due to the effect of suction cups, moisturize with a linen cloth dipped in cold water, and place it there, until the suction cup wounds turn red;
And if the wounds are multiplied, then place powdered vitriol or garlic, and similar items, until they become stenchy;
or you place half the peeled hazelnuts inside the wound, and leave them until they heat up within, it will now stop bleeding.
and if you need more, take other veins.
And if the veins are not to be found elsewhere, rub with fresh blood-soaked material, or you insert a needle until blood flows from it and then place it. Once they start smelling the blood, they will heat up;
And when you see that they sweat, then powder a little aloes and ground grain, or ashes, and they will stop now.
This begins the book on fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fracture and alleviation.
Know, dear son, that these matters of this chapter, they were not seen in any old books, nor did anyone read about them;
And for this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, because I have never found anyone who was good at it;
And I know nothing of it, because through the knowledge of old books, which I have studied so much that I have dealt with this science, and by experimentation, and through the experience of my life;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and summarized at the end, clearly showing the forms of the instruments used, as I did in these two chapters previously.
So it is necessary that we outline or introduce this book's main points and chapters where the wise people use their understanding, and remain faithful to truth. Let those who have experienced this know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or pain occur in any part, it is necessary to quickly treat the patient from both sides, without letting anything prevent you, such as weakness, children, or elderly people; If the place you're tightening is too tight, or too cold;
and use cold joints, which means cold meats, and oyster flesh and venison, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and let the body not be too full of meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess or spreading of matter in the limb;
if the patient's body has adapted to its usual government as it was using it.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that cause a heavy digestion or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and nuts, and pies, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For at times, after an operation, it can move again more quickly than the breaking.
And know that broken bones in old and weak individuals cannot be properly healed or sutured according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
But if there is no remedy, reset it on the broken bone and large thorns that stick out. Join the limb together as tightly as before; and do not finish his work entirely, and for this reason he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
For the fracture of the skull is different from the fracture of the heel, or of the leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of fracture. For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others through cutting, such as the length of a feather for writing.
For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others through cutting, such as the length of a feather for writing. And if it's a fracture with injury, or a fracture with just a small crack.
And in every way has his own device and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to his mind;
And the breaking of the bone is known by that his hand hurts and opens well outward, and feels a press on it;
And when there is no twist or soreness in the hand, and the body does not feel great pain, if there is no breakage;
But it may well have twisting, or cracking, or a small break. But do not move it with your hand yourself, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently constrain it now.
Know that the break occurring in the journey, and where it splits into two parts, they should now place them evenly, just like when placing an abscess on its side.
And if it's a hard abscess that comes to the surface, so he lets no day pass until the abscess is alleviated;
Then place it evenly until you can do so lightly and skillfully. Know that the restoration of this is easier than those with pieces;
Then tighten it, as it should be done hereafter.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it's split into two parts, whether they are hands or feet, or at your hand if they're small limbs, or if they are divided by two cords, or one cord and at your hand;
And place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the injured parts of the limb are healed, you adjust it with every effort using additions in their respective places as much as you can, and be sure to avoid causing injury or pain through your actions to the patient.
And adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
And test it thoroughly with your hand if you feel it is not quite right:
If it is correctly aligned, do not overstretch or apply too much pressure. Do this gently as those who remove the abscess by their own efforts use heat and muscle contractions on the limb, as we have wished many times.
And when the limbs are in place, ensure you take good care of the patient so they do not move them, whether awake or asleep, walking or in any other manner; And make sure the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, this is not enough; it must be placed in such a position that he does not feel any pain.
And make sure the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, this is not enough; it must be placed in such a position that he does not feel any pain. And see to it that it is put straight, so there is no distortion when it is restored;
And the quality of the broken limb should be according to what I am telling you.
Know that limbs broken are varied by size and extent and shape.
For there are smaller limbs, such as arms and legs, and others like them: They should be wrapped in soft, fine linen cloths. And those that are larger, such as thighs and calves:
They should be wrapped in a broad and firm bandage, for wide bands encircle the entire large limb, restraining it evenly from all sides, so that there is no awkwardness.
Then lightly apply the ointment for three rounds or four according to the limb, and hold your hand somewhat tightly throughout this process. Then move upwards beyond the breakage point and hold less tightness; allowing the breakage to move a little away from the breakage area.
and soften the area gradually and gradually, until you reach a substantial part of his healthy side, then take up another connection, and return back to where you began near the broken limb;
then return to the area around the breakage point, and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, just as we explained in the first round above;
then place the linen or cloth bands between the applied ointments until it's all evenly spread, then secure everything with a bandage. Lastly, position your well-made stars on top; if there is no pus or swelling present.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then apply something soothing for the abscess, and which alleviates the swelling, and leaves it in this state for a few days;
Then stretch over your ears, and let them be half the width of a hair tightly, or from a shaft that is used for making arrows, or from palm leaves, and they should fit according to this pattern:
However, it is necessary that the ears placed on the gap be slightly larger and wider than the others;
And let them also be as long as is suitable for limbs of smallness or largeness; Then stretch over the ears in the same way you did with the first attempt, then tie a supplementary thread on top, just like you did above the break in the first instance; More constriction occurs there, as before, at this point.
And it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and be soft like linen.
for if the thread is thick, as in works of the folks who make their looped knots with linen cords twisted, and that's great error, because the knot can't be uniform if it's too fine, and it doesn't suit to have less than half a thumb's width between each pair of threads.
And if the wounds are irritated by the edges of the stitches after tightening during their healing, then place linen patches or raveled wool on them, so that they do not blister.
When the wound is inflamed and the ribs are broken, I will then describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not proper to hold back too much of your efforts when healing broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it's not suitable to place these loops until after five days or seven, or more depending on your tolerance of pus that comes each time a new one occurs;
and here is the method of ancient plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And it is that you take some flour which stands by the walls of the mill, and mix this with plenty of eggs, and prepare this concoction neither too thin nor too thick, then use it, and this is the common method for plastering to restore fractures in various positions, just as much for women and small children, because there is no matter whether it's too expensive or too cold.
Another method for plastering that restores fractures, dislocations and torsions: Take ginger, garlic, nutmeg, and asafetida, and gum Arabic, add water to make X parts. Mint and aloe vera, make up for V parts. Allium (garlic) VIIIX parts. And make powder, and mix it with beaten egg yolk; If their body heat is hot, they should use this plaster, because it has a good composition and quickly heals broken bones, being beneficial for many people.
Another method of applying plaster that is useful for twists: Take meat and vinegar, add X parts of salt; Myrrh and aloes, add nine parts of them; Add six parts of acacia; Add ten parts of Armenian balm, grind well, mix with water or beaten egg yolk, and administer.
Another method for applying plaster to dislocated joints and broken bones, it eases the pain coming on, and when they use the bone, it breaks the swelling: Take a new lamb, and cook its milk with ease and oil, and place it under your head.
Bandages do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses, and properly treating the pains.
Another method of plastering which restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and terrestrial poplar leaves, grind them together, and make plaster.
Another way to plaster is for the restoration of bone fracture and to relieve the removal of the abscess. Take the root of valerian, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour from rice, from each take a part;
Grind it, mix it with wine, and when the limbs are warmed, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another method of plastering more forcibly than the first, when pus is returning to the recovery of the limb. Take the roots of valerian, and sesame seeds, balsam, melilot, and sorrel, and flowers of violets and chamomile, from all take a part; And grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
In his book, Hippocrates instructs that only beeswax ointment made of wax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration without anything else. He states that it must not be too soft or too hard but just right.
And it seems Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, substances slightly heated and somewhat dry, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plastering that is useful for injury and pain: Take the brains and feathers of cooked men or bird feathers, and liverworts, and woodlice, and earth equal in quantity, grind them together, make a plaster from it, and use it.
And then apply the plaster slightly later, and make sure that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is their bone moved out of its place; If you do not apply the plaster with your hands. And if pain comes to the limb, or itchiness, without rest or swelling, then you should act quickly, remove the plaster, and apply the plaster anew;
Take a light cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and dip it in water, then remove the moisture, until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or oil, and secure it with a belt until you are sure of removing any pus;
Let the inflammation and pain in the limb subside, then relieve the pain, then continue with gentle manipulation, and a little plaster, but do not strain it as strongly as before. Gently until it is healed.
And if you notice that pus is coming out and the area is red, painful, swollen and oozing, indicating inflammation throughout, then you will need to apply plaster and bind it, start again as you did initially, in exactly the same way.
And if nothing comes to the limb that we have said, or if it is not released only after three, four, or five days; And never let it go for more than XX days, as we see, until the fracture heals and brings about alignment of the bone above;
Therefore keep it restrained longer than at first, and strengthen its flesh, as I have said before;
And if you see that the bone is healing better than necessary, know that no remedies can come about; Let the bone then be immersed in hot water, every time you untie it, and let that happen every third day, and clean a little of the wound;
Through this process then cut out the remedies from the limb, and quickly heal whatever the foolish eye sees that leaves the limb deformed:
This is bad, and there are difficulties with it, and I don't see anything else but leaving it and opening it straightly.
Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
because there are fractures that result from the impact of a sword, and in these cases, the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the symphysis which is at the end of the bone, like in the case of a mallet or staff. And for this reason, this type of fracture is called "mallet injury".
Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute".
And these two types of fractures have large or small injuries.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or fracture of the stone collarbone, or under the stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a fracture partly through, which approaches until it reaches the membrane beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound may be large or small.
And if there is a wound that has healed within the bone as delicate as a hair, and has small cracks, and because of this it is called this breakage "hairline";
And if there is a wound made or caused by striking with stone, or falling, or from something seemingly trivial, and it causes the part of the bone to enter the body, so that they are together as hammers would be when struck upon hammers; if within the stone.
And this happens more often in those who have wet bones below, like in children's bones;
It occurs in all these ways of breakage where small fragments are lost, like with maggots. And I will speak about it in its place.
And know all methods of breaking through the diminution upon them, and the examination by touch, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon.
The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs inside it, if the breakage shows black.
In the treatment of a breakage, beware of any bad accidents due to illness, if you see no harmful incident, such as vomiting bile, loss of intellect, extension and rigidity, fever ague, and if the eyes emerge and turn red, or show other similar symptoms in various conditions, you cannot be certain of recovery.
And if you do not see a terrible accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the nose comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
And if it's in winter, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day after the month; so that when the pus around the bone becomes infected, and accidents as we said occur.
And if the breaking of the bone reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to cut the broken part like this:
and that you apply the hot tip of a needle to the raw flesh and expose as much bone as possible in all ways that you can, and at the shape of the wound more than you can, and if blood flow comes with the exposure of the bone, or pus appears, use what is necessary, and when you fill the gap with wet bandages soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the pus subsides, and ensure there is no blood flow; then begin digging into the bone, and this is done according to two methods of operation:
One method is that you cut close to the front, and this is the shape:
And then make another cut that is larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others broad, they should be pointed, and made of iron;
and perform the operation lightly so as not to cut the head.
And if the bone is outside and hard, it must be pierced through internally, in such a way that cuts are made with thimbles, not all the way through so as not to pierce beyond the bone when tested, and there should be a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and it must be that you have several of them, so that each returns to its place relative to the thickness of the bone, so that you have thimbles for all tests;
And this is the form of the three ways of cauteries:
The quality to pierce through the broken bone is that you place the cautery on the bone and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced;
Then place the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then cut into the space of the bone that is between the teeth, doing so more subtly than you can, gently, just like we said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any tool you have such as forceps;
And make sure not to touch the brain or the pituitary gland.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if necessary, resaw what was left of the bone with all another instrument like a tooth. But it should be sturdier and more delicate than the other tooth;
And if there remains no little bones, nor any scales, if you gently shake them with your tools; Then cleanse the wound of the bandages and ointments that we have mentioned.
And another way to treat wounds is as Galen said, which is safer; and he uses strong ligation, and that's his word. Firstly, it is necessary to uncover a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture opens and moves, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, from which its shape is given:
And do not cut from one side only, and divide the flesh into two parts, so that your cut is facing towards the bone;
Then strike with a small hammer on it, so that you gently crush the entire bone, and be well aware of the wound material that is nearby.
If it opens to the bone, gently crush it, for the bone is well sensitive without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture doesn't penetrate just to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, with small pieces present, then after that abrasiveness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor you must have in various quantities, for administering the most suitable one to each area according to the treatise and the shape of the fracture.
If you are in front of large razors, and after even finer ones, and never cease doing this until it is done well.
In each other type of hair cutting and delicate breaking, you must adapt according to its direction;
And this is something that cannot be answered by the one who has devoted their study to this craft.
And if the scab is discovered, it is necessary that you apply a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, and soak with rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another bandage doubled in two or three layers, and soak it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first bandage; And do this as lightly as you can so that it does not weigh down the scab; then apply another bandage over it without pulling too hard that only the wound touches.
And let it do so for one or two days, until the abscess has subsided, then release them, and administer medications such as roots of this herb, meal of garlic, incense powder, and myrrh, and similar things;
And from these things make powder, put it on the wound, and administer those medications locally without causing irritation;
And see that the wound is kept clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor let it become too swollen; because when swelling assembles under the skin tissue, it can move and constrict, causing great harm to the patient;
And when one applies something sharp there, it cuts through from above. Then be careful therefore, if no accidents come to the patient as we have said, there is doubt without fear.
And if no fear comes from that which we have applied, assuming it has this virtue, then you should take a portion of honey, and three parts of goose oil and one spoonful of glue, and spread them on the affected area; Then apply the appropriate healing method until it is sound.
Know that twice the parts above the nose are broken, or only one part by itself, for these are two bones;
And that area is made of cartilage and does not break, nor allow bending or twisting forces, then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should bend your little finger or to the inside of the nose, and place an equal break within your index finger, and outwardly through the nostril, until the nose regains its natural form. And do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your actions.
And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot come to the nostrils, it must be that you put it level with the tip of a hair a bit thick.
And if the break is in two parts, redo the operation, and strive to restore on the first day, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or the eighth day, when the abscess is dressed and calmed, then apply to the nose tip with a poultice of linen bandage, if the break is in one part.
Or you may crush it from another side, if the break is there; And let them be as large as they fill out the cavities of the nose.
And they say no restorer thinks to moisten the warts with butter, and change each day. I don't think it's quite right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture of egg whites and powder from grinding; Then leave the tent, until the bone is strong, and the cartilage hardened.
And do not use any goose feathers or ointments instead of tents, and if there's wind resistance, and the air stays stagnant, causing the patient to feel it among them; just do whatever you see.
And if pus comes out through the nose as you work on it, then apply a wet cloth or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little pot of almond oil.
And if abscesses do not come out, apply a plaster to the outside, made from ground frankincense and incense powder mixed with yolk of egg, then place it on light bandages and don't bind it tightly around the neck;
And if the rupture is small near the neck and broken into small pieces, use tools suitable for this task, then clean the wound from infected matter and sew it up, using plasters and ointments suitable for that purpose;
And if there is no wound within the nose, then you treat it with remedies, and I place cloths soaked in vinegar, as long as it remains healthy.
When the jawbone is fractured and there is no wound on the surface, and only the breakage is external, not at all broken into two halves but rather split internally throughout, one can recognize it lightly.
It is necessary, if the breakage is in the right part, that you bend your second finger on the inside of the knee; And if the breakage is in the left jawbone, then bend your second finger of the right hand and gently push the break inward, and do it with the other hand from behind, and place them evenly.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is divided into two parts, then it is necessary to provide extension for both halves, ensuring they are even.
And when tooth movements or rupture occur, stretch them with a gold thread or silver or silk thread, then place a wax on the broken jawbone, and place two layers of cloth on top. And place on the cloth a well-made large slab or a piece of leather of equal size, long and wide according to the jawbone, and fasten it at several points with strings that you can find. Instruct the patient to rest and consume light meat portions.
And if you notice the figure changing, dislocate it on the third day, then reset whatever has changed; and place them on top, using ground powder mixed with plenty of egg or saffron flour, after you have removed the wax.
and place on the plaster a light cloth, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave them until they are healed; Many times, it is healed within three weeks.
And when pus comes out during an incision, then apply what we have instructed many times.
And if there's both breakage and injury together, remove any part of the bone that has been broken. if it is necessary to use instruments suitable for this task during the operation.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, place one plaster suitable for it over it to promote healing until it heals.
The forces break many times before, towards the shoulder, and breaking is according to three methods:
Or it breaks and dries out in two parts, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore;
Or there is breaking with injury.
And the operations are like when breaking occurs with injury, that you have two helpers, so that one slices off the shoulder where the strength breaks; and the other extends along the neck towards the affected part;
Then place the break evenly on your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there's neither appearance nor distortion.
And if you need to extend further, then place a round sponge under the shoulder for the patient, of cloth or wool, and make it as large as your need dictates; And they reduce it gently, restraining the spear with your hand, so that you make an even break, as is fitting.
And if you cannot draw the head of the force outwards due to it coming forward, so that the patient lies on their back, and places a half pillow under their shoulder, and pushes the shoulder blade downwards, until the bone of the force is lifted.
And direct the crack to your fingers, and if you find splinters, it's right that you split them;
And pull out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join by any pressure, then cut to one of the incisions you have; but when you apply force to this tool, it helps to push out fluids:
and seems like a spoon, not completely inside, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the operation;
and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, just like the cut of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are sure of the removal of pus, if you clean the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about removing pus, then dress the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
And if pus comes out, if moisture arrives, apply oil roses and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
The grinding of the bone, when it concerns wounds and surgery, is to place on the bone a plaster made from the powder of the mill and some yolk of egg, and put light wads underneath, and apply a splint over it, if you need to. Then take a very long band about the size of a palm in width, then place two layers of bandage over the wads, and apply plaster. Then take a strip of about three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, such that only the edge of the bandage hangs down. And set the candle near the burn, and turn the bandage up to the neck, and over the healthy elbow, and over the diseased elbow; And reset each part; and when you see that the candle's heat supports the wound growth, and you clearly see that the wax does not move over the fractured bone, then reward each day, and when it's removed, keep it restrained.
And let the diseased substance drain on his back, and place him with a small pillow under the elbow to lift the shoulder up; So ease the strain of the muscles by aligning the shoulder; or you tie his arm to the neck, and don't untie until such time as twenty days;
Then resume bandaging if you see it needs doing, and hold it in place and leave it like that until it is restored.
And she is restored within the most 28 days, and in some cases does not exceed even one month.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or is wide at its end and not in the middle, and does not even extend as far as by touch;
if you align it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
then put on the shoulder powder from the mill with plenty of eggs, and apply gentle bandages, and place two layers of cloth. then place a wide and fine bandage, slightly larger than the shoulder, and where there is no movement on any part of the shoulder, use that hair from linen bandages so the bandage fits evenly.
And then it restrains everything tightly into one large bend, so that the limb does not move from its place, and he checks each link every day;
And every time when it dislocates, if it restrains, and puts the limb on equal footing if it is strong in its place, and lies the patient with their side on a table;
And the shoulder has been healed after 20 days or 25 days.
And when these numbers have been completed, if it dislocates again and you are sure, because it is not an os that quickly takes hold lightly.
And if a bone piece appears first and not below the knee, then proceed by removing it, along with the abscess beneath, and do as we have instructed for treating wounds of muscle dislocation.
of the breaking of the foot
The limb is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the outer part.
And when it is broken in the middle, if it tilts downward and the patient feels intense pain throughout their body, along with loss of consciousness, immediately afterwards, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the joints in the broken bones, and one can well perceive this.
And in restoration if the patient lies on his back and stomach, then put your hands under his shoulders, press down his shoulders, and join the ribs of the two ribs together, combine them at your hands, and with skill make it equal to all manners you can do this as long as the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then place the plaster and cloths over the small salt pile, or another light stick, and wrap it in a cloth. Securely tie this around the broken bone so that it does not move; Then round out the binding on the back, and strain it appropriately. Every hour check the tension of this bandage; if it relaxes, then tighten it again;
And if it seems necessary to loosen due to corrosion or itching that comes to the body, or pain or abscess, act quickly and loosen it. Remove the plaster, and treat with care whoever came into contact with it using appropriate remedies;
Then remove the plaster, and hold it until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the ribs
The breaking of the ribs only comes about at their lower part near the back, and within them, and bend because they are spongy; And one feels it very much during the examination in the way it should.
And for the healing process, you should make the break equal, just as it should be. And then apply plaster and bind with a bandage if needed.
And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, one feels great pain and piercing in the body, akin to weeping, because the bone punctures the membrane; And it causes pain in the kidneys, everywhere and vomiting of much blood, and this is serious illness, and they used to treat it with a large amount of food.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats which swell the belly, in order to expel the wind from outside.
We do not follow this, for abscesses and pus do not come about unless they have arrived. And if they have arrived, heal them.
And it is said that no one puts on the body suction cups for forming, as this appears reasonable; However, there is doubt as to whether the suction cup attracts the excesses to the body due to its weakness in placement.
And they say that when treating the wound of an animal, one should cover it with moist wool in a hot oil, and place the bandages between the ribs to make the healing consistent all around. Then follow the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing through the skin, there is doubt as to whether it's safe for the patient to cut through their broken rib area and then place an instrument to protect the lung.
And then one must cut the bone and gently drain it, and then stitch up the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plasters until it heals.
And if pus comes out from the abscesses, place oily bandages that have been moistened with rose oil on them, and place them on the wound;
And treat the wound while applying what is suitable for pus, and place gentle supports on the rib area where it should be applied, until it heals.
And similarly at the spine of the back.
And when this happens to any person, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take care; if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and unable to move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
You know that it is fatal in various conditions, and if they do not respond well when their limbs are restrained and there is no sensation, you know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the illness has been cured, as long as a treatment is applied.
And if this sort of thing happens to the spine of the back, you need to know whether it is sound or not. Take care that his joints are softened, and if there are any symptoms they are with their hands, and on the back gusts of wind and loss without volition;
And when it has been affected on its belly, there is a loss of wind without volition. And when he is observed on his back and wants to sit up, if he cannot. Know that these are deadly: if not attended to in its treatment.
And if this incident does not happen to him, then it is a simpler thing.
And the treatment is that you remove any pus if there is an abscess, if you apply on the spine oil or egg yolk, until it calms down;
Then place on one of the supporting plasters that are drying, and bind with a bandage, instructing the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it heals.
And if any bone splits open, it is necessary to cover over its surface; And sew the bone back together, then join the two edges of the wound if it's large with stitches, then treat with oil until it heals.
And if the bone head (meaning 'the head of the bone') is broken, which is called 'the bone head', then pinch your pouch from your left hand, and place it evenly against your power with your other hand. Then apply the plaster and cover it up, should you need to do so;
Then they hold it. If there is any bone to be removed, they cut it out, and the surgeon treats the wound until it has healed.
From the breaking of the bone of the hip
Sometimes the hip bone is broken, and if that happens, it might cause a small reduction in strength at the shoulder. And they continue for quite some time, reducing it until the shoulder is eased, and there's a sharp pain at the broken spot, and it swells where the bone was broken.
And for the restoration, you extend your hand upwards as long as you're on the breakage. And know where the break is and what shape it has;
And if the break is only at the shoulder, put the break in an equal position, as long as it's in its natural shape.
And if the breakage is along the length of it or it declines towards the inside, then guide the patient so that they lie on their abdomen, as long as you are able to complete the repair of this breakage. And when you have set it equal, place it on a splint, then put it onto a staff or a rod, and keep the wound still, so it does not move;
and place his arm under the ribs, until the rib is level. And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
And if an abscess forms underneath and bursts, do not touch it, until the pain from the abscess subsides, and place something as we have mentioned before. and then return to the treatment, and apply pressure as needed, if there is no bad incident;
From the breaking of the shoulder.
The shoulders are those that are between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you should restore it according to one of the two methods:
The first one is to take a rod of medium thickness, according to this shape:
And tie with two shoulder straps, and lift them up, then position the patient on the seat;
Then put his broken arms on the rod until they reach the waist, and make a bend of the rod halfway, then lift him up or let the assistants extend him downwards;
Then place the brace so that it is evenly on both his hands until the splint returns as it should.
And the other method is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then instruct two assistants to have one cut off from where it's broken in his hands, and the other cuts off everything up to one finger length, stretching each one to its respective side.
And if you see that the extraction is more fierce, then bind it tightly against the wound pain, and above the wound, and extend each of the assistants to their share.
And if the splint is near to the shoulder joint, it must be that you put one strap at the waist and the other towards the elbow, under the splint;
And similarly when the splinter is directed towards the knife, if you must insert a thread lightly, without strain, until the splinter is even both at the skin and on the blade;
Then place the splinter evenly, as is necessary, and extract it, if pus appears do not stop.
And if pus does appear let it come, do not extract immediately up to seven days, and place on greased wool and oil until the pus is relieved.
Then extract it, and the method of extraction is that you place the plaster on the splinter, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or under the breast;
And put the brace, and hold it to the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is straight up instead of hanging down, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not moving.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use these tools, and place one on the break larger and stronger than the others, and have two inches between each tool, and make sure every tool is large enough to pass through the fracture three inches from either side;
Then apply pressure on the tools as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter on fractures, more forcefully and less while spreading them out.
And if you observe the setting of the tools and the constriction, as we have said, during the time that you restore the broken limb, and if there is concern about any pus, then leave it to be bound for up to seven days, as we have said.
Then check the bandage every three days to ensure there's no itching or swelling around the wound, or that the surgical scars do not come down because it is too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, and the dislocation does not heal within three days or longer, let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach;
And place under the shoulder a cushion filled with even wool, and observe every hour of the day or after meals, that the shape of the broken limb does not move or that the joints become soft;
if it is cured through the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat we have prepared in such a way that the meat reaches the finest particles; and when he begins to recover, if it becomes strong.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be re-established within forty days of everything; And thus one must release it and apply baths and remedies of ointments for the affected area.
And if the tightening is ugly and tangled, it should remain to be relieved for one or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is made of two bones, which are called the "foscile" pair; one is small and it covers the pit.
And the other is large, and this one is inside, opposite the small pair;
By chance only the large foscile breaks, or only the small one, by chance they break together.
When the small fosciles break, the restoration is light, and healing occurs;
And when the large ones break, recovery is difficult, and more painful than when they break together.
If only the small bone is broken, it should be slightly extended and made even.
And if it's a large distortion, then it must be held tighter.
and stretch it over the knee, and cut the hand pouch above the others, and place the small fingers below the other fingers, and have the patient cross their own limbs, and have the knee in front of them higher than the limbs, so that the patient doesn't suffer any discomfort;
then extend the ministers' arms to the part above their hand, or at the elbow, and have other ministers on the other side above.
And then set the eyes even, according to their best form.
And if in the break into pieces, you place each one in its own location, and if there is none that grabs onto the bone, and you cannot restore it to its location, then do it upon and through the bone, as we have said before.
And if about wound pain, I've spoken in the singular chapter; so take the cure.
And if during the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear, then make a plaster wrap from rose oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; And I lift it slightly from above, until the pain of the abscess eases.
And then dress the wound, and I apply the plaster of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg, indeed place the wicks, for among the wicks, that of the healing is stronger, and a little wider than the others;
And know that there should be six or more wicks or blades arranged in various positions: for if the healing is within one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more above the healing than anywhere else, and all days less as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages covering the healing be soft and moist, and not be hard or rough;
and let the bandages covering the healing be soft and moist, and not be hard or rough; And let the children, which he tightens with linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And restore the member and the link after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary for you to immerse the limb in hot water until the itching subsides;
and let the limb not be left to rest.
And then continue the process of ligature removal, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones have been exposed, and similar actions are taken.
And if precautions are taken so that no further constriction can come to the limb because it's too tight, it is necessary to soften it with heat and let it rest for a few days until the constriction ceases, then resume constriction.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, or if no untangling happens up to twenty days.
otherwise, when lying down, then place his hands on his neck, and if his necks are equal, and guard against movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back;
and know that this healing is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the concoctions and temperaments of the virtues.
of the breaking of the hand
You know that in the back of the hand and on us, few breaks occur, and only fold many times.
And when the hand's foot is broken or bent, it should be treated by having the patient hold their fingers spread and straight in front of them evenly.
Then place his hand on the extended table, and stretch out the fingers of the broken bones, placing them evenly, until they are well aligned;
and apply the bandage and splints; if no pus comes out, then place a splint according to the size of his shoulder. and wrap it in an inner linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the armpit near the belly of the hand, make a hole in the cloth, and instruct the patient to hold it over their broken hand. And then there is tension in a long cape, and whether the shield's strength resembles the size of a hand plant as well, and it is tightened, just as it should be.
And if the fracture is at the front, it must be that you place one splint above and another below on the foot part. So that your hands are open and straight; then tie them entirely around the hand, and seal the joint between the fingers.
And if the breaker comes to any of our toes, it's because he has hugged us, if he puts them equally, just as it should be; And he tightens with the heel, and if you see that placing a small shield upright helps to relieve the pain, and it doesn't move;
And if the pain is at other toes, like in the index or any of the others, if he places them equally, and ties them with the healthy toe that follows; Or you tie them altogether in an 'I' shape, that is better, or you place a shield on it, as if you are holding;
And take care in the restoration and placement of each wound, and help those who come for it, as I have said.
The bones of the thigh are often broken; and well one sees this when they turn both forward and backward;
And for the restoration, it is tying above the breakage, and another below it. And the muscles lie over this face, then stretch each minister's ligament to its equal part;
This is when the break is within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thumb, then one should apply the ligaments towards the knife, and the other ones over the breakage.
And also if it's near the knee, then place its ligaments above the knee, and let its extension downwards;
Then set the bones to their natural position with both hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply plaster, and the bandage, should there be any abscesses.
And if there is pus at the wound, let it subside then return to your work and your treatment; The labor is performed in an orderly manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the burn with a bandage folded two or three times, and keep the excess. Then turn the leg until the heels reach the base of the foot, and thread the first piece lengthwise between the cuff and the leg, under the knee and upwards; tie the end of the string above.
Then wrap the bandage around the leg and the calf, then place the stakes over the burn. Place a stake on the bone of the leg;
Then use a loop of eight threads between the leg and calf of fabric to make an even pressure, then start to bind in turns of three or four around the burn; And when you go further beyond the incision, and loosen less;
Then open the two knots of the thread you have placed between the thigh and the calf, and tie three points that are above it. Then return under the body of the thread until you see beneath the foot;
And hold it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this. Then until no further abscess appears or swelling or other sign occurs. And if it happens, reset it and address what comes, as we have said many times;
And if there are pieces of bone that catch, then it is to your advantage to use force, as long as you can; And if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut open the joint, and draw out force; And treat as we have said, until it becomes clean.
And each time the heart is broken in such a way that one puts in the garlic, as in the shoulder and arm;
Nevertheless, after this treatment made, there is no injury to the patient.
Know that the flesh is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the variety of complexions.
Know that in the joint of the knee, there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack, or it might be lost, causing pain in all injuries and being felt well by one.
And the restoration consists in making what is round at its ends equal until they move as can be done;
Then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put a round garlic on it, and hold it in place as needed. Then reorder all the positions that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses and similar conditions; If faced with each accident, attend to what it requires of you, until your mind is clear.
Regarding the breaking of the leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "malleolus", and the other is called "fibula".
And if any injury or break occurs like in the arm, treatment for it is similar to that of an arm, equally so; and the operations are all one. And if both bones of the leg are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then twist in front.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; And it twists around.
Then apply extension, and set them equally, and fix the joints in place;
But still, it is necessary if the fracture is ugly, and there are many fragments, that the extension be smaller and more gentle; and guide according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your task, take two wooden poles that harden and support the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as from the thigh down to the ankles;
Then wrap them both with cloths above and below, and tie in the middle as well, and at this binding, let neither leg droop to the right nor to the left, and thus it is well done.
And no one administers any bandage all the way down the leg, and it is made of wood, and you place the leg to guard against movement, and this is properly done in the fracture where there is injury;
And move each leg every day to see if there's an abscess or any other incident; if the treatment continues as long as it is effective.
From the breaking of bones at the knee
At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but when bones at the knee are broken, there is a break and in the legs, powerlessness occurs in multiple positions.
And if it happens with a bone in the foot fracture, and you see these bones mount one over the other, place the afflicted feet on the ground like they want to go, and then put your foot under his, where the bones are raised, press them so hard that their senses return in their legs;
Then apply the plaster and place it upwards, put a small table under the foot with two shoulders filled, then restrain at the foot on the opposite side, then when you have wrapped it in bandages around, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of his fingers are broken, if you restore them, just like we have said about the fingers of the hand; Then place the broken finger at an angle corresponding to the length of the finger, and make it slightly wider; then set this over the board that I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place.
And if there are two or three, or more, broken, for each finger place an applicator according to its quantity, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and hold the board firmly in place. And while being on top of the board under the stomach of the patient, make sure it is well aligned.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, once we have discussed them; And assist with each injury as it is necessary.
Regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand.
When the bone of nature in the woman is broken, if she is made to stay swollen, then she is laid on the lower part of the back, and held from behind.
Then fill the cavity that is natural to the patient with cotton, and put in similarly large amounts as needed;
Then stand the woman up, and raise her back gradually, and then jump out the cotton until it reaches the entry of natural anatomy, and return the bone with this action;
And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinated, let her return to it, and thus do this for seven days or more. If the break will be restored, and if you see fit, take a goat bladder, and fasten it at one end with a reed, and let the entire bladder fill into natural anatomy; Then breathe into the straw form, until the bladder is inflated inside: Nature will cause the break to heal;
Then fill it with cotton, and let it remain for some days, until it is sound.
And when the bone of the hand or foot of a man is broken, or of a woman, if you restore it as we have said for the thigh bone;
And do not ignore these neighboring breaks that he who puts his study and use to it should attend to, and listen to my book.
For the break signifies many different positions for the correct way of restoration: Understand it therefore.
In the testicles, when they are broken, take a goose's neck and insert it into the testicle; Then wrap it with lint, and leave it for three days or until healed from the inside, and it will heal quickly.
By fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, like in the case of the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, that they be surgically treated now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is clean, then seal it with vitriol, or if you have nothing else, then start to treat the fracture at that same hour, or on that day, assuming no abscesses appear.
And if abscesses appear, then let the treatment continue until a new day, as long as the abscess is calming down, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents.
And if the bone is broken and visible at its exposed knee, then it should be put back together lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
And if it extends beyond what you can equip with your hands, take this iron instrument which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound; And for this, the surgeon must apply three or four times, according to how many times he needs it in each case of injury;
And make it round and slightly thick so that it doesn't bend under pressure on the limb inside your body, and make it pointed at both ends, and large in the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palainche" for this reason, so that the curved shoulder should be placed on the head of the visible bone; And when it is put back once, as long as it regrows, and so that one is equal to the other. And if the break is subtle and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone, it requires that you place the tip of the bone until the tools have capability.
And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have access to an appropriate tool for this, such as a saw or file, by your power;
Then remove the one that is stuck in the bone due to its hardness and small flakes.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Do so until it is in its place, then wet the bandage in black medicinal wine, and properly if it is internal; and do not put tallow or any other thing that might smell on the wound, which could lead to gangrene and decay;
Then administer these [treatments] when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it entirely, according to the size of the wound, and be sure to ensure that the wound is not constrained with bruising.
And many times this has happened to the fool, and it brought either death or corrosion upon the patient every time; and let the compresses be softer and more soothing than other injuries.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that harmful accidents have occurred there, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it should not be placed under these [treatments]; but wrap entirely around the limb instead of these compresses, with hard cloths and tie them in place.
And when you see that after one or two days the wound is swelling, remove whatever you have put on it with vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as the fourfold medicine and similar ones.
And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and sound.
And it should have been so that the limb is bound in such a way that the bone slides down slightly.
And if it continues for the whole day, and it cannot join anymore, know that there are small fragments of bone, so you must seek to open the wound with a probe, and remove all these necessary pieces that cause pain.
And if a sinus develops in the hand or any other form of corruption, it is necessary to treat it according to what was instructed in the chapter before this one.
And when the bone is broken, and an opening made in the body, such as the bones of the shin or shoulder, or other parts of the large limbs, do not attempt to set them immediately because many times this leads to death, but leave it until they heal;
By chance, wait for up to 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if possible;
And if you cannot, leave it as it is.
Many times after the healing of the breakage, especially if it's near the joint, there's something to observe regarding the shape of the limb; And by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Therefore, take care if it seems that there is fluid: If they administer stiff medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, as well as sarcocolle, caragana, and similar others, do so by taking any of these things individually or all together, and mix them with stoptive wine or in abundance of an egg or with oil; and apply them on the wound as wafers, and hold them well in place, and don't remove them with your hands during the day;
and apply them on the wound as wafers, and hold them well in place, and don't remove them with your hands during the day; and then reset it again, repeating until all dislocations have been removed;
or you hold onto a well-made piece of plaster. for the property of plaster is such that it extracts all swellings from the limbs;
and if the dislocation has turned into hardness like bone and needs extraction, if it has formed a lump underneath, and remove any excess that is visible. If you are handling it on any bone, as long as it is intact, and during treatment until it heals.
Of the limb that becomes weak after an illness.
When the fracture of the bone has been restored and remains after the limbs are weak and fine, this happens due to various reasons: It's because when it was tied too tight and wasn't tied as it should have been; Or perhaps because there were too many ligatures, and the body couldn't come into its own in the limb; or due to excess bleeding; or because of too large movements, not in their time; Or perhaps because there is little blood in his body, it becomes weak.
And the treatment involves you feeding the patient, making them weak, until the sickness has multiplied within them; and administer baths, and give them joy and laughter;
then apply wax to the limb, so that the wax attracts towards the large artery, and often rinse it with tepid water, until the swelling aligns with the limb; and restores his natural appearance.
The member becomes twisted after recovery. When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if bones were broken openly, even though the shape of the limb is deformed, still it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew entirely, and many people have done this in our land;
And these actions are criticized, and they lead to great harms, and by chance one dies;
Still, if nodations and torture are involved, they should be treated with hot water, or if soothing herbs are cooked, such as the leaves of the angelica plant, roots, and meadowsweet, among similar things;
And you should apply a soothing ointment, such as properly prepared tallow, and take angelica oil, and mix it with lard or the oil of sesame, then apply it topically;
Or you take dried figs and grind them with cow dung, and similar remedies that reduce inflammation.
And no time is removed the operation of rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And let each body part move once an hour.
And if the stiffness has hardened and become as firm as bone, such as in bones, and requires being treated with hot iron, if it's necessary to operate up until the bone, making incisions gently and delicately; And apply concentration and study to the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation affects none, if now is needed bring back without hesitation.
For if one delays, they swell up, and by chance, when one tries to reset them at the joint;
By heaven, it is not right for one to move them at that time when they are swollen: Often brings on nausea and other pains;
However, when this happens, if you find the patient is ill, then leave them alone until all abscesses are relieved;
Then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb according to how the treatment should occur at its joint.
And I have organized the chapters about shoulder dislocations up to this point.
Sometimes the jaws are dislocated backward, and dislocations of both occur in two ways: These are somewhat hardened at their ends, and slightly softened; They are completely dislocated, hanging towards the anus, and they let saliva from their mouth which they cannot contain or close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can often return through several positions.
And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, without delay;
and in such a way that the ministers cut into the chief of the bad side, and thrust the sights from his pocket with one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other should be done with both hands to make it even;
And instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions. And guide her until she settles back into its place.
And if it is difficult to return them, especially when they are the two jaws combined, so that their heads are immersed in hot water and oil, until lightly resetting them;
Nor be troubled to set them again, as we have said.
And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed properly with soothing, then place wet cloths in a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax, then bind them loosely with moist thread;
And let the patient rest on their back, and have their shoulders lying between two pillows, so that they do not move to either side, nor try to strain, but only consume light food, until the pains subside, and secure the jaws;
And then judge if he wants to eat lightly, and there is no work in opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the lower jaw is well healed and cured.
And if the two mandibles cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not converted back to their original positions, then fevers and recurrent swelling occur, along with occasional abdominal discomfort, and occasionally, vomiting of pure fluids.
And when you see that, then know it's destruction; And many times has death occurred to those it befalls, within nine days.
The strength cannot relieve from within the middle of the back and at its base, and is dislocated outwards every time, and one feels this well indeed.
And the healing is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; And then press the limb against your palm, and it will return to its proper shape;
Then place on the plaster and the bandage, and keep it in place;
And the head which is towards the blade cannot be dislocated; If it cannot stay in place even once, then reset it to its original position, just as we have said.
Then place on the plaster and bind it tightly, then instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
And similarly, bring back the shoulder blades when it has returned to its place after being dislocated.
Concerning the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three ways:
The first way is when it dislocates from the part of the clavicle towards downward; And the second way is when it dislocates from the part of the base; And by chance dislocates from the top part, and this happens rarely.
And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves;
And it gets dislocated multiple times from above to below, even in those with little flesh, for these jump out quickly.
For those who have enough flesh, it jumps to the bones and returns to them.
And by chance, some men suffer from impact or fracture, and the shoulder swells due to an abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
So you must verify it, as long as you are sure; And then begin the treatment.
And you will recognize dislocation when it moves towards the shoulder, and you'll make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear manifestation of their diversity; And you will find a hollow at the shoulder's head, and from the elbow to the shoulder, like it's an opening; And the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
Furthermore, if it is dislocated at the top, as long as it isn't completely hidden, because you clearly find it at the socket;
This method of dislocation can only be resolved by repositioning, when it is new, or if the child has been injured.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand from the flesh at the top, then place their thumbs on the socket, and lift the joint upward forcefully to the shoulder; And the ministers lift the hand, then extend it upwards, before placing it on top of something. If it comes quickly.
And if it does not come out as we have said within several days after, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should apply gentle soothing treatments, such as a decoction of rue, fenugreek and borage in hot water, and it should be administered;
then sew the wound on the back of the patient, and place a pillow of evenly soft wool under their buttocks, neither too hard nor too soft. Then place the heel against the pillow, and raise the shoulder joint gently, and guide the hand towards the body of the patient;
and another attendant should keep hold on the shoulder joint from below, so that it does not move upwards; this shoulder should now return to its position, and if you see that the realignment is being done in this manner:
And indeed you must have a space at home that is larger than the person; And make it straight toward the chest, and place your shoulder under the edge of the person, and lift the edge up so that the body hangs down below. And another helper should stretch out their hand from behind the body towards the belly. And if the patient is too weak, they cannot support anything heavy with him, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And you can reset it in other ways as well:
And you place the long stake in the ground, so that the shoulder is also positioned like a pistol, and it should not be too large or too greasy; Then place it under the body, but so that it has straps supporting it from below, and the person should be lying long with the length of the stake.
Then extend her hand towards the other side, form it, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if she does not wish to return through all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: take two elbows of strong firewood and four sticks that are wide; have the head ready to be inserted from above into the opening, according to this form:
then bind the head to the rod with fabric underneath, so that the rod does not injure the patient, then place it into the opening under the affected area;
and extend your arms on the rod for its entire length, bind the shoulder onto the rod, and place the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one end of a large stick, allow her hands to hang downwards, and leave her body hanging from the other side: The joint has now been reset.
And when she is there, in whatever way it may be, if you must put on the seat of the dislocation an equal thread, then place plastered with powder from the mill, together with incense and egg oil, all over the shoulder and around it. Then remove that which was placed upon the seat after a while, and retie the bandage on top of the plastering, and hold the hand at its neck, and keep your hands in this state for some time.
And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limbs become stronger, for they will heal faster;
and then eat more after about 5 or 7 days, and start moving them; and if it is hardened and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for some other reason, then you must administer three cauterizations to it, as was described in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it releases after about 7 days, but the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is compressed or stretched or weakened; And know that the joint will never properly return to its place.
The dislocation occurring towards the buttocks and breasts or behind, if it is caused by pushing and stretching of the hands, and another treatment is applied elsewhere;
And treat as long as it is clean.
And if after healing there comes weakness in the limb, and delayed movements, then the patient should take frequent baths with hot water until that weakness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder joint
It's dislocated at the elbow joint and with poking it returns;
And it's dislocated from all sides, and in front as well as behind, and the dislocation is not responded to, because one can clearly see and feel it; And dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the diseased skin with healthy tissue, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is knotted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder to any degree.
And it must be reset in this manner that abscesses are removed and flow away, for if they were to flow outwards instead, there would be blame for trying to reintroduce them.
And by chance cannot be reset completely, even when it is behind; It's worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and by chance death comes from it.
And this restoration occurs, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend his hand to your two hands; And his arms are spread out, and the hands are directed towards the center of the chest in all directions, forwards and backwards, and push the joint to its place on his wrists or at the base of his palm, as long as it returns to its position.
And if there is a dislocation in front, it returns when they double their hand against their own and push from the base of the palm with the knife that has been inserted.
And if it doesn't want to return to place, administer strong stretching;
And if two ministers stretch the arm and keep it stretched by both hands, so that it does not move during stretching;
Then turn the arm in all directions, then when you have wrapped a double flag long and wide around it;
And when the eyes touch the joint with their hand, if they apply some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it heals;
And when it's in place, she places it on dry plaster with a poultice of an egg, holds it steady, and lets the arm hang by the neck towards the diseased area, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, she releases the bandage, and leaves it.
And if you see that the joint is not being placed well, then start the plaster and the bandage again, and leaves it like this for some days, until it's firmly set; Then releases it.
And if they feel pain after the displacement of the joint is reset, and it moves again, then they should bathe in hot water and generously scrub, pressing until their discomfort subsides; Or you place a sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then the surgeon performs an operation, or the person enters into a bath; And when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on, and then enters into a bath; And do this two or three times until it heals properly;
And if you see that, put on wet cow's dung mixed with butter and apply it;
If it returns to its normal state.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand joint is dislocated, and the return is gentle, more so than other joints. Otherwise, it is necessary to bring it back immediately into its place while it's dislocated, so that the limb swells or there is pus discharge.
And the process of bringing it back should be like this: you place the bad hand on a board and extend the helper's hand, so that when the patient puts their palm against the appearance of the joint, you hold until they recover.
Otherwise, you should check if it's correctly back in place; Then have the patient bend and stretch their back of the hand on a board during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and you mirror their hand onto that appearance of the joint.
If she returns now, that's quite well. But if not, when the pressure of plastering material relieves abscesses, and it is left without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put her back in place after some days, if the joint remains twisted;
and it does not harm the patient for as long as the hand is immobilized, and cannot force anything at all: so you know that the nerve has been cut, or the artery;
if there is no other way to apply force except with the cautery in this case, and by chance there is no other option.
And when his hands are in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it as such.
And if he can't move it well and there's no crack, then apply hot water, and rub until it is clean.
Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
No matter how many times the elbow of the hand is dislocated in each direction, no matter on the back of the palm or belly;
So apply pressure, and hold the dislocation in your fists until it heals. Then support the head of the shoulder, and gently guide it towards the part that is separated.
and leave it for two days, and then place him evenly on that day;
and bind it in the manner we have described, and remove the binding on that day, and allow him to move gently, and re-bind on the next day;
and do this repeatedly, until it is properly aligned, and follow the same procedure if it has been dislocated in the arm pit area. Proceed in the manner you did before, until it heals;
and do so likewise when it has been dislocated on the other side.
of the heel, of the back
When the heel, or the back, or multiple heels are dislocated, if there is no treatment, because death rushes to the patient.
And the symptoms are that the discharges jump without being voluntary, and cannot be held back. Numerous times, they soften parts of any limb or both of his legs or arms.
And often, the lungs divide into four parts;
That which divides at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment involves rewarding when the gilbositez has come from childhood: If there is no treatment or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, according to the old methods of treatments described in great words, it does not yield any significant benefit;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
I state that when the gilbositez occurs at the belly frontwards, there is no danger or harm;
And also about what comes straight into two ribs, and cannot be cured outwardly but only that which belongs specifically to the back, as I say;
And when the patient's health extends up to his face on one side equally, and has tension over him, so it does not bruise;
Then place one ember at the head in the ground and make another on top, and tie a string under the buttocks with respect to the disease near the skin, and make another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
And two assistants know how to handle the strings, one at the head and the others on top, among the two embers;
And be well closed, the ember as we have said, and the patient places her palms on the top of the formed ember until she regains consciousness.
And if it doesn't return through this cure, take a board of three lengths long and place it vertically on the skin surface. If the illness is at the side, place the head of the board vertically over the affected area, then put the center of the board above the spine; and place his feet on the other side of the board, and press firmly until he returns to its original location;
And if you see that it happens at the elbow which turns towards the hand. And if you place two torches at the head of the sick person's arm, one hand's length apart, and in between each torch, directly underneath and above them, a palm's width of space that is half a hand.
And place one piece of charcoal in each torch, where the elbow bends, and ensure that the torches are firmly buried in the earth, so they do not move.
And between each two sticks there is one stick turning, since they turn when you connect them, and in the two turns there are two small sticks of the length of a palm, to turn the hinge;
And then join the link that is among the screws towards the hinge near the head, and the other link towards the feet at the other hinge. Each of the assistants turns their hinge throughout the entire link, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, place a desiccating plaster with plenty of egg on it, then the hot rods, and then an emetic tablet that is three inches long. This cleanses the area around the boil and the healthy portion of the spine, then tie it with a string as we have said, letting the patient experience subtle hunger until they are sane.
And if no improvement comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and moistening medicines, together with the elixir that we have mentioned before. And whenever you administer an oak piece, and each time there appears the appearance in the lower spine of the back, and be careful that it is a dislocation; And it's the bone that opens, so we must not have any presumption: By chance it would bring death.
Know that the hips and shoulder joints only come from dislocations, not like other joints;
And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: From top to bottom, and from front to back;
And more from top to bottom, and somewhat less in front to back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation from within is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it's longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend like the healthy one would. And it's where the limbs are swollen due to pus accumulation because the shoulder joint is coming into contact with it.
And the sign of him who comes to death is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
And the signs for someone who has been injured in front are that their leg is properly aligned according to completion; However, it does not bend the knee without pain, and if one tries to make it do so, it cannot before, and retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it walks, it goes over the heel.
And the signs of him who goes behind, are that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other one, and his ankle is softened, and the shoulder joint comes out under the ribs at the top of the back.
The restoration of this semblance of dislocation involves that you recognize if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, so there is no treatment; and it should not be assumed about it.
And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint, stretching it inside and outside, moving it to the right and left; By chance if it returns, there is no need for further treatment.
And if it doesn't return in this manner, you should apply strong force and press the leg strongly with both hands, or to one place bound above the knee; And another attendant extends his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands under the axilla, then forces him with a single effort up to his waist. and another person holds the other end of the string;
And they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient rises from the ground in one go, and stays hanging.
This stretching method applies to four similar situations; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
If this doesn't happen, then treatment should be given according to its appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, it's necessary to have the patient lying on their healthy side, then place the string under the root of the axilla. Afterwards, raise the leg which is out of the socket, and pull the string upwards towards the socket, using force;
Then ask for other helpers to hold his arms, and encircle the large part of the elbow muscle, and extend it towards the back in line. If it returns to its place now;
And this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you can't squeeze it in this way as we have said, then you should bind the two legs of the patient together with a strong and solid rope above both ankles and both knees, and make sure that the diseased leg is extended more than the other;
Then have it hung from the top of a post, and allow for two long lengths of land above it;
Then command the helper to encircle the elbow joint, and have other helpers accompany with the patient, who should encircle the elbow in its form. For now, the joint returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the front, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of someone with arthritis, and pulls on the leg's tendon directly over the painful area and also on the chest.
Then place two pokers, one on the head and the other at the ankle, then insert the poker between the buttocks of the patient in a position near the painful area; And wet the bandages, to prevent burning of the patient, then have each practitioner stretched out towards him, and place the shoulder's position evenly with his hand.
If it comes back, that's good.
If it doesn't return to its place, put it on a surface like a table and press it in this manner as we described with glibosity, having the patient lie there, and have them rest on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must involve stretching the painful leg quickly, and according to what I have said; And place the shoulder in its painful position on the outer side of the leg, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it does not suit to extend the patient's back, nor lift them up from the ground. Instead, they should be in a position as if their hip was dislocated at the front like we have said about lying between two hips. And place them on their face, and have the neck stretched out as we said before, and one should apply pressure to the joint at the table; And it will be correct when the patient extends their legs and they become equal in length. Then adjust the thighs, place the plaster, and tie with a bandage so that the hip doesn't move. And let them rest for three or four days, then release them and place the plaster again.
And if you see they are even, pull them as before, and let them rest for three days;
Then reset it, and let it be well-stabilized, until the limb is properly set.
Of the dislocation of the hip
The knees are dislocated in three ways: This means, inside and outside, and behind;
And do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. If they cannot straighten it to its full length, this indicates that the dislocation has occurred;
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient lie straight, extend their leg if they can, and place them on their back with their feet on your feet;
Then take his thigh bone between your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the thigh bone that form; and also other attendants extend his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he properly aligns his leg with his thigh lightly;
and place the plaster, and let the leg rest on the thigh, and join them tightly for three or four days, then release it;
and do not let the muscles contract until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limbs are not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, as long as it is sane.
From the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes partially dislocated and sometimes fully out, both inside and outside.
The signs that occur are when the ankle swells and tries to move forward at the part where it is dislocated:
The reinsertion should be gentle, and when it has been correctly placed alone by the person, one must gently extend it with their hands.
And when it is relieved completely, then it must be made to stand the ill person straight, and hold them up by their right leg from above the ankle.
then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and then also to the left twice, then lift them up high, and firmly hold the leg high.
and do this twice, as we have said, pulling and moving the leg;
if it comes back, that's good;
if not, start the procedure again because it will come back.
and if it cannot return in this way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and bury the rod firmly into the earth between their buttocks, and tie the cloth tightly around them so that they do not hurt the patient.
Then the ministers cut the fat, and some other ministers stretch out his legs at his hands or around his neck, so they tie them up on the neck of the animal. Then each minister equally extends them, and the animal should be placed between the animal's legs so as to hold the patient when they are extended.
Then place the dislocated joints at his hands, and some other ministers cut the healthy leg at the knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right point, put on the plaster and bandage it up, then tighten properly, and tie the leg to the other leg, and guard the nerves that are under the ankle from behind, so that the ligaments do not become too tight;
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the wound heals properly, then strain it.
Then release it on the third day or quarter, and instruct the patient to walk for three days afterwards; And if it progresses until this point, it's not safe to assume that it won't dislocate again.
And when abscesses begin to drain, you should soothe them as we have said in other parts of the text, while they are still clean.
Of the cautery tool directed by fire, command the patient to let their hairs grow long and uniform; and if they start pricking at their base, keep the eyes steady so they don't move until they fully grow. When the shoulders are dislocated, if they should be nicely extended for work, it is a simple task.
And if the dislocation is in neither the neck nor the foot, it's necessary to have the patient sit on his full height or halfway sitting down, and place your foot where the joints are open. Press firmly with your foot until they heal;
And when it's even and nothing is popping out, place under the foot a shoulder support table. Then press firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it; And make him rest, until he becomes well.
regarding wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation and one seeks to restore it, many times death of the patient occurs:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, do not be hasty;
and begin with soothing things like removing pus, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope for their recovery; and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb in its place, so that the pus and its discharge can occur.
and when the limb is in its place, administer soothing things for pus removal, and treat the wound as it should be, using dried ointments;
And if there is a break during dislocation, and small bones are fractured, you should manage them as we have instructed in simple illnesses;
And guard against entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this befits you to act according to your Creator, and through knowledge arm yourself and protect your body.
