You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the science of medicine, bringing together its completion through my explanations and declarations. And it came to me in vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is well established in our region and has spread everywhere, it has lost its science and been divided up, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books written by the ancients that were handled by hands. And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and closed are the minds, and the science is far away.
It seems to me that I can revive this treatise as a whole according to the method of exposition and declaration, and abbreviation; And I will gather together the forms of the metal cauterizing tools, and other surgical instruments for use, along with their appropriate presentation and preparation, as necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been neglected. And he who intervenes should ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they know how to judge members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving and resting veins, and where their exit lies.
And as Hippocrates said that inaction with no action is much, and with work is less; And similarly in the art of manual skills.
We will inform you at the beginning of this book that if someone is unaware of the matters previously mentioned, they might go wrong and idle people.
As I have seen many times, those who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and experiments.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who excised an abscess or neck sore of scrofula in a woman, and cut the arteries from her neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another surgeon treating a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called to extract, and saw the position of the organ and the size of the stone, and indeed if they had cut him he would have died.
And I saw another surgeon who treated our local count who had his leg broken, and with the breaking came an injury;
and the surgeons full of ignorance bound the breaking above the injury as it had been by strong ligature, and did not allow any salve to touch the wound, and they left him like this at the end.
And instruct him not to dislocate it again;
So he should stay like this, until the leg was fully extended and the feet reached their position, or else it would lead to ruin.
I rushed to be called for him, and I hurried to come and reset the leg; And when I heard it dislocated so smoothly without any pain being felt.
But all the corruption was already confirmed throughout his body or limb, and he could not be cured;
And the corruption continued spreading through the limb as long as any part of it was still intact.
And there is another method that collapses an abscessed wound, and then inflames it through the wickedness of her lordship.
For a chancre, when it is full of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot all be removed, what has been corrupted.
And because of this, dear children, you need to know that the art of medicine is divided into two parts: This means "It's like this, where there are risks in various positions.
And I will show you in each section of this book where there is danger and risk.
Because it's necessary that you keep them in mind, so that the illiterate don't have reason to speak poorly of you.
If you take your weapons with caution, treat your patients lightly yet firmly, and employ the best method so that through God's grace you may reach salvation and be content;
and leave insurmountable complaints without health or cure;
and use your weapons against those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens states in some of his admonishments: Never undertake an inappropriate treatment for your illness, lest you be called mad instead of healed.
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medical cautery, and are arranged from the head down to the stones";
and the forms of the instruments, and the metal of the cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters.";
and these chapters are organized with the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters.";
And arranged are the commands for lifting the head until the neck, and concerning the shapes of the instruments.
Just as we remember our work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of each remedy and its harm associated with each temperament.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, is the longest speech and most subtle science and the hidden responses;
And many wise people spoke about this, and they agreed on it;
And their words bother me somewhat because I fear the length of them.
I say that the cautery helps universally with all constitutions where there is matter, because there are two constitutions: This means to know hot constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
In the combination of hot and dry constitutions with matter, they devised nothing and said that the cautery is great help; And others said the opposite: that cautery only works on diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be treated with hot diseases through heat or dryness;
And those who say the opposite state that cautery provides great aid to hot and dry diseases that originate within the body. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the aspect of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion by experiment.
And in all matters, do not interfere except for those who have experienced it themselves, and who understand through long use the chapter of cautery, and the variety of people's complexions, and their conditions and causes of illnesses, and their symptoms and timing.
For other types of complexion, we have none for them either, especially in the case of cold and damp illnesses. And all the instruments gathered together with the cautery.
Know, children, that when a fire cautery is assembled, it contains the secrets of healing, and offers more benefit than a burning medical treatment.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any member except that which is cooked, and it harms no other member if you do not name it.
The hot medicines travel from limb to limb spreading disease instead of healing; and by chance cause harm to the patient.
The fire for its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not make this if there is no excess.
And this is what I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it corresponds to the truth of things;
And because of this, I apologize for the length of my speech, as I do not want to withhold the secret which lies in the fire and the quality of work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates through demonstration; Receive it in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
And I say that cautery is applicable in all circumstances, for the nuisances arising are minimized by the aid of the cautery; And indeed, if the cautery is for necessary pains that cannot wait until the time when greater harm does not come to the limb.
And never think it, dear child, as foolish people do; for the disease cured by cautery does not recur; and they say it like this;
and they say it like this; but it is not as they think, for cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries out the fluids that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for the swiftness of its effect, and by virtue of its work and its power.
And it is possible that disease comes in any way depending on the nature of the patient's illness and its strength;
And they gather in him the excesses through the consumption of meats and similar things; if this is not done with cauterization where there is little excess and moisture, such as dense cauterizations for pain, and similar things, so that the pain does not return; But this happens little.
And few people understand why cauterizations are called after medicine, and it's to see;
But they do not believe that cauterizations are after medicine; their understanding is false. Cauterizations are considered after medicine because when our methods of treatments in any disease don't work, then we administer the cauterization, and it does work.
Therefore, it is correctly understood that cauterization belongs to the later stages of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
The old ones said that cauterizers made of gold utensils are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated this due to the quality of gold and its highness in terms of substance.
and they say that the edges of the cauterizer do not cause putrefaction, but it is not visible because I have proven it and found out that it can be visible in some people;
And gold cauterizers are better than iron ones, as they said. And still, when you heat gold utensils, you do not know when they are heated by the color of the gold, and it is suddenly cooled;
and if it is overheated; if they use the fire; And thus there is enough hindrance.
So I have organized this chapter on the shoulder until this point, so that finding it may be easier.
A fire cautery is suitable for moisture and coldness on the head. There are two kinds that we do this due to the cause of an illness called 'soda', and because of many fluids that descend from the body like sweat, and from ears, and through a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also towards all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning and apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patients should be purified by a dissolving medicine, modifying it every third or fourth day according to what the properties and the strength and the habituation of the patient can bear; and then resume applying the medicine to the patient's wound.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on some hot stones;
after placing the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his second eyelids; and leave it where your two thumbs come to rest; if there is bleeding, apply heat from the fire cautery called "olivare", which has this form: And mark its place with ink on the left side, and apply it as you descend and steadily hold your hand a little at a time while turning. Then ease your hand slightly, and reward the left side if you see a small bone sink into it; And if you don't see it, resume the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
After taking some silk, and place wet and soft cotton inside, apply it to the left side, and leave it for three days;
After put on butter-soaked cloth; and leave it until the scab is removed; After treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmac', until it heals normally.
And if the old men said, that when a wound stays open longer, it discharges more; and because of this, they move in such a way.
And it was said by some that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
And the other says that we should apply the cautery there and press so strongly against it as to match the width of a woman's belly button when she is pregnant, because fluids escape when this happens.
And should we leave the wound open for an extended period; Afterwards, should one clean and stitch it up.
And these two ways of using cauterization do not seem to be entirely good for everyone, except in cases where there is the risk of fear;
It seems to me that I should leave it alone;
For the shoulder is weakened by continuous exposure to nature's elements, as we have witnessed in other limbs.
And likewise when the shoulder muscles are weak by nature, and the first sign of cauterization is more healed and smoother for me, and using this method I perform my work thus gathering together healing.
When chronic pain in the head comes about and lasts for a long time, then one must use the head's remedies and pills that are called "couchies", and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages; and if one performs the cauterization as we have previously said, and it proves effective. Take heed that if the shoulder of the sick person is very frail, and do not let it become too cold; Then apply heat from this fire cautery a little as we have said above. After you apply the heat to each horn up to the bone, as we said before, and apply heat at the part of the head called "wattles". and place it in the area where suction cups are applied; and move your hand gently so that you do not see up to the bone: The patient feels much more intense pain in this heat treatment than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
It is necessary that the heatings of the horns be more subtle than that used to heat half the head, and this is its form:
For the fire cautery, If pain suddenly occurs in part of the head and extends the illness to the eye, and the head is treated with purifying medicines, and other treatments are done as I said in the section on illnesses, but none of this helps: Therefore, apply cautery according to two methods, namely that of cold medicine and fire.
Apply the fire cautery if you take a handful of herbs and peel and coat them once or twice on each shoulder. Then make a cut where the pain holds in such manner that you can place the herb mixture directly under the skin;
and when it is placed, if it is held well and left like this for twelve hours; then release the hold and remove the garlic mixture, and leave the wound like this for two days or three; Then place a cotton wad soaked in butter until the pain eases.
After the ointment treatment as long as it is effective;
And if you see it fitting to use some of these burning medicines that I have written about or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery works like this. Heat the cautery as shown here:
And is called "bowed" because the head has the shape of an ogee arch, having a slight curve at the top and appearing small in the middle.
and place it in the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron until half of the thickness of the ear is burnt;
and lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, it's exposed, and a large amount of blood flows out.
After that, put cotton in salt water, and place it on the wound for three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it heals;
And if you wish to cauterize this head wound with the cautery that is called "cultellare", across its entirety, and beware not to cover the artery in this head wound which isn't old.
From headache
When you treat a head wound as we have described in the divisions of diseases, if it does not heal and you observe that the cauterizations mentioned previously in medicine do not suffice, then it is necessary for you to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
And thus, while holding the length of half a diem in your hand, and having your fingers poised once, pull it out until you do not cover the artery and stop right up to the bone;
And beware of the mandible that closes when you bite, and let only the jaw move and no spasms affect the patient, and be cautious about blood discharge from the artery when it is cut, or if cutting causes great fear and even to those who do not understand, and who are neither studied nor experienced; and let the work come in my way;
but I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery has been cut, and I will show you where it is explained in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not work against the disease, and the patient is suffering, apply the fire to within the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
And if you see this, administer the cautery that we have said or from the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; And these cauteries are better than others and more beneficial.
From the pain of the ears from coldness
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "points", as follows:
After this, point everything around the patient's ear, or in both places where pain is felt, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after marking its line; And has ten points within each ear;
after treatment until it becomes clean.
From the pain in the mouth
The torture that must be treated with cauterization only leaves those that move from blood, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
and do not use cauterization on appearances that come from scarring and inflammation of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture that comes from blood in urine and purges of the head and gargling, if it doesn't respond, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three applications. The first one at the root of the ear, and the second slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the adjustment between the two lips;
And place the cautery at the healthy opening part, and apply the cautery to that spot over the tip of the ear a little below the head's horn, and another one on the temple as long as a hand. And let the cautery remain there until half of the cheek is burnt;
And that is how it looks like using the cautery:
And it is similar to the knife operation we showed before, but it's a bit more subtle. It requires that the knives be slightly larger;
After the treatment of the wound as I explained before, until it is sound.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and if it does not benefit, and if the patient has fever, then make four cauterizations. On the second horns of the head, and I touch the top of the head, and I move to where the neck is called 'wattles' as we have previously mentioned, and on the back cautery at the mouth of the stomach;
and so treat it in the way we have said before.
from liturgy
For this illness, one should give the patient large grains and round pills to improve their brain function;
After the head of the patient is well rested, and one places the sinapical plaster on the occipital part, as written or prescribed in the treatment for plasters;
and this is how the cautery works: if you do it as I have said.
If he is healthy like this, it is well; And if it isn't done, you should make three burns below the neck down to the collarbone, and leave an interval of one digit's width between each burn.
And the treatment is like with the others, and if you find it fitting, and the patient is suffering, then you should make one burn in the middle. And if there's need for it, two more burns on the two horns, and treat until it is clean;
And so, let the cauterizations known as 'olive' be as I have described before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of old blemishes and what we have discussed beforehand;
After cleaning the head of the patient, then make burns below the head and on each horn, and one behind and three near the spine at the neck.
And if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is present, make four fire cauteries on the spine of the back; And let it until the very softest wound heals, and lift your hand; After the treatment until it is clean, and apply the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have previously mentioned.
From epilepsy
The epileptics should only use a cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and first modify the brain with years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from physical medicine.
And if it's a child who cannot bear the pain, give gargling and chewing with many good meats often to the brain;
After the king of the head in the middle, and I make a fire treatment according to what we have said before, and one fire treatment on the vessel, and on each horn; And if the limbs are outside and suffering, you should apply cauterization as I have described for those with paralysis and muscular atrophy, on the spine across the back and neck area. You should perform an olive oil-based cautery according to the method that I explained.
If the patient is an infant, then you should perform one subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to the cause of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and full of pus, then the part cautery of the fire cautery as we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy is the excess descending into melancholy, and the parts are moist with malaise, then this should be drunk so that the brain may be purified, as was discussed in the previous section.
After you have examined the head of the bone; After that, make a linen thread well done, like a circle, and place it around the head.
And when the limbs have settled, ensure they are firmly held in all directions;
After applying the liniment, and apply a paste of old bee's wax; And heat it gently over the fire, so that it can be applied without causing pain or discomfort; After emptying out the space inside through the mouth, and letting it cool down.
And do this to the patient once every week with different types of governance until it is cleansed.
Or, if you see that it is being cauterized by making marks on the entire surface of the cautery.
This way of cautering moistens the brain more;
Then place on it wet cotton in butter and animal fat.
of the eyes When the onset comes to the eyes first through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and continue making the patient drink things that purify the head, and keep him/her away from all moisture, and make them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After that, he commands it to rest on its head, and he applies the cautery through the head, and applies two cauterizations on the two temples where the descent of the arrow is at both eyes together, or in one it descends in one.
And apply the entire cautery to all the veins and arteries that are around the knee, and make sure to cauterize them long according to the width of the temples;
And beware of bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by pressing with a piece of cloth as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in the cautery, how to extinguish it;
And never apply the cautery or heat over the two inner bones.
And it is seen that these are cold phlegmatic excesses, then do the cautery which I have said at the beginning of this work when descending to the eyes: I apply the cautery to the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauterizations over the two inner bones; And if there is need for more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with every small cautery.
When you administer the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three oxen' intestines to drink; After the king's head, and I make him cauterized with or in the middle of an olive oil cautery; and do two cauterizations with the cautery called 'claw' on both eyebrows, a little below the hair.
and beware not to cover the artery as you work.
And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw".
When the paper treated with oil becomes diseased and moist, then cauterize it with this iron known as "olive". of which here is its form:
And if you see that you do two cauterizations on both eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not let your hand rest until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have described.
The hair which pricks the eye No instance has occurred where the hair of the nose turns into the paranasal region and enters the nose; in such cases, one performs cauteries according to two methods: This means that it involves using fire or burning medicine.
With the fire cautery, instruct the patient to allow the hairs to grow until they are long and uniform; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and if they are uniform, then put the patient in their healthy position; After on Sir upon the parchment of the eyes make a symbol that is as such like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign opposite the hairs;
Then place moist cotton soaked in egg yolk and garlic paste on the eye, then apply the fire cautery tool as shown here.
After that, gently and gradually apply the cautery to the symbol you have made, until the marks are burnt in that spot;
And the signs of health in the operation are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs lifted to the edge of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave it like this for three days, then apply moist cotton with butter until the scab is removed; After the application of ointment until it is properly absorbed.
And when these have come about, and the skin has softened, then resume the cauterization on that same area, just as you did at first.
And when the hair is burnt off, then cauterize until the skin rises to its natural position and remains even, not allowing the hair to touch the eye.
The fire cauterizing of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make of parchment the shape of the bay leaf;
Then take French soap and fresh lime leaves, each one spoonful, and grind them together thoroughly; And make haste, so that it does not cool, then blow upon the shape you have made like a leaf of myrtle, and place the eyes on paper. And if the illness lasts only in one part of the body, you should open it there; and if it is present equally in both. And put some damp cotton over the eye like an egg.
And have the body of the illness on your healthy side and place your hand showing on the medicine, and press the paste with every application when the illness feels the medicine's bite; for it feels the bite also like fire.
When this has been done for some time, once you have exposed the medicine to your finger. And when the bite has passed, lift the part away and reward if you see the paper lifted also as it would be by constraint of fire or by incision; And if it's like this, then do so well.
And if not, try again with medicine at the shoulder or until the medicine has worked, as long as your actions are equal, and your eyes focused;
Then place wet cotton and butter until the ears are covered with wax, after treating the shoulder with ointments known as 'dyafenis' and others, until it is clean.
And if it requires that you take good care of your work by great caution so that no medicine leaks into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes moist and the hair sticks in the eye, then apply medicine to that shoulder which is softened by clean paper properly, just as you did before. After treating it until it is clean;
and this is the shape of the leaf of the wormwood:
And know that eyes of men vary greatly in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints;
And do not have the right way respond to him who studies this craft.
regarding the treatment of fistula with a cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your well-being; And guide the ministers so that his head is between your hands in such a way that it does not move or slide from his head;
after put wadded cotton in the shape of an egg or garlic juice on the eye;
after heat the cautery which is heated:
and place it over the head as if it were a feather of a sparrow, so that when you have the cautery;
If you observe, it might look pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it may also appear like a tent.
However, this is what happens in your work due to the nature of things.
After pressing, if the fistula is opened, you treat the putrefaction and dry it out. And if it's closed, let it heal naturally, and remove from the body;
After placing the fire cautery in position, hold your hand on the cautery at the part below the nose above the eye, so that your hand doesn't make a mistake. And place the cautery in the oil's grease and it will burn.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then apply the fire cautery once more, and if necessary, do so again, letting it be for three days.
After placing damp cotton and butter on it, apply the ointment dressing until it heals. Do this with a drying ointment dressing as long as it is not healed; if 40 days pass without healing, then apply an aqua corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. And let the ruler follow as it comes in his chapter.
And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand about fistulas, and make the wound; After placing in the slit a slender stick with this shape: and it should be as large as a thimble; And hold your hand or clench it firmly, and do not move the spots at all, that the wounds may heal properly.
And it is proper to place on the eye a moistened cotton cloth in anticipation of pus or blood:
The pus flows from the place of the fistula, and the healthy one through marvellous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it's good. If not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child and return the fistula to the body of the child according to what is proper in its own nature.
of mouth ulcers Occasionally, mouth sores appear on the lips which are called "whiskers", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these mouth sores with the methods we've discussed in divisions, and if treatment doesn't help, then use a small surgical tool like this to gently burn them:
And place it quickly in those cuts until it becomes as full as possible;
After the treatment of the waxed area, while it remains healthy.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the oyster, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has turned rotten and swollen and becomes inflamed and develops into a fistula; And you treat them as we have said in sections, and they do not benefit. Therefore, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the fistula; After the plug or obstruction of the fistula, and hold your hand until the metal reaches the bottom of it, and wherever else there is.
Do this once or twice after the treatment as we have described in treatments, until it is healed;
And if it is treated like this, it is good; And if not, it is necessary to expose the wound and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
When the gums become softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then apply pressure to the head of the bone until it returns to its healthy state; After rubbing the cautery, in such manner that you place a stick over the tooth;
And place the heated cautery quickly inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching to the root of the tooth;
After ease your hand and repeat the heating with the cautery according to your will;
After fill the patient's mouth with ashes, and let it stay for an hour and then remove it.
And in this manner the moving tooth is repositioned, and the softened gum becomes restrained, and the moisture that was present dries up.
from the pain of teeth
When toothache comes from cold or there is coldness or inflammation and medicines do not help, then it needs to be treated with the use of a cautery in two ways: And the wax cautery and the fire cautery.
Wax cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in a iron or spider's leg spoon; Then take cotton and cover it on the tip of a tent, and soak butter with its moisture, then apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down;
And thus do it often until the butter's power reaches to the tooth root. If you see moist wool and cotton after cooling butter, apply it to the aching tooth, and place hot iron on it until the heat of the fire spreads through the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take a piece of iron or spider's leg, and make it big enough so that the heat does not come to the edge of the wound.
After heating the cautery, from which its form will come afterwards, place it on your teeth and keep your hand there until the cautery has cooled.
Do this often, because the pain will be reduced either on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of that cautery, and then push it out.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery according to what you want, and according to what you have the ability for;
and this is the form of the cane:
regarding the treatment of scrophula When the scrophules are due to cold blood and moisture that do not respond to digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery as described below which will show its form, and make two openings for the vapors to escape from the other side of the cautery;
And place the cautery on the abscess once, or twice as required, until it reaches to the bottom of the abscess;
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; And place on cotton soaked in butter until the splinter is extracted.
After the wound has healed and the stitches have been removed, until it is completely healed.
When the moisture invades the channels of the heart, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary for the body to be cleansed initially with diuretic medicines;
After applying the cautery at the base of the throat, and make sure not to touch up to the throat, but only apply it moderately.
After this, I perform another cauterization at the joint of the neck and head of the spine, and it is from these cauteries that we derive the term 'clavicle' which we describe in front;
and treat the head as previously described until it is healed.
When all illnesses of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and patients do not have fever or dryness, if it is an old disease, then you should perform two cauterizations on their kidneys through their urinary passages; and apply another cauterization between the buttocks, at the place of the anus.
And it is from these cauteries that we derive the term 'clavicle', according to the description provided earlier.
And if you see fit, perform cauterization by pressing on the entire area called 'points', as described earlier in the illness of the ears.
Let the points grow until they reach XXX, or perhaps somewhat beyond.
After treating the area according to what was said before, make the fire cauteries in three stages according to this form:
And because of this makes the cautery lighter, because you make three at once.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, gird the patient on their back and at their sides; After lift the kidney inside the testicle with your left hand;
And if the joint is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery which has two prongs as described here:
And cauterize the kidney until it pierces to the side, and let the figure of the cautery gather together four cauterizations;
And for this, use the cautery with three prongs, because the figure of the cauterization consists of three cauterizations;
And guide the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the figure of the cautery with three prongs:
And always fix onto this single nerve, because there are seven heat treatments for it.
After placing the fire cautery on, cut with force. After making the patient lie down, and do not let their limbs stretch too long until they are well settled.
And if it has been relieved upwards, where little happens, then make the fire cautery on the thickness of the clavicle fire cautery, or a few cauteries by touching.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and healed are the patients.
For when colds and dampness affect the stomach as long as they correspond to its constitution, and multiply his urination, and use of accustomed treatments, but he does not benefit from them, then it is necessary for the patient to be wrapped in a blanket on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms. From this on, I apply three fire cauteries under the tail with the force of two, for each fire cautery across the knee, and two fire cauteries behind each of the two sides up to where the pattern of the cauteries forms at three angles, ensuring there is enough space between them so they do not stick together when they get infected;
And let the fire cautery extend sufficiently to turn both parts of the knee, and let the pattern of the cauteries follow this form without adjustment:
And if you see that it has been burned down by a large cautery up to the stomach according to this form;
And he who has doubt about this cautery, apply it firmly upon the stomach at point number one according to the amount that you see of it; Then cauterize over the entire cautery which is called 'points'.
After the treatment we have undertaken, as long as he remains healthy.
As for the liver, it experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, and excessive winds; until its natural constitution is restored through elimination. And the patients should be treated with what we have discussed in sections; if they do not benefit from this, it is necessary for the patient to fast until his urine changes. And signs of three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this amount on the liver, beyond the hips, where the stomach's pain comes from;
and keep an equal space between each cautery as large as two; let the cautery be as long as your arm, and do not pinch all of your hand to the entire cautery;
let only half of the iron be heated, and have the patient lie straight on their feet;
and if they can't, if they sit up, and extend their legs, and lift their arms;
And if you wish to do so, cauterize these cauteries with surgical knives, if you are skilled and careful in the art, and remember not to burn all of the iron completely, for you would dry up the entire body; And let it boil until just before oil comes out, for the kidneys are very subtle in that spot, and you know how to see.
When it has drained into the liver, and you know how to determine whether it is in the liver tissue or in the sinusoid. If it's in the tissue, the patient feels moderate pain;
And if it's in the sinusoid, there is extreme pain felt.
And when this treatment hardens the vessels, it's necessary that the patient is treated with caution on its head;
And then guide your hand to the area where the drainage occurs, and then heat the cautery which resembles a raisin, as described below: And apply the cautery until the cheeks are seared, and proceed until the ulcer is completely out.
after the treatment according to the treatment of the wounds as long as it remains clean;
And it is not fitting to use this cautery except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been committed once.
Then he can boldly operate, and always it seems to me that movement is worth leaving it to.
apply the weeping cautery
The old ones said that one must do wet cauteries with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, let it be dry, and also make sure it is as big and as long as your fingers; And in the ear oil, and captures it with fire, and applies a cautery between the strength and the neck, and two small cauterizations slightly lower down on the part that is under the beard;
And apply two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly behind them. And one cauterization under the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two near the ribs further down from where the cauterization is between the two shoulders.
And do not squeeze with your hand, instead apply it gently as you would when smelling something.
And it was said by an old person that no one uses a fire cauterization at the armpit, they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; And once the pain leaves, as we have said about the abscess on the liver.
But in this chapter there is fear of when the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
Of mice
When you treat the illness of mice in those who have been instructed on dividing treatments, and it doesn't benefit, then they adopt three methods of cautery that are all good.
Among the methods there is one way such that you make three or four cauterizations, lining them up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization as we have said before.
and do not hurry your hand over the entire cauterization, and let it be that the sick remain under their back;
and another way of cauterization is to heat the cauterization that has two rods, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the hook which is at the mouse location, where the disease's cost comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the hook according to the hook, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
After light the two wicks until they are lit from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and so there will be four.
And if you see fit, fully cauterize with the entire cautery on three wicks.
After the cure when it has healed from a long disease, and this justifies that the other remedies should be applied as previously mentioned.
The cautery is not effective against dropsy, except in the way it is called "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we've discussed in sections, and your treatment doesn't work, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations inside the abdomen, one above the stomach, one on the liver, one below the intestines, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place near the anus; and make sure that the cauterizations are close to the kidney's edge.
After leaving the cautery in place to promote decay for a long time, and do not stop treating the disease with remedies after cauterization; And healing would hasten, and the two intents would come together with God's aid.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the clavicle, which we have demonstrated in front; And for the back, it's olive-shaped, as was shown before.
When the joints swell in someone who is tubercular and filled with yellow bile, it's necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the index finger and the ring finger; And with your hand, apply the cautery lightly without turning.
And do not enter too far on the circumference, otherwise it would remove the yellow crystals, and apply the cautery according to this shape:
After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the heel; And let the cauterizations be long, one over the knee joint in front and the other behind, across the leg;
And let the cauterizations burn for a long time without cure, until it produces this;
after the treatments of other procedures that we have discussed.
When the belly's solution comes from cold or moisture, as long as the restorative and digesting properties are at work in the stomach and within the intestines, and cannot be treated through conventional treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, if perform the great stomach cauterization according to what they spoke of previously or the stomach cauterizer, in the circulating cauterization; and four cauterizations around the delicate area of the mouth with each cauterization on the subtle line, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moister being abundant and the patient suffering, do this: one cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauterizations on the stomach close to the large one. For the cure is beneficial when there's good help.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the abscesses are at their origin or multiple, and are old with large cold wet corrupted pus, and are treated as we have said in sections, yet it does not benefit, if apply cauteries: At the spine of the back, that which is entirely outside beneath the spongy tissue a little by little in triangular formation, and apply the fire cautery under the skin twice.
And if you think that the stomach is cold and the meat doesn't cook, and you see the intestines swell up, then apply a large fire cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire fire cautery. And let the cautery be applied for as long as necessary. After treatment until it becomes healthy.
When you're working with metal, if it seems to be a good fit for the fire cautery, and then place all of it ablaze over the metal being worked. and let your hand and the heat of the cautery reach to the base of the vein from which blood flows out;
Do this once or twice, and if there is much metal, heat each one as we have said. after the treatment of beneficial herbs while they are still fresh;
and if you heat with a large cautery on iron, it will provide more help.
When the patient's body cannot endure cutting or incision, as we will describe in its place, if there arises a disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
If there is no fistula, and it decays and festers due to corrupted pus and moisture, if you need to test it with a complete method, and ensure that you know the entire technique as to how many parts it has.
After heating the cautery that seems to be of iron, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that your patient can bear when it enters, and continue using the cautery until that hardened, rotten part is burned, once or twice or even three times, depending on the amount you need.
And you must beware of burning the nerves which are nearby, and large veins.
If there's a fistula going to the bladder and the intestines, beware of these areas, and don't do that elsewhere, only in the abdominal area, and remember it doesn't occur often;
After the treatment as long as it's clean, and if the area is inflamed, and the contents have been hardened for a long time, then you know that the area has completely healed;
And if the contents are not hardened, know that the disease is still present, and the bone has been damaged at its root; And thus like one of those we will mention in their place.
When abdominal pain comes from the lungs and strong winds, affecting certain women, then it's necessary to apply a cautery on both sides of the lungs and on the surgical area that we have mentioned before;
And if we apply the cautery right in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and it will receive more help.
From the bladder When the bladder is swollen and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the kidneys to retain urine, then apply the cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair nears the hand begins, both on the right and left sides. Each cautery should be as long as a fist that we have.
And make the cautery behind the back, or two if you need it;
And let the cauteries be as described in front, following the shape of a hand.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception to occur, and the flowers are rotten and their ends are delayed; And when they come, one feels great pain: And when they occur, then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations inside the mouth, as we have said or the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back;
and let the cauterizations be of the clavicle, as we have said.
When the thick fluids descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together;
and find the lines of departure visible, then it is necessary to cauterize the hair on the hip socket at one cauterization seeming like a circle, and mark in front of the limb inside the socket where it turns, so that the socket be within the circle;
And if such cauteries are like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if you do not have such cauteries at hand, make three olive-sized ones, and let the cautery be made similarly to all the others;
And cure it as long as it is sound.
The pain in the hip When pain comes to the buttock of the thigh, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what we have advised in its division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: Therefore, you should cleanse the patient of the large phlegms with stinking pills, or other good and similar pills. Afterwards, make the cautery;
And the method of the cautery is according to two methods: This means 'and this refers to the combination of hot remedies, and fire cautery.'
Fire cautery follows several methods, among which one is such:
You should apply the fire cautery on the buttock region, three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make them deep and broad, with an area between each cautery equal to the size of two fingers, and let these be olive-shaped;
Never do you apply the fire cautery in the middle of the buttocks, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see that it needs treatment, apply the circular fire cautery as we have discussed earlier in the dislocation of the buttocks;
But do it in such a manner that the circles contain all the hip, and all the ribs be pierced.
And this is the method used in sciatica, when pain remains in the hip and does not reach to the thigh or leg.
And if it reaches up to the thigh and leg, then you should apply two cauterizations or until the patient's pain is relieved, and perform three on top of the ankle, with one slightly towards the left side;
either use surgical instruments or apply heat to the ribs where they connect to the hip;
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the right or slightly below the knee, then apply cauterization where the patient feels the pain, three points or four at each point of the cauterization referred to as 'points'. And if necessary, do more of this task;
And if the pain is localized around the knee toward the thigh, apply a cautery with either an incising or circular cauterizer, and ensure strict caution in all your cauterizations so you do not let off steam until the cauterizer burns nerves and major arteries, and you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who performed cauterization on the ankle near the foot, and it worked until their leg was completely healed, and even the toes as well, causing them to be pierced and corrupted entirely. After an abdominal treatment from which they died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And the sage instructed on using a thigh cauterizer, which is as follows: make it like this rod and place its head also as big as a finger's knuckle, or slightly less, with joints in between and from one joint to the other cover an area equivalent to the size of a thumb's knuckle.
And let the joints be made in two parts, and they should also resemble knots, and have a well-made iron hook;
And here is its form:
And apply it until it becomes entirely red and emits fumes, and then place it onto the buttock of the diseased part, and rotate it over the healthy side;
and once the cautery has been applied and heated, leave it for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for fear of causing harm to his patients, and few people use it;
and nevertheless this is among the better cauteries, which can be tolerated, and it benefits where it applies.
The medical burn tools are such that you make the instrument intertwining in which descends the edge of the door, and it may be made of skin or iron with one long surface, and at its height have two marks, and have between each the size increase of a thumb; and they must be opened both above and below, and join together in this form:
After placing the loin of the animal lying on its healthy side, place your hand very close to the hip bone; After placing it between the two hot circles which are heated by the fire for one hour to the end, allow the patient to feel the heat and the burn.
For he finds a similar sensation as if of fire;
And when the biting is past, lift your hand with the tool and raise the buttocks gently by two fingers, and leave it like this for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scalding goes off. And let it be for three days until the putrefaction proceeds;
This would be the final treatment after wound cleaning as long as it is clean.
And if the pain has extended up to the thigh or even to the leg, then you should apply the same tool to the waist in the same manner as you did to the buttocks;
And this is the way for hot baths, and I have written about it in my treatise on correcting medicine. Take wood ashes and live lime, as much of one as of the other, grind them together, and mix them into a new pot. if there is a small notch ahead where a razor's tip might be able to fit in.
if there is a small notch ahead where a razor's tip might be able to fit in. and place another pot well filled with water and add alkali and salt and sweet water, as long as there are two layers of powders on top that you will have well grasped in your hand;
and let it be like this until the water turns murky or the water becomes as dense as lead, then take all that liquid, and pour it over salt and alkali in the same way as before.
And at that point, it will be quite murky and administered in the manner of various medicines' preparations and in other cauterizations.
For it performs the same work as fire and can be used with other medicines for cauterizing well in the buttocks area like pepper, honey, anacardium and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment where some men were cured of the pain in their hip and sciatic vein, and all the joints, and he says that no other treatment was done, and it was cured in one instance when this treatment had been performed. And they bathed themselves as Galen instructs below.
And instructs in this manner that you take finely ground green and dry vitriol, and grind it very thoroughly with a little fat, and apply it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is situated, and bandage it;
And leave it for three hours, ensuring that the afflicted area no longer feels the burn.
And then make them enter or bathe until their body becomes slightly warm, and have them rest in bed. The pain will disappear completely and they will be cured.
And know that no one should use such medicine cauteries, if this isn't after the removal of pus.
And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the fat of a goat, if help must;
And the cautery should be made in this manner. Take animal dung and mix it with old oil, and apply this mixture to the hollow located between the thumb at the ankle and the other one called the sole.
After taking dried goat fat, and place it on the fire until it turns to charcoal, then lay it on the wool, and leave it until it becomes sooty.
And repeat this process again, and keep doing it in this way until you believe by logic that it will reach the hip, and that the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called "sheep cautery".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by impact or percussion or from too much evacuation, or due to similarity of cold substance spreaded, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, because that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
After that, when the patient has been rid of rotten pills or similar substances, and when it's positioned on its back, at the spot where pain persists, mark three lines diagonally, and in each line perform V cautery sessions or more according to the effectiveness and quantity that the patient can endure.
and let the cauteries be done with the type of cautery called "points";
and if you see fit, perform three or four point cauteries halfway along the median clavicle according to this form:
This disease often affects young children, and the initial symptoms are that they feel faint when they stand up, and fear; and you find in the last spinal nerve of the back and in us the manifestation that appears on other nerves.
When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this shape. So that the cautery pricks every part of the spine equally.
And if you see it, cauterize along the spine with the cautery touching two or three lines, and make the points close to each other.
After the cure as long as it is clean according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery on blisters which are in the vicinity of a nerve.
Of the pain in joints
When joint pains are due to moistness that spreads through every limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call 'gout' properly, and when it is caused by cold, these conditions cannot be cured with medicines alone; instead, treatments involving cautery should be used in this manner:
Make the mouth of the cautery at the joint of the foot, and apply olive oil in this manner:
And if there is need that you touch on the face at the foot, if it makes you cauterize across the whole cautery saying "point" when done. And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, apply the cautery on each knee three or four times for each part, with all parts treated using olive oil;
And if you need to do more, do it further, but don't let your hand be off until the pain's expected heat is cooked.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, one administers the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
And if pains occur at the hands, do points inside the second faint lines;
And if there remains any pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the back of the hand;
And if the pains come up to elbows or up to shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and apply medications.
And if you treat him well and cleanse phlegm, he will recover with the help of God.
When rupture occurs in the intestines, and the bowels descend to the kidneys; this is new, so it's important that when you are curing his eyesight, you don't let him fast on that day. And when he uses things that make his stomach empty, so that his intestines descend from his belly;
After making him lie down on his back between your hands, and instructing him to shave his armpit so that his sweat glands are repaired, and then you pull out at his fingertips with your fingers, and watch over the cut along the bone as if it were a half-circle above the chest;
Then heat up the cautery of which this is the shape:
As long as it is white and excretes gallstones. Then pull out the boils at their base; And let the attendants shave his hand so that it doesn't turn around;
And work the thighs well with the patient, and place one of the servants on his thighs, and another above his buttocks where he shaves the hands;
Then place the cautery on the mark at your full hand span, and hold it straight until you touch the bone. If you don't reach it on the first attempt, try again several times until you touch the bone. and remember that the boil should not escape when you use the cautery; so do not burn it; and so that the disease does not die or any other illness occurs.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your procedures are worthless.
And it is necessary that the application of the cautery to children be subtle according to their size, and for adults as well, according to their size;
after three days, cure the wound with butter until the scab is removed;
After applying other ointments until he heals, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well sealed.
And it is necessary that his exercises be prolonged for some time, so that the sweat does not appear when he wishes to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, make him wear a well-fitted bandage, and let him do this for another forty days;
And let him have good rest, work little and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and avoid shouting too loudly;
And when he follows this instruction, he is completely healed.
And I will say about the treatment of clipping hair in its chapter.
When ulcers occur in other bellies and are known to the patient, and you see that they no longer grow, treat them with a cautery as needed according to their size, and apply it for one-third of a spoonful. After the treatment according to what we have said;
And none of the old ones said that one should cauterize with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
But the first sign is the direction of the wound and make a line across the width above the wound, and another below it, and hold your hand along the entire length of the cautery.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and redder.
from old pain in no limb When pain comes in any limb, due to falling or being hit, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure with medicine does not help, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized using the cautery called "points", and make the cauterizations according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its usefulness and its location in twisting and its pain.
If it is well done by the first cautery, that's good;
If that name, reapply the second cautery on it, because these parts are such that they must move with the limb that is nearby, so you should make the cauterizations until the maladies are healed.
Every time the wound is treated with a large dose of treatment, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Can't you see the cauterization? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, without spreading or staying, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the malady, then make five cauterizations on this head: I place the head at the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. and at the two horns it is above them, and one behind near the spine;
and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches to the bone and until the crusts come out fully, in order for the fumes of the large pus to be able to escape;
and apply the cautery on the mouse according to its location.
And if it is spread everywhere; And if it is evident, then you should apply these cauterizations with this method: the first on the neck and the second under the spine of the collarbone. Apply three cauterizations down the spine from the neck to the back, one large in the armpit and another below it, and two at each shoulder; And II on the heels, and II on the tendons under the foot, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
And be careful not to burn those nerves that are at the back of the heel, where you should not touch them;
And never apply heat to the bone of the forefinger, and one application on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Know that the more you apply heat (or cautery), the more help it provides, and it benefits him;
Know that the sick do not feel pain from heat (or cautery) as those who are well would, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the methods of iron tools.
After the treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unchanged, then you should apply heat (cautery) to the limb according to its size and degree of swelling.
And let the cautery slightly enter the skin of the anus; Then do the cure for ointments until it is healed.
And one cauterizes at the hand and foot and back, along the nerve where it makes the limb move, and thus there is an extraction of pus;
And always, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" has matured, and medicine treatments are of no use, then cauterize with a small cautery according to the amount of skin around the anus, until all the pus is extracted, and its color changes;
Then apply a paste of oat flour and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from calf and blood from quail, one part from each; And mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and let it be over the area until it is sanitized.
The treatment for the sore by cautery
When the sore starts and you notice it, if you stop its growth, apply the fire cautery to the part that seems like a circle around the sore, all around its circumference.
And the surgeons advised that one should also apply the cautery in the middle of the sore;
And I don't find this to be good either, because I fear it might lead to the wound becoming infected and putrefied, and I have never wanted to do so before;
And a more practical thing is to apply the cautery internally, using what's called the "circular" cautery, as we have mentioned earlier in terms of different types of cauterizations.
When some have an illness which is called "adubelati", and it delays death or because of the excess it makes or due to old age when health declines (that is, when one is too old) and there's little blood present, or due to its length; and you see it hastening towards death: therefore, apply the cautery between several small applications; after that, leave it like this. Because it will hasten its death.
And if you see her pierced through with the entire cautery, then heat up the cautery in accordance to what is described:
And place your hand in the middle of this illness that is called "adubelati" until the cauterization penetrates deeply, and make these cauterizations such that the patient feels discomfort in such a way that the process of decay accelerates.
Afterwards clean it as long as it is perfectly healed.
Another way of illness is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing else but a limb disease, for it damages the limbs as if they were dry branches being burnt.
If you see this illness in them that can withstand the combined heat of a cautery, then gently apply small and large fire cauterizations, according to what is needed for the body or where the disease is;
After applying the cautery from all sides until you have cleared away all the corruption, and leave nothing behind, that everything corrupted may be removed.
And leave it for three days, and apply with oil on the burned areas until the scabs from the fire are healed, and all of the corruption.
After the treatment that generates pus.
And if after three days you see that no harm has appeared, it is good;
And if not, then reapply the cautery to the one that has been left behind with its legs corrupted.
And this remedy is not once cured by medicine in lieu of the fire cautery;
but nevertheless, the fire cautery is more effective aid, and I have already described the treatment of the ague with medicine. Use as much as you need.
of hernias that come to stones Sometimes it happens that a stone growing outside produces an illness that is called "cyst" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that irritates the foot.
And the cautery for this illness does so in two ways. This means fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Fire cautery is as if you heat the metal of the cautery like a feather from a rooster, and it should be made of well-cast iron to fit over all parts, and there should be delicate margins;
After you heat everything thoroughly on the nail, and twist your hand completely around the nail as it goes to the end of the nail; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to rot; Then make him a poultice of pounded wild marigolds with vinegar, and leave the poultice overnight, and he pricks it and will be pulled out from its roots.
Then cure it with a greasing ointment until it has healed properly.
And if they have turned from the inside of the heart, and often happen both in hands and in feet, then you must bring to bear a cautery of hot water; and is done in this manner: take an arnica stick or iron, or a feather of a goose, and place it on the nail and the thorn, that is to say for warts; And place the candle on it until it burns through completely, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and squeeze your hand as you rotate so that the edge of the candle smears to the base of the nail, and then may find the warm water way deeply down to the root;
And let the patient endure a little of the hot water's immersion for an hour; Then leave it like this, and all its roots will be uprooted completely.
Start one after another, until you have treated all those within your body, then treat the inflammations that produce pus.
When there are tremors from cold or nerves, or a fever of the fourth sort or any other illness, it is necessary to make four or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery under the chin, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery;
If you let it tremble, hasten the health of the disease cold.
Once visible from outside the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from large decaying matter.
It is necessary at the beginning when they appear that one performs a cautery on each head of the pustule: A fine fire stick cautery, whose points are taken by the flame, or a long root of sainfoin, or to the lentil-shaped cautery.
And once they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and it cannot grow pus ahead, but they get rid of the excess from which they come, and they become healthy;
But it must be done after the blood has been evacuated.
Many times great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound comes outwards or from incising an abscess, or from the cautery on the limb, and similar things would occur; And there's much inconvenience in stench.
And yet, when this happens to none, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it for as long as the pulse subsides under your finger, and no more droplet comes out;
Then apply several small and large olive oil cauteries to them until they are all red.
Then apply me, whether large or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery is located, place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place until the pulse has ceased.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are off the fire, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
And don't stop doing this one after another until the pulse is ceased;
And see to it that you do not burn through the nerve which is beneath, and let no harm come upon the patient;
And know that when cutting near the artery, it's hard to properly suture even if the artery is large; this isn't done through one of the four methods we've mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction if it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong sewing with thread, or through medications placed which have the power to prevent blood flow; and so tied and restrained afterward.
Who will administer the reattachment by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning things on, or other similar actions, if it does not help then it likely won't.
And if this happens to anyone and they have neither seen nor medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb on the wound of the vein as we've said, and stretch it well until it's properly sutured over the wound and over the vein; And let it not move but moisten it with cold water often that is very cold until the organ becomes frozen and swollen and remains stiff.
And make inquiries about those who need cauterization and medicines.
As we told you in the first chapter, about all diseases where cauterization with fire or hot medicines is necessary, and we discuss their causes, remedies, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I have covered that chapter on the shoulder up to the elbow, and I will proceed with this chapter along the same path for what is found more easily for what you want.
And as I begin this one, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first section about cauteries, which means greater caution must be exercised.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often bloodletting when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; For there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
And I urge you that you do not embark on folly. And none of the ways of people come to healing. If they come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die lightly due to the foolishness they find in their disease, and the severity of their suffering; And one should have fear about this.
And for these I will give you their meaning, and say: Wait, I am here. And the illness is resistant.
It is not right for you to consent to those who come to your door with this manner, but rather invest more in respect than in greed. Do not act foolishly, but wisely about what you are certain of and can take knowledge from;
And use prediction and guidance in your treatments for your patients, ensuring their health is transformed.
And this will help you gain good reputation, fame, and lasting memory.
Dear child, our lords provide good understanding and righteousness to you, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, so be it.
Or I have ordered this chapter out of discussion by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter about the cauteries, which I discussed from the head up until the foot, because you will find it easier that which you need.
Know that this disease often arises when the child is born, and when the mother holds the head of the child too tightly;
And it never happens due to any other reason that we know of.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I have seen, death came quickly; And because of this, it seems to me that dividing the work into partial treatments would be worthwhile.
And I have seen the child of this, where the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer bear it;
And suffered so much from the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone at the elbow, between the muscle and the bone;
And the operations were such that when moisture is between the muscle and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you split through the head with a wide crack.
And make it as long as two of our lengths, while the moisture goes along.
and here is the form of the splint:
If there is more moisture, and the abscesses are larger, make two cuts in a cross-like manner, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the signs where the head joints are open from each side, and when you press it with your hand internally, it makes a sharp sound that does not stop: So it is necessary that you split the head along its center into three cracks in this manner:
And after making the incision, remove all moisture completely outside. After restraining the cuts from powders and oils, and I put wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day;
Then release him, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and allow the head to heal evenly, and then let the patient eat dry meat from a source of moisture until the limb is strong and healthy.
And another method of incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and to assemble water;
for it never faces forward; nor does it face behind; nor does it face to the right; nor does it face to the left.
Cut accordingly to the size of the wound or abscess opening, and fill with water, and make a cut according to what you are able.
and beware that you do not clip the artery; and let blood flow slightly, so that the patient dies from the diffusion of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it comes to any disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the bottom, and this sickness is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort therapy would be cautery using which one cuts off the two great arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut off, the patient must recover beyond their head; After rubbing the wound with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the patient's head to its entire length. Then look where the vein is located, and after the ears where both the eyes are, and they should be returned;
Then mark the signs of the incision, then cut both with a sharp sword for two parts, until the vein size reaches to the bone, and this should be done through the width of the head.
And if you see it, hold the spatula near the artery and vein above, cut also as two inches through.
And when the vein has been severed, make sure to continue cutting upwards outward from there.
And if the artery does not open to touch it, you should measure the size of the gap in three inches, then cut and proceed until reaching the bone;
And what needs to be removed of the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance somewhat more or less, depending on how well the patient can endure it, and the filling of the artery;
Then look at the wound: If there is a bone tip mark of syphilis, cut it off where no vein remains, then incise and remove any pus, stitch up the wound and dress it with ointment until it heals.
"De emigrainne" translates to "from grain" or possibly referring to a process of sifting or removing grains. Without further context, it's challenging to provide an exact interpretation for this specific phrase within the medieval medical treatise. In general terms, in a medical setting, it could relate to procedures involving the removal of grains (such as pieces of gravel or sand) from bodily tissues or fluids. When old age approaches, and severe coughing occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere in the elderly body, as well as similar things, treatment is done using methods of medical cure and all this does not benefit it. Therefore, one should extract the arteries of the temples and apply a cautery, as we have described.
And the way to extract them is that the patient should allow their hair to grow from their temples, and listen for the pulse which appears in the temple, because it opens well through its beat, and responds only in some who are too cold;
And if it responds, strangle the neck with some cloths, then rub its head with a rough cloth, and raise it in hot water until the pulse becomes clearly evident; Then take the spatula of which here is the shape: Then scrape the skin slightly until you feel the pulse, then pull it upwards with needles, and remove well the webs that are off of each part;
And if the pulse is subtle, turn it at the tip of the little finger, then scrape that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders. For if it's not cut, neither will escape all without pain.
And bleed from the sixth century onward, until the third.
And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two loops of a strong silk thread, to prevent putrefaction from occurring before the healing of the wound and to prevent bleeding.
Then cut off the excess that is between the two threads at that same time. And then, if you see fit, apply the copper cautery up to the bone as long as the dislocated shoulders are cut.
And this is the skilled work, if the patient does not have fever and they have warm complexion. For the cauterizing helps to complete the drying process: Therefore, it is of greater help in drying processes.
It is necessary for the extraction of arteries; one must fill the area with old cotton and place it under well-made tents.
And when they [the arteries] are released, if one uses dry medicinal substances that create heat and tents until it is healed;
And if you leave the artery without stopping bleeding as you work, if you hurry with the copper by cautery, or you fill the area with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the bleeding is stopped. And if you do not have that present, place ice on the area as long as the bleeding is frozen, and remove the ice with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it in accordance with what is necessary;
And there should be between the two knives about half an inch of space. Then when you mark to join the two ends together, and you place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut open in two places; And let there be distance between the two shoulders, because this cautery does not weld completely from end to end;
and it is the shape of the cautery:
And when the one who is bleeding and more fragile in extracting an artery is involved, you should apply this cautery to sear the vessel of that cautery by two cuts, but let the cuts be well apart to retain heat for longer. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
of tears When the tears from the eyes are draining through veins above the testicle region of the head muscle, and no benefit is gained from any medicine applied, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and feel the forehead trembling as if with a heartbeat; And when they are so wet and moist that the paper hairs fall off, and the papers heat up, being scorched by the tears' heat, this treatment requires effort. And they named the old one 'healer of bruises', and it is that you make the patient who has this disease grow hairs on their head or forehead, then you cut three equal slits across the forehead according to the length of the forehead.
And they named the old one 'healer of bruises', and it is that you make the patient who has this disease grow hairs on their head or forehead, then you cut three equal slits across the forehead according to the length of the forehead. Let one of the slits also be two and a half inches all across the forehead from bottom to top, reaching almost to the hairline, and for the others, two in length by two in width, cut them above the ribs through the sheets (a type of protective covering), and avoid cutting into the arteries which are above the ribs through the sheets.
And keep your hand away from the connection of the two jaws, and each wound will have an area equivalent to three inches in length.
And have an absorbent sponge and cloth ready to wipe away the blood, then use a sharp spatula from two parts of which this is made.
From the incision made above the temple up to the second incision; And burn the entire area between the two grooves until you reach the line where it meets the bone, then cut along halfway down the second incision up to the other groove, and then remove that pus-filled part. If you use a tool in the first incision that is called 'culetter', and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is hollow, not sharp, and this shape:
And make the cut towards the fatty part of the kidney, and let the knife head face towards the bone, and the blade until it reaches to the middle crack.
And cut all the blood vessels that descend from the head until the incision is continuous up to where they open into the skin, and then make another cut halfway down the groove up to the other opening;
And remove the blood evenly, and expose the area for the taken blood;
Then place a piece of old cotton in each groove, and put damp cloths soaked with vinegar, oil, and garlic over them, making sure no pus remains.
And on the third day, release the wound, and I administer large plantings of water turpentine, then the cure with basil oil and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it heals.
When dealing with sudden severe catarrhs that are customary, and you see the eyes becoming weak and small, and weakening of sight, and burned paper; And the hair falls out, and one feels pain in the forehead, and the patient sneezes, and the body is affected; So know through these events that such matters and this catarrh come only from many veins, and the correct treatment is here.
And it is that you instruct the patient behind his forehead, then make a large incision within the forehead, and another somewhat wide below it. And start from the left temple fracture to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; And keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
And when the bone is exposed, all the blood will escape onto an sponge; then stuff it between the two lips of the wound and place old cotton, trying linen. Then cover it with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against pus formation;
When it is bone, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that dry out and cause growth.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of clove, then make them into plaster; And he administers in these wounds to enhance flesh throughout.
Regarding ear piercing.
Everything that goes into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone from mining work or anything similar like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing matter like water and vinegar and similar things.
When it discharges from the ear hole or in any other manner that does not fit to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then place the ear under the sun.
If you see the stone, if there is no drop of purple oil or camphor oil, then proceed with extraction; and you make him sneeze with condiments, and moisten his nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; And the ear is above.
The mouth often comes from this treatment;
And if it doesn't come out, then it's handled through subtle pinpricks, about which there is this procedure:
If it jumps out through the pricks, that's good;
But if not, then proceed with extracting using a delicate surgical instrument of small curvature;
And if it doesn't jump through this one, make an arachnid needle and press the tip of the needle or the ear root very strongly, and soak the part inside the needle with beeswax so that the wax cannot enter along with the needle; Then try to force it outwards, as often comes out in the manner we have described.
And if it doesn't come out in such a manner, then one takes hold of the part and holds its sides, and places on oneself none but an instrument that is precisely suited for this task, and puts a little cotton inside. Then press the lump against the stone or whatever it may be, and use force.
And if it doesn't come out from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear so that pus can escape, and spasms;
And the way to cut is that you first make a surgeon in the face of the earache, and remove blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the person under your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear near the fat or where it hangs down; And make the incision as wide as a moon, until you reach the bone, then cut through the flesh according to your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth;
And clean the wound until it is sound.
And if there are grains and they swell up, administer extraction;
and if it cannot escape, administer pus evacuation under this form: and make an incision on that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grains are moistened by ear moisture, until you have done many pieces of it.
Then extract with subtle hooks and suck at the source, just as we have said, so that the extractions are healed.
In an earache therefore that causes weeping in the ear, then it is fitting for the patient to perform first-aid by making a hollow with some old cotton and letting the ear weep out. And be still over that same ear or where the ache is. If it leaps out through the sky, that's good.
If not, take many stones according to their lengths and lightly, and heat them a bit on the fire; And place the patient's ear one or both parts inwards, and draw from it on one side of his feet, and make an incision on another bone near to the bone that is in the ear; And continue this from bone to bone until all the strength of the cut has been made, and in this way it cuts away all its strength.
And if you see this, take the twig, and push one part of the bone into the ear, and the other end with fire until the more tender twig is burned;
Then do this to other twigs in the same manner until all the cut has been made through it, as we have said about bones.
In the extraction of the beast, if it's small like a mite and similar things, treat it as we have said in division;
But if it is of great size so one can feel it, proceed with the extraction of needles; And it's the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you try treatments as we have mentioned in dividing and discussing distillations, if the treatment isn't effective, it is necessary to examine the ear under the sun: If no worms are apparent, treat with fine needles, and if none appear, take the form of wax from here:
And make it narrow below and wide above. And apply the finest point in the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient's illness, then fully shape it with wax. Let this often happen until all the blood leaves.
And if they do not heed to leave, if you apply the end of the cotton wick as I said in the stone;
And if they do not protrude as we said, administer distilled waters that the old ones have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find a treatment for distilled waters;
And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, as shown here in the form as you see: And be it made of silver or rusty iron at the small openings, and above pour to distill;
And to press within the distillation with an iron-made instrument well made for this, and if you see take the wick and envelop it around the protruding cotton tip; Then pour your oil or your juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the wick, and let the wick be inside the ear;
Then bury your cotton in the powder completely, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or at the point of entering the ear; And let the smell of the medicine permeate inside, and let the distillation be heated over fire as if one is distilling it in the ear; And make sure it's not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good then.
Regarding ear piercing.
No child is born without any ear parts;
And the same thing happens to many due to injuries from wounds or a fetus born inside the ear, and these injuries come into the ear at no other time unless one can see them;
And never does any part lose its shape, and one sees this very well.
Therefore, that which comes upon them, if one cannot see it, is of concern for several arrangements, and in such cases it is appropriate that you place the ear to the sun on the sore. and look inside: if you see the superficial pus, if the work has this kind of formation as described:
And may it be both cutting in front and behind all flatly, so that it does not hurt the ear;
if the pus is of new flesh or from the ear, if you have subtle cuts, and gently scrape, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the ointments are well applied in the ear, take a delicate thin tool and heat it slightly over the flame, then place it inside the ear.
If you feel the irritation that causes discomfort in the ears of the patient, gently prick the earlobe, and ensure you do not damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with the Egyptian ointment. Continue this for as long as the wound is healing or apply a tent and moisten it with pink water, and dust it with ground vitriol.
And if you see the ear swelling up, it is necessary to remove the tent and replace it with another one that's moistened with rosin and beeswax, until the swelling has disappeared. Continue to treat it as long as it is sound.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a cloth and wet it with cold water, then put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are similar to those used for distillations.
The treatment for eyes when they are moist and dry involves spreading them with forceps and tweezers, and applying a hot iron to the base of their roots; Then place sulfur on the burned area.
And if it is not removed by peeling, then apply the small lens cautery to cauterize it, and then use a cauterizer after an incision; it will heal.
And many times they can't find anything left from their roots; And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burnt and do not return.
Regarding ice Many times in the papers, one encounters things that seem to freeze in their form and hardness, and for this reason is called 'granulation', and it is a collection of moisture large on the surface of the paper. The treatments are as follows:
The treatments are as follows: Take care of the silence of the great bone on both sides, and it is a simple matter to know;
Then make it wide, then scrape each part slightly, then take it with forceps, and manipulate.
If you can't scrape without piercing the paper slightly, if it doesn't harm the patient;
And if there's a large crack, you put it together at a seam, and treat until it heals;
And if it's small, don't use any force, because the ointment heals it quickly and nourishes the flesh.
And if the great bone descends within the ear towards the upper part, you should turn the paper, and put the bone at one of the forceps, and manipulate it from both sides;
And if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm;
And when the large lump is removed, rinse with clean water and cleanse the area around where the infection was until the patient feels better.
of the grease of the lumps Exinach is a fat that accumulates on the sheets of papers above it, and this happens more often in children than adults, and causes much discomfort to their eyes, and they have catarrh coming out during mornings, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;
And because of this, they lie on their sides and sleep there, and have the papers under their eyes wet due to the sweat and appearance that turn over from the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press your hand onto it and feel the exinach between your fingers.
And the method of treatment is such that patients place their head on your healthy part;
And take flax cloths, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that can contain the discharge from each part, then place it on them; And press with your thumbs on both sides, so that the discharge is gathered inside the circle;
Then make in the middle of the moisture at the spleen, cut a slit that is not much larger than the wound you do for the opening of the vein;
And stretch the leather all around as far as you can see the discharge; And in various orientations comes discharge from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Pull out then take one piece of fine cloth between your thumbs at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses;
And make sure not to adjust in the slit, don't allow all of the pus up to the eye, don't cause any bleeding.
And if it leaks out at the start of the slit, gently increase a bit more of the slit until it starts to open;
Then pull it out as we have said, then soak in oil and water, place on the area, and apply binders.
And if there are such people who grind salt and place it to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then he should be treated as long as he is sane.
And if it comes to cutting an abscess there, then a plaster treatment is applied until the wound heals.
(of paper hairs) When hair grows out of its natural place and becomes old, if they harm the eyes, they can bring about diseases such as weeping used to be and paper softenings causing impotence, all leading to the deterioration of vision;
And then the treatment follows four methods: or by fire cautery with the assembly of heat, or by medicine in water according to what was discussed previously in the section on cautery methods, and it will be done either through cutting and stitching or through bandages, as I shall explain.
It is necessary for you to place the head of the eye in its healthy position, then turn the paper towel under your left hand;
If it has turned, that's good; otherwise, if not, then insert a needle with all one thread above; and let it be either outside the edge of the paper or where the hair grows beneath these hairs, and pull the thread upwards across the entire paper, then turn it with the razor;
Then they do this on the part of the skin, on the aligned hair, all over the perfectly smooth area, from the big muscle down to the small.
Then take one thread, and place a small cotton and silk tent on the paper. Then make an 'X' shape on the paper, like a bay leaf, always ensuring that the figure corresponds to the height you see. The paper should be placed diagonally according to this size.
And if one needs to cut a large amount of paper according to how the paper is softened;
Then proceed all over the smooth area on the two lines you have indicated, and start from the large muscle down to the small. And if there's a crack near the natural hair in the size of a root, then insert the thyme into one of the two corners close to soundness, and then remove it entirely.
Then gather the two lips together at a stitch with a needle made of single thread of fine wool. Clear out the blood, and dry off the excess threads on both edges of the two cuts in all respects. If you see fit to do this;
And if not doing that troubles you, or if it's not of concern to you, then leave the stitch and the threads until three or four days.
Then treat the wound without stitches or bindings. Paper peels off at the healing of the wound and the joining of things together; however, the stitches remain moist (as the old ones say), and this is work without fear. And if there's another way:
And if there's another way: And it is that you seal the paper with a shape that resembles the leaf of myrtle as we have recounted, in three inches cut according to this form:
Then cut the one that sits above evenly, according to this form:
And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and the thing isn't even, take a needle or where there is thread, and hold it in front of your face; and hold the other thread longer than the large artery, and the second thread shorter than the small one, and join the threads evenly between your thumbs;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you've stitched, just like we have recounted, then join both edges of the wound by suture, and the treatment until it heals;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and similar salving substances;
and sometimes the paper hair gets turned inside out:
If it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incision;
but the stitches in both cases are more artificial.
The treatment of canines follows this form: and you should convert the paper and the cut inward according to what I have said. Then make two canines by art, and also two ligatures as long as the paper is wide, as well as small in diameter equal to the thickness of the bone; and tie them as two pieces of two parts where you hold the threads;
then delicately combine both on top of the paper where the oil is found, and tighten the two canines from each part in a symmetrical manner; And let it like this for a few days, and the skin that is constricted will die, rot and peel off, until it exits through itself.
If it lingers, if the wound has strength, then he treats it as long as it is clean;
And when the wound has healed, and if the scab is lifted, and no longer will grow hair;
And this is the form of two hens that you will do according to this image, and according to this length and width:
The operations consist in taking a delicate needle, and then you cut off a thread of silk soft and fine; Then join the ends and knot them finely together, and make the length of the threads as long as your palm in width;
Then proceed with this hunt for a finer silk thread, tie it firmly to the end of the thread.
Then place the patient's head onto your healthy side;
And let the sun be over the operation so that all parts are seen clearly, for this is a delicate and small procedure. Then pull the needle out of every hunt into the root of the adjusted hair, and pierce through the paper as quickly as you draw it above the natural hair;
Then pull out the hair up to the tip, and when you find one or two or three or more hairs in it;
Then pull your hand until the hairs come out at the tip of the needle with the natural hair.
And if the chase (hunt) is treated and the hair doesn't come out with it, you should pull the hunt to the end of its thread that you have ordered, until the chase feels forced above the wound and you see this through the eye's vision;
Therefore, if you pull the hunt (likely referring to a wound or removed tissue) and the thread, cover the eye and leave it covered for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and flesh starts to grow.
And if the hairs are small, accompany with one hair that is naturally long, and raise it along with whichever you leave, until it becomes extended, then raise it.
Regarding eye infections or diseases. When this disease, called "Aleacrati" or the putrefaction affects the eye, if there are two ways:
One natural, and the other unnatural.
And occurs suddenly from wounds, or due to surgeons or cauterization, and through similar incidents.
And the method of opening it is that you cut through that seam, and open the lips of it, and place linen tents inside, and bandage until it's healed;
And it is not right to use in treating it with things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first one;
but use remedies that soften, such as fennel; and wash it with hot water or oil and linseed meal that has been cooked, and anoint with garlic melted in any oils, and make a tent, and treat it with this.
And the treasures of your treatment are such that you must guard against it not joining together according to its former shape;
And these operations that we have described do not leave out directions for this disease, so that it does not return according to its former shape.
This disease that is caused by worms is really called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds and cuts, and cauterization and similar things;
And the method of performing this operation is that you take an awl in which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make a cut on the left eyelid as far as the right one, so that the threads go through two layers of the flesh;
Then there is the flesh above all the awl, and it cuts into the wide spatula-like area. And if the paper figure returns according to what is required, it's good;
If not, take it easy and place it in the groove, then turn the paper, and make cuts inside the paper;
And make the two corners of the two cuts corresponding to the two angles of the incision you have made. Ensure that when they are joined together, the figure resembles the shape of a letter 'Y' or 'Griesche';
Then position that flesh according to the size of its circumference and thickness as indicated by the paper, then adjust the two required parts, sewing them with thread like wool.
Then follow the cure as we have described for softening medicines and baths until they are healed.
And if the disease originates from a cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make an incision filled with the hair of papers, and according to what was previously mentioned; then cut between the two sides of a tent, as I have said;
then cut between the two sides of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for she is very varied in form, and the skilled masters equip themselves with all kinds so they know how to return the shape to its natural form;
and the patients themselves, according to what requires treatment and instruments in various positions.
When this seam occurs between two people in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white of the egg and cannot move or do its natural tasks, then it is necessary to thus insert the tip of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up;
And in the incisions, until you have this one who is in pain under the delicate pus point, which should not be too sharp and not too piercingly dull, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp pus points and they do not irritate the eye.
and make your incisions on that which is assembled, lightly, so that the skin heals according to its natural shape;
and heal that which is assembled entirely, and perform no sharp washing in the eye, but use salty water, and wear a colander.
then place a linen tent between the skin and the eye, and put wet wool on top of the eye. and after three days, use a colander and other hot things until it is fully healed.
Know that there are two ways regarding the angle: It is nerve-like and appears somewhat hard like dough, and another that isn't nerve-like but appears white like frozen moisture. If you touch it with iron and treat it by pricking with pins, then it cannot be moved;
And both of them start near the large tear ducts and grow slowly, until they cover all vision, light and eye movement.
And the method of incision is such that when the patient's head meets their healthy state, then they open the eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then curl the nail with small pins, and extend it upwards; Then take a needle, and insert a horse hair, or a cow hair, or a bull hair, and a strong thread; and double the needle's point slightly and place it in the nail bed, then pierce through with all the needle, and bind the nail with a thread and stretch it above, and scorch all the hair at the edge of the nail which is adjacent to the cuticle and the tenderness of the hair up to the tip, then cut off the rest from the root near the hinge on all delicate areas and minor forces, and leave nature's sap if necessary, so that by incision there does not flow the body's tears habitually;
And always stretch only the nail to the nail bed and with thread, as we have said; Then for the scorched one, all the hairless skin around which is of this form:
And see to it that the hair doesn't touch the fleshy lining and tear it, and that the nose tip doesn't pierce;
and after the cut pour a little of this ointment into the ear, and make a collar from silver, and leave it until the other day; Then treat the one who needs it as long as they are sound.
And if the nail isn't sensitive and you can't push in the needle, and it doesn't enter under the nails, this condition of the nail is often treated with medicines;
and they grow like I have described in the section of separation, and if you see it cover, work on the eye with the patient, and take the hair carefully slightly sharp according to this form: And grasp the nail gently from above, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and your reason is quick, then drop a stream from your mouth into the ear canal made of argentum (silver) and red neckring, and apply a paste to the ear until another day;
If there's nothing against your sight, for instance with pus-filled sores, then treat it by draining and start by curing the pus-filled sore until it becomes clean. Then resume the work as before, until it becomes clean again.
Then start the next operation in the same way, until all of it is removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the corner affects the eye with great harm, suspend it in vinegar, and carve out only part of it, not all at once, so that no tears come.
Then drop the red neckring which is made of silver into the eye.
There are some who have the eyes of certain people born with a red eye, covering the pupil and remaining on the paper and turning outside, seeming like a sapphire rose;
And the procedures are such that the patient puts their head into your hand, then move their eyes, and do this to all parts of the body, ensuring each movement is coordinated with what you're doing, and hold them with strength.
Then start with the first part of the body and move to shave it all off until the end of the process, making sure not to hurt the eye during this task.
Make the cut like what we have described for the cut in the nail and with the small movements of your hands when dealing with bone, just as the figure shown after this chapter illustrates;
And when the cut is completed and all the flesh has been removed, use turpentine oil or distill it into red colander and similar corrosive medicines, then place cotton soaked with this oil outside where heat can be applied to promote healing.
And if it stays still, and you can feel a lump under the skin, and you doubt about an abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that soothe an abscess;
Then return to your work as long as it is clean, and thus make several characters attached inside the eye by this resemblance.
However, nevertheless, it must be that you adjust the treatment of each natural weak eye; and of the injured way, in the work of iron;
and do not leave your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb endures that work.
When there are red veins covered over the eyes, they tolerate their work and weaken the sight for several days.
Thus the profession is at first to look where there might be a lump, in which it belongs, and besides, and there is no other disease besides that lump; Therefore, perform this treatment like so:
Instruct the patient to put their head in good health, then suspend all their veins throughout the body according to their wisdom, and have the sinews be finely doubled according to this shape:
And let there be two ounces in stages through one half according to this form:
then carefully guide those fine veins, and let blood flow out the hour after another, until you see those veins being removed from the eye;
and make sure not to damage the eye at the tips of splinters, and do this operation in midday sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you only remove the veins.
And when you have done this, if you drip a necklace of green and red in the eye to corrupt what remains due to congestion.
And if you don't have the ability to treat it at that hour, make a plaster for the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it be for several days until the pain is soothed and assurance can be taken that there's no pus accumulation, then start again following this method until they are healed.
And this is the form of strength:
The stent so called "arissati" is a fistula:
When you treat it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and if it does not heal, then it is infected in the place you cut into the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that there is, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is fully exposed, and you see the decay and darkness, if you remove it with all the tool that I described;
And call it "hard head", and shape it from iron inside the head ring, and make its points like a file as it is in this form:
And place your fingers on the affected bone, then turn it between your thumbs, and press your hand a bit as long as you know that this corruption is removed;
And do this once, then restore the affected area with medicine that has been prepared for drying.
When the muscles are joined, and there is a new birth of flesh, and the veins of the arm are joined, and remains like this for 40 days, and it does not heal nor becomes abscessed, and no bad accidents come about, know that it is cured;
If this does not work, so long as there is no other matter than to bring the fistula back to the neck of the nose according to this form: And when you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and through wet medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the cut according to this form, and place the iron point of three angles, and the shaft should be thinned up until its head as shown here:
Then place the metal against the bone in the eyebrow area, and keep your hand away from the eye socket for a moment, then turn back to fully apply pressure until it pierces the bone. The patient will feel pain because of the wind entering through that point as long as you hold your hand on their nose;
And then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the sweat begins to appear and harden the skin, let the matter drain out of the nose; if it's something lighter for the patient.
When the eyes open fully and completely, and there is no dislocation or thinning of the lung, you should bind the patient;
Then heal him, then apply suction cups or reed without piercing to stimulate it. Then place on the eye a mixture made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarsaparilla, and then press on the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths;
And the method of folding the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and double each one in four, and then place them one on top of another according to the amount they require.
Then fasten it above with a hard bandage, and reapply the suction cups to suck without piercing;
Then leave the suction cups on and let the eye be held day and night, and if it becomes loose, you should tighten it somewhat.
Then check the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good;
if not; then redo the plaster, cloths, and bandage along with the suction cups until it heals.
from the bursting of a blood clot When tears come to the iris cloth, then open, and come out like pieces of resin, and is unbelievable to see;
Then if you see it congealed, the veins are such that you pierce at the root of the part above just until below, then pierce another hole where there is double thread by the weeping area; and make her pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its placement;
then grasp the part of the double thread and tie a section of the iris externally, and tighten well, then remove the needle and place wet woolen bandage abundantly over the eye;
and leave it until the thread tears with the iris, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
And no less, the wound is restrained by the sleeve of each part of a circle of cloth, until it has healed.
And if the eyes show a great appearance, if they pierce through the delicate fluid that flows beneath the eye and reaches the nose, and expel the moisture, then insert them quickly.
Then remove it as soon as it has healed.
This disease, which is called "alcunnati", can only be found where blood that resembles descending water accumulates in the eye, and it is not real water;
And the way this disease appears is that you make the patient sit upright on an apparatus and straight, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move them until you see the blood come up to your eyes. Then let it burn, do not descend and let light disappear, behold the wounds as they should be.
And if it does not descend at once, know that it is severe, and if its descent from the eye isn't as we have said.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and do this on the corneal membrane, cutting from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the eye comes out;
And when it has come out, if you pour in the hot water mixed with honey, or hot water boiled with fennel and honey, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
From tears of the eye We have the indications for the use of water in division and what needs to be pierced; if conducted according to health.
It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from light in front of the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly but not too tight.
then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are opposite each other, or on your right hand if the eyes are side by side;
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are opposite each other, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are side by side;
then place the tip of the instrument at the crown through the thickness of an inch in that hollow behind the eye to the lower part of the tear duct, then firmly move the tool called "almagda", and turn your hand until it pierces the hollow behind the eye, and feel as if almagda is reaching into the empty space;
And it is necessary that the measurement of the conduit amygadal be at the fullness of the measurement of the space which exists from the corner to the end of the darkness; And it is the crown of the eye;
You will see the bone in that paper due to the transparency of the corneal fabric, and then place the tool up to it where its sharpness is, then express through one channel after another.
Let the patient now feel it descending, so they see the wounds before them and the instrument in their eye.
After having the patient lie down, and if the sharpness ascends on the second channel, apply force with the tool, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, then gently remove the amygadal tissue by twisting your hand slowly.
And then insert a little bit of emerald water again, and remove the eye from there. Then place something wet like a woolen cloth or oil-soaked material over the eye and apply plenty of egg white, and secure it with healthy oil.
Yes, and those which belong to our type, place them on a common grid with plenty of egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then it is necessary that you take the tool called 'alberit', of which here is its form:
And then pierce only the conjunctive tissue, do not go too far into it but make it subtle, then add alumina, as we have said.
And at the completion of the work, provide the patient with a suitable aftercare, in which they should sleep on their back in a darkened room;
And avoid all movements, and choose light meats for them, and do not move their head to the right or left, and tie them according to their comfort until the third day;
Then let them move within that dark house, and test their sight, and make sure they see nothing, and then place the bandage again until the seventh day;
And it is not right that you perform this during the time of the treatment or after incision now, but you should apply this because the fever rises quickly.
For the removal of abscesses, you should cut it open on the seventh day, and then remove the pus from him who heals the abscess;
And when it is relieved, you should release the eye and place it above its socket with a little gold to cover for one day, and then stay in that dark house.
And leave the house gradually and gradually, transforming into his own form;
Know that no disciples should interfere in this situation. And one came to us who was from the East, who told us that elsewhere they would make gold into silver, by which one can transform water, but nevertheless I never saw anyone do this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; And perhaps this is something new.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see them;
and truly spider-like: And these have the head of those from this very subtle thing, and at the back there are three angles down.
None of them produce or hatch mixed creatures of various kinds; some seem like scorpions with the feet of pies.
And if there are such or if it has a mixed char with red color, and if it has a well-colored char. Therefore, for the char that is well-colored and not mixed, you must place the patient between your hands facing the sun;
Therefore, for the char that is well-colored and not mixed, you must place the patient between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and apply honey to those characters, and expel them out; For hold what you are able to bear under the sharp fine tip on one side, until you know that this flesh is entirely bone.
And if there remains anything that we cannot bear, if you open it all to extract the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing stays inside; and if it is without elevation, or if there's pus-covered, if you support it as it should be;
and if it's malignant pus, then hurry and cauterize until the pus is stopped and all the flesh is bone, then pour or drain it with hot water or vinegar. If it doesn't heal and moisture reaches the palate, know that there is pus;
And if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is marrow above the bone, to which no instruments come to cut:
Therefore it is necessary that you sew with a piece of linen thread slightly thick, and use your hands to do so, ensuring there's about one inch or at least this much space between each knot. And place the patient's head with the thread on its neck until it can be pulled through, and pull the thread gently until it emerges from the neck into the mouth;
And this is often done with children in schools, and it is a simple matter for someone who wishes to do it;
Then hold the head that comes through the neck with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and be aware to handle them one after another as we are or by the thread.
Perform this until you know that the new flesh has corrupted that tissue, then remove the child, drain out the blood, moisten the child with Egyptian ointment, and place him back on his mother's nose as before.
Do this for three days or longer, until the ointment corrupts all that is remaining of flesh;
And then place a piece of opium on the nose for several days until it heals completely, and if it requires dried medicine, then use it;
And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, to which one distills oils and medicines or on the nose:
And it should be made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp or a cane, and guide it in the same manner;
And if you see this, make a small incision, ensuring that the instruments are filled for purging of the head;
and have your hand ready on the head so that when you heat the oil or any liquid, it doesn't move.
Of the flesh around the nose
Many times, in the head under the nose, a disease is born which is called "Telul," it grows and becomes large enough to be seen;
And because of this, you should prepare the wound at the beginning, and heat up the bone completely, then place either the cautery or the burning medicine onto it;
And if you delay to cover it until it is large, take care if it is hard, if it changes color, or if it has poor sensation:
If you do not touch it with iron at all because it is a trapped abscess, for when one cuts it once, it causes great discomfort to the patient;
And if the abscess is of soft material, not of wax or something alike, and you see that it can be completely cut, then let the patient feel and cut it without fear, and treat him with things to dry and restrain.
Know that when continuity solutions come into one of these venous loops, profit is little, for in some people.
Therefore, you should ensure that this does not happen to anyone else; if you see that the wound is still fresh with all its blood. And then adjust both lips to a stitch, and treat them until they become clean;
And if the lips are quite dry on both sides, it is necessary that you cauterize all parts of their cheek until they heal. Then join both lips with a stitch and tighten them, and apply powder after powder of dragon's blood and ground incense; And apply on the powders a piece of plaster of strength or another hardening plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of the stitch is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
from abscesses of lips
Inside the mouth of abscesses one finds hard lumps, resembling seeds sometimes, smaller and larger;
Therefore you should open the mouth and cut through each lump, and take them with forceps, collecting them in every part.
Then use the hand after the vitriol incision, until the wound has healed;
and then apply salve, and cleanse the wound of dry things until it becomes clean.
Many times, something white arises on the gum that is adhered to the tooth, which the old would call "albulus";
So you must hold it with the forceps and remove it at its root, and leave to cure where blood or blood has flowed.
Then place on the wound vitriol powder or other drying and desiccating powders;
And if this flesh returns after the incision and happens repeatedly, if you cut it a second time, and apply cautery: if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they gather at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, with scaly and rough layers. And sometimes they come together as black and yellow teeth with worms, until the decay reaches the gums, and the teeth stink.
It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands, and their head in your holy direction, and pull out the teeth or scales until nothing remains. And thus make it black and green, and yellow and other shades, until they are all removed.
And if we remove what is at the first reason, it's good; But if not, start again from the second day and the third, until you have everything taken care of;
And know that teeth require various types of instruments to work, according to what the procedure demonstrates, because the root that comes out of the gum has other shapes than those that come between the teeth; And these forms and others be prepared with you.
It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you keep the tool as long as possible, because it should not hurt at all; because this is a very sensitive substance thus one should not have any excuse for the irritation.
So when the patient is constrained to bleed, it must be certain as to which vein to pierce. Many times during a person's illness, and fearing it might be toothache, and believing it to be holy toothache, they would draw the pus out of the good tooth; And yet, they never leave the pain alone for such reasons, until the evil is removed, because we have already seen fit to do this among the soldiers;
And when you are quite sure of the tooth causing pain, it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth to all half inches thick in order to keep the gum from spreading everywhere;
Then move it with your hands or by the use of fine tongs at each click and click, until they are well locked in place, then firmly secure the tongs; And have the head of the illness in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the right tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take none of these tools and push them inside each part gently, and move it in the same way you did first.
And if it is pierced and eaten, you should fill them with cloths where they were lost; and if it is gently squeezed with tongs, so that it does not break while being squeezed;
It must be opened quite carefully between the gum for the extraction of the tooth.
And make sure you do not break it well, and leave a part of the tooth, awaken the patient to greater pain from the root than at first due to its cleverness.
And beware that you do not act this way as the ignorant surgeons do, who break the bone every time due to their haste and boldness, and do not bring in what we have told you;
but bring it once by the extraction of this great disease due to the roots that remain, or due to the bone they break, as we have often done;
And when the teeth are pulled, if you wash the mouth with wine or salt or vinegar;
And when bleeding occurs during this process, which often happens, if you use vinegar instead for washing;
And if that doesn't work, then apply the cautery.
The shape of the tools you use to remove teeth should be such that they have long points and large handles; this way, they won't bend when you are pulling out the tooth.
And these are their shapes: And may have large members that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth for holding as needed.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in butter or oil inside the mouth for one or two days until the wound heals. This allows you to use forceps called "algefi" which makes the patient seem like they are being taken care of;
And they should be made as within a file, for this is its form:
And if they do not want to come out of all these nails, it is necessary that you reveal the flesh entirely along the root and place the tool called "althalus", which means palanchet, as its form is shown here:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if its root jumps out of this, it is good;
If not, assist with all instruments, from which the following forms come:
And if one uses this tool which has two points, as its form is shown here: and there are other tools placed according to the order of teeth, and this tool that appears to be large tweezers, as its form is shown here:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that very few bone-breaking instruments exist; And also other instruments, which are not even mentioned;
And the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and disease indicate to them. For there are parts of diseases where the old ones did not teach any instruments due to the diversity among others, or if it breaks part of the body or other bones, or if it rots, so they search for the appropriate tools that I have mentioned and help with gestures; this is their form:
And make them large and firmly holding for holding the bone, so it does not escape, but can hold and remove;
and then restore the right side with suitable medicines for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, if you insert all of this instrument to it:
When the tooth does not appear as natural to the body, and its shape is ugly, even in virgins, you must know whether the tooth was born after the tooth, and it is not in its right position, and one cannot see or file it:
then the groove; and if it is next to the tooth, take this instrument as described above, and it resembles a small beak, and it should be made of steel that remains sharp:
And the tooth is inserted gradually into one's hand due to its hardness and because you don't move others, and if it can be seen that we could grind it, then this tooth is ground with a single grinding wheel as it is formed:
And also like the iron used to make needles;
And with the file on his teeth, tapping lightly in my hands, so that it does not move until it breaks;
Then in the end on all smoothing tools, and if it's too sharp and it hurts the tongue, it's necessary to smooth down the roughness until it's even, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the front teeth are struck or through impact, and if the patient doesn't vomit what he eats when they don't leak, and you've treated them with restricting medicines, then it's not valid;
if they need to be restrained by a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
And let the children neither too large nor too small, according to the size of the gap between the teeth;
And if you see the teeth moving, take the thread and the needle doubled between the two healthy teeth, then place the head between the molar teeth, as long as there is another tooth that feels properly to the healthy tooth on the other side; Then continue the dressing until you reach the part where you stopped, and gently and carefully tighten your hand, as long as it does not move at all;
And tie your thread to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then grip the heads with tweezers, and align them, placing them back between the healthy tooth, making sure they do not irritate the tongue;
And then let it stay slightly restricted like it can endure for some time, and if it slips or the bands come undone, if they need to be held tight by another band;
if it could endure for the entire time, and this is the shape of the roots and the arrangement of the healthy second roots and the diseased second roots as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if it's removed and placed back in its original position step by step, as we have said;
And don't try to replace it with anything inappropriate that can cause harm and never make the shape of an ox's bone tooth; instead, place it back at its rightful spot where there is a defect, hold it in place as we have described, and let it remain and serve for as long as necessary.
No time does it come from within the tongue or nature, so one is born thus; or by chance of aed wound;
and the actions are such that you work at the mouth with the aid, have your head in good health, and lift the tongue;
then cut the nervous bundle from the base, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or lack, this is a sudden wound, so force the hook and cut from the base that connection;
and make sure the incision is not too deep by mistake, for there is an artery underneath;
and when you have done so, if lift the wound that is pink and moist or cool, then put under the tongue a linen tent;
And the disease afflicts the patient every night, so that his limbs cannot bear it.
And when bloodletting occurs, place the blistering iron over the affected area; And if it doesn't heal with that, apply the slow-acting cautery to it, which is good for such cases; Then continue other treatments until they are healed,
And if you see that it has turned red or black or hard, so that the patient doesn't feel it, do not touch it at all, because this is gangrene;
And if it is deteriorating to the point of pus formation, and there is moisture present, then use vinegar, and apply a subtle poultice, and cure from both sides; And if you can't find it in your work, then apply vinegar to it until it's clean, then return to your work as long as you're extracting all force;
Then lift up the aid and sail, and perform other treatments until it becomes clean.
regarding throat abscesses None of the nodes inside the throat called "godaths" come into being. They are correctly named as the two almonds, and when you treat them, just like what we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care:
If it's hard pus of little sense and colored, don't touch it with iron.
And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch it with iron either, for the circulation of blood; But let it until it is heated, then you will take it away, or it would break by itself;
And if it has a whiteish hue and the root is delicate, when you have prepared your instrument for use, but first check that the abscess cavity has cooled down and is calm.
Then have the patient face the sun and keep their limbs warm. Let them open their mouth and place the surgeon's hands on their tongue, pressing it all along the instrument, as this is how it should be done;
And may it be made of fine silver or steel, as sharp as knives:
Can you press the tongue against this entire instrument? And you see the abscess. If so, take the thimble and insert it into the almond-shaped area, pressing harder than you can with your fingers;
And take nothing from the cloth with you, then apply the paste to the tool, of which this is the shape, that seems like some strength; And always the head is mended, one place after another, and it's very sharp, made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this tool present, then use forceps, as depicted here: And so be sharp on one side, and on the other also;
And when you have applied the paste to one of the almonds, apply it to the other in the same manner. After incision, gargle the patient with hot and very warm water, and also with cold but still warm water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle them with cold water or slices of cooked pomegranate fruits, or bay leaves, or similar things, until the bleeding stops; Then proceed with the treatment as long as it is effective;
And no other abscesses are born in the throat except for those resembling almonds, if they are treated accordingly just like the two almonds.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, which is commonly known as the small senseless abscess.
And it was so tightly closed off that all the woman's throat, she could not breathe through the blocked passage, and therefore could neither eat nor drink, dying if she had remained in this state for a day or two.
And the abscesses had ascended so much that they had caused two rows of blisters under each nostril.
I acted quickly then, piercing it with an awl, and then pulled out the thread, extracting a large portion of the pus;
Then I cut another piece under the other nostril, and on that one, I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue.
After removing the bile from these abscesses, and I took a part of it, yet only a little blood came out. And so the woman's throat duct was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine from this moment onwards; I didn't stop cutting that abscess for a long time.
And the abscesses would recur immediately, filling up once more the area that I had emptied out, until it grew very large.
So I treated and cauterized inside the throat: And it didn't grow again;
And I depart from these parts, and may God make of him after me.
regarding the eye
When it descends to the eye, and it becomes elongated, if it is called "perpendicular";
And if it is large and round, it is called "eye".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the wound has calmed down and healed, and it becomes subtle, then it is necessary to apply it;
And the one that is round and assembled, and is not lengthy; And if it is bloody or dark red or black in color, then it is necessary to avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger for the patient.
So when you see the person it is necessary to do as I have said about their shape and length; make them stand in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the tool we mentioned earlier. Then press the anus into the abdomen, and proceed from there, and cut towards the second organ as I described in the incision of the two glands.
So it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess which extends beyond the natural boundary;
for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech;
After making the incision, use what we have explained about the incisions of the two glands, and treat until it has healed.
And if the patients have fear about cutting, it is necessary that you apply means to their sense of fear in the process of cautery.
The way of cautery involves using an active instrument. And let the patients place their head in your healthy position, and then press their tongue with the tool that we have mentioned or described in the chapter on cautery, and hold it firmly with sharp forceps, so that they are neither too thick nor too thin. and when using the strength of this tool, as it is shaped:
Have your head covered with a cloth or place the medicine there, like spreading on a spoon, and apply the tool evenly over the entire area.
And let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus can drain from their mouth due to the medicine inside, ensuring it doesn't descend into the throat, causing choking.
Then hold your hand over the entire area of medicine and apply pressure to the affected area for half an hour, until you see it being absorbed and the irritation from the medicine is alleviated.
And if you see this, take cotton and cover it on any tool, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, then wrap the tool with all the cotton on top of the reed, until the cotton dries inside the organ.
And do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash after three or five days.
And if you need to repeat the medicinal cauterization, then do so, and after the cauterization go around inside the organ with it, using cotton dipped in butter, and clean the area that is inside of the medicine;
And let it be rinsed with cold water, and also do gargling until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than cutting, nor does the cautery cause harm;
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take chamomile, hyssop, and rue, as well as basil, camomile, parsley, and similar herbs. Gather all or some of these into a single pot, fill it up, and bring the contents to a boil;
And ensure that the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot place the heating tool according to this manner: And it should be made of silver or iron, and if one of the shoulder blades is placed in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises through the nose to the womb, as long as the womb is necrotic;
Afterward it often recurs, until the womb dries, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the coming out of pus, for many things occur; And do not perform such action when there is an evacuation of pus from the abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a reed and put a piece of an eggshell inside the patient's mouth, so that the fire does not get too hot on the patient. For the eggshell does not produce heavy vapor in the mouth, and this is a good treatment combined for health.
Many times it occurs in the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing;
So it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
And that which does not allow you to see it and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit this way that the meat be cooked in the stomach; By chance if it is pushed out by vomiting;
or the patient swallows an sponge piece, or a belly button piece, or a lettuce root, or a fragment of dry bread; and attaches to the sponge with a thread, and then swallows it. and when it reaches its place, if it opens, and then expels force;
and if it does not come out with the force that we have said, take an instrument of a plumber according to this shape:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised in height; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all be obstructed, nor push any bone inside;
And it is better for the patient to control the tool, because they should control or the thing becomes loose; If the patient is breathing properly, or if they apply force evenly to all parts of the tool throughout, as long as they maintain their strength.
from the saliva of the throat
There is no healing without surgery, as I have explained in the division, through the treatment of medicines; And if this doesn't prove beneficial, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then have them press their tongue with the tool I've told you about.
And if you see blood, guide it out with every small fraction, or with fine tweezers that suffice for this purpose.
And if this doesn't work, take a piece of a hair and push it into the throat of the patient, then remove or stop the bleeding with the end of the hair by twisting it. And do this often. And if you dye the patient's body with water throughout the day.
Then take a full view of cold water and open their mouth, then pour it in gently without them swallowing it, and move it often with their hand. And as soon as one feels the cold like water, they die.
And if it doesn't relieve as we have said, subdue the patient with asafetida, using the tool I mentioned in the section on asafetida application.
Do this many times, for it will relieve without causing harm.
And the method of applying the heat involves taking an iron pot containing glowing charcoal, covering it with a thin lid in the middle, and placing the patient's head on that part.
Then pour the steam into it, and have the patient place their head end in their mouth, then seal their mouth so that no steam escapes but only goes up to the nostrils.
And now let the urine flow, and if it does not come, then start the fumigation repeatedly;
And let the patient endure thirst, and consume salty things and such, and do not drink any water;
And then it's necessary for her to depart through this governance.
And the shape of the tool used for the urine, when one can see it, resembles curved tongs to be inserted into the throat; And it has the appearance of a surgeon's hook, and it is rough like sandpaper, so that whatever she takes, she cannot leave it;
No descriptions of pus exist, as per the recollection that comes after from one and another in this book, and they vary in puncturing and shaping;
And this is in two ways, one being in its appearance itself, and the other due to moisture.
And the second way is for those limbs they are within the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those in the foundation, and the abscesses of the internal body are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in action.
And if it's about abscesses, one should not prick them until the body has accomplished its completion according to its nature;
And for those that need to be pricked when they are formed, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses located near joints.
And when abscesses are located at joints, and they remain swollen internally, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint have become corrupt, which is a cause of constriction in that limb.
If the abscess is near the main member, and you delay the puncturing until it's fully formed, it will harm the main member.
If it is near the base, and you puncture it or do so as if it were fully formed;
And it is not proper to puncture an abscess that has not been digested and fully completed its development, except for those located near the base, which might inflame internally and result in a permanent passage; And cannot heal thoroughly.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the abscess perforation which occurs according to completion, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of the fever, and the reduction of the pain and redness, and the movement and hardening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
And it is necessary that you allow the perforation to occur where more depends of the abscess, and at which it opens.
And let the perforation occur along the length of the course, and where it opens near the hands or feet, or at joints and necks and arteries, and everywhere else equally where there is no curvature. In these cases, according to that member.
And when abscesses are in the fatty part of the body, it is right to wait until digestion has been completed before making an incision, as we have said.
For if you pierce him in front of this, so that poison from his body flows out, and is full of little worms; and by chance harden the lips and deepen beneath him.
And if in any abscesses they pierce according to the breadth of the body, as per what the body requires for its members.
And it is necessary that you take small pus-filled spots, small cuts; and in large pus-filled areas, large cuts, and many fissures according to the size of the pus area;
and if there are such pus areas where it is necessary to clean out the wound and cover it. when it has become as white as linen and is healing, and when it has softened, you should do this as one does for boils:
and if there are such that split into three corners, and those that one covers like the leaf of myrtle, like boils;
And if such injuries or there is made a round cut, and other cuts and seeming to be cutting.
For those who lack a head, such as an abscess on the surface, it is necessary to pierce them thoroughly;
And it is necessary when the abscesses are large and have formed a significant boil; if you pierce them, do not drain all the pus at once, but drain only part of it; Then let the abscess subside up to the other side, then leave no further treatment alone; Do this repeatedly from big to small, until all the pus has drained;
Similarly, if the patient lacks strength, or is a woman in her pregnancy, or has young children, or elderly and feeble people. For when the attempt shakes every time with the expulsion of pus, perhaps causing death to the patient, and you do not notice it.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, if there's an opening, observe if the wound from the abscess is small; And if it's a flat cloth, you may use linen or wadded cotton to dress it; And if it's large abscesses with many perforations, you should make a tent in each one so that they will press against each other;
And if you have cut through some of the skin in the abscess and sealed it internally, you should fill it with old cotton or linen thread debris without moisture, and tie it until midday;
Then the meat, and treat with ointment as long as it is sound.
And if there is bleeding at your operation site, apply cold water gently and easily, and moisten the cloth, then place it on the affected area repeatedly.
And if the bleeding continues obstinately, you must apply government and treatment, and use the powders I have mentioned in this book for your hands. If it's or around a river, and either where your veins are or where your abscesses are is full of nervousness, then it should be that you put on moist tents and cloths soaked with wine and heated oil;
And if it's an internal issue and the patient is in flesh, then you should apply moist cloths with water and oil or wine and cold oil until the third day as we have said;
And then remove and clean the abscess, treating as it should be done, until it heals.
And it must be universally known in treatments of abscesses:
Or you have been told how one should prepare before performing treatments for abscesses, and here is this chapter.
Tiny abscesses come from the head, and they are in the form that we find them on cloths, like under a gooseberry's skin, and there are many that resemble these.
There are those with much moisture as well as those where there is moisture too, like in puddles;
And there are those that are hard and stony to the surgeon's blade, and there is no doubt that it hits an artery and does not go against this.
And the procedures of cutting are such that you must test with all the instrument which is called "intromission", from which the following form comes, something it contains.
For if it contains moisture, if you make the incision too long.
And when the moisture is drained, one scorches without leaving anything behind that contained this moisture, because it returns immediately once nothing is left.
then dip a cotton swab in Egyptian ointment if it's available; if not that, in water and vinegar, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; And these concern those who are tormented by night.
And continue with the cotton, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure it does not last through the night;
Then treat the wound with ointment as is suitable, until it heals.
And if the abscess holds its new fat content, shape it according to this form, along its length; And pour your wounds, and apply the scorched parts from all sides, and place your entire treatment for bleeding in the coat where it lies;
And if the artery does this differently, then do what I have told you after.
And similarly, treat if it's tubercular, and cut and cure as I have instructed you to.
And when it comes to cutting on the tubercular abscess and moist area, it's easier because they contain less blood. And if in any of these abscesses or heads there is no moisture, and of these newly formed abscesses that I made or came to be like a head of an old woman;
And I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; And even if we had let out none of it, we would have made the wound as well just like with a stone.
In other abscesses coming or going from the head, those that come from the neck and the roots of ears, the incision should be as long as possible depending on its location, so that the pus may easily exit;
And the treatment should be done accordingly.
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and around the armpits, and in the throat, and never come to any other part or corner, they are soft and are intertwined with each other.
Each scrofula is properly within its bone, just like a nut and an abscess at the head, as we have said; And the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
And the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are tele's that contain moisture, and some that don't want to comply with health.
In this then, that you see in good position at the shoulder pit, and it resembles the color of flesh, and mute from each side and is not pressed under the collarbones nor around the artery or in the conduit, and is not deep;
It's necessary that you lift it from above, and scrape each part of it, and the two lips at the base should be exposed when needed, just like we have mentioned concerning abscesses in the head;
Move it slowly and cautiously; make sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, nor let out too much pus but don't cut deeply either. Keep your hands steady and avoid cutting too far ahead, making sure you only cut what is necessary.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to open further, apply vitriol or any powders that stop blood flow into the wound, and restrain the bleeding; And leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to rot.
And when your blood is replenished, return to your task, until you complete it;
Then follow your duty's sign if there remain any small warts, if you scrape and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the wart, it should not be that you scrape off that wart from its root, but tie it with a thick double thread and let it fall out by itself, without harm;
Then apply old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound, then proceed with the treatment.
And if you remove all the pimple, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, then there should be no excess left due to the size of the pimple. And it is necessary that you cut to reach the root of it, and draw out pus, and stitch it as we have said.
And it is necessary that you cut to reach the root of it, and draw out pus, and stitch it as we have said. Those warts that occur due to excess, puncture where they appear if it is fatal;
And the puncture is done like the one before mentioned, in dependence, then he administers ointments and similar things with it, so that she (presumably referring to some medical treatment or substance) decays what has been left from the decay. And when the wound is well cleaned, with ointment treatment encompassing flesh, as long as it remains clean.
The old ones spoke and mentioned the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone perform it in our land, and that is their written word.
For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the slit in the throat which is called "the epiglottis" be removed; And it is not advisable to do this, because all the veins and the heart of the patient are close to those who have pus in their mouth, or in the throat, or in either lung.
When the illness is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut through three circles or four with a small slit right across, between the second two circles. The size of this slit, according to its depth, not in the cartilage;
And if the lips allow for the division of the epiglottis there should be no fat, and the vessel is long outwards.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary for them to extend the throat skin throughout the inch, then cut into the bone until they reach the vein; Avoid the blood vessels if you see nothing, and then expose the sinus, as we have said;
And demonstrated by the section of the windpipe that leaps out through the limb that is broken, and by the loss of voice;
Let the wound remain open for a space.
And when the time has passed during which one doubts strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound neatly together, and sew all smoothly without the cartilage;
Then administer medicines that promote flesh growth, as long as it is sound.
Albucasim, instruct that this should be done until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient's life judged to be at an end, and when there is no further improvement. Then operate the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe properly, and they inhale through the wound, and thus you prevent death;
And to command the old ones to leave the wound open until the disease's illness passes, and it has passed after three or four days, and then they commanded to stitch up the wound and clean it, as long as it was being cleaned;
And I will tell you what I have seen. I see that a maiden took an iron knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting parts of the windpipe.
And I was called to treat her, and found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and indeed, it wasn't accompanied by a severed artery or exit route other than the throat, and the veins bled through the wound.
I hurriedly treated the wound, and after she was healed, I cured it.
And the maiden spoke with difficulty for days and eventually returned to her usual state of health.
Therefore, I say that in the surgery of removing the epiglottis, one should take care not to harm it.
These abscesses are called "neck hernias," and they are large, dark-colored abscesses that occur frequently in women.
And there are according to two manners: natures, and accidents;
or natural has no disease.
And the accidents occur in two ways, of which one resembles that coming from us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from our veins; and there is fear, and it should not have any cuts made except in those who are small, and the proof and search extend to every intervention: if you find it as soft as the back of our hands and cannot puncture any vein, then operate, just like we operate on our hands, and treat every part completely, if there is even a hint of disease. And search thoroughly then, and treat it as is appropriate, until it is healed perfectly.
Many ways there are for us, of which I will mention all the similarities;
And it is fitting that I should mention all the differences that exist between us and them.
I say that in the case of an infection and fever, until the body's eruptions have subsided, and after completion of the putrefaction; Then the fever and heat subside.
In the case of us, there is no heat, fever or pain, and contains its own sack, which is akin to the flesh's cavity and starts out similarly as a gooseberry, and grows in size;
And they are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and little color as I have said in the division.
When you come to the treatment of new injuries, it is necessary that you first inspect and inquire about all the tool which is called 'the adjuster', according to its shape or chapter that follows.
And the method of incising abscesses is that you take or find the more moistened part than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers a little bit by little bit, until you know that the instruments have pierced the pus, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the pus, and be careful not for it to jump out.
If moisture is running down, whatever its color may be, cut it in the same way as I have said for other abscesses;
And if no pus comes out after the pus, you know it's greasy, then cut it in a cross shape, and hold it with tweezers, and gently burn each side from every part; guard the place where it lies that you may pull out the grease alive with the rest.
And if you cannot bring it whole, take it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if there is nothing left, the body will come back through many times;
And if there is a little left, and it does not trouble you, use powders that are corrosive and wet for the wound, restrain the wound, apply things that soothe abscesses heated, and treat it with other treatments until it is whole;
And if the wound is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat in this manner what needs to be done with what is injured flesh.
And if the vein is too large or another way you hurry, use the inside of a roasted grape peel and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound cooks, and rest with blood boiling; Then return to observe what has been delayed by the newness of it.
Here are the forms of the interstitial organs, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small;
and there are three pairs of them, which are called "albaret," and one is called "breb," and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small, to encompass the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like needles that one uses to cut the roots, and they can be of carnelian, or iron, or silver, and golden ones are considered better for cutting away at the swellings of fistulas;
And there are three ways: Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the defects.
The shapes of the horns resemble sheep, as you see here:
and for horns that have two curves in three ways;
and for horns with three curves, they also occur in three ways;
and for horns that have two curves, and horns with just one curve, they also occur in three ways;
And all this must be considered in their location.
The tip of this is to be sharp, and for some it does not cut fully but only from one side, which we shave because there is no vein or nerve;
And these interventions are answered with responses placed in gloves, so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;
and there are three ways: greatly, little, and moderately, as you see;
and one uses none of them except in the sensitive parts such as legs, arms, nipples, and bones, and similarly to these;
and no other small tool resembling whips' thongs is ever used according to this form, to which bleeding is stopped: And it is placed in the healthy part of the body, at the junctions of veins and arteries, and never according to this large form:
None of the men's nipples swell until they seem like women's nipples when they begin to become corrupt;
And remain deformed and swollen, and those who wish to cure them should treat according to this form of this line .b. until .g.: Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to promote healing on the wound. Sew together the two edges of the wound, and continue treatment until it heals;
And if the mammary gland is deformed downwards and is flattened due to its size, like it appears in women, if she cuts it into two pieces above, by two similar slits; Due to which the larger line contains the smaller one until both ends at last, so that this pattern follows according to this form, from this line .b. up to this line .g.; Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges and remove the fat. Apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, as well as anything necessary for treatment until it heals;
And if it is not healed, or the incision has not been fully completed, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to bleeding, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive ointment; And leave it until it starts to heal, by adjusting and massaging the wound with fat, then continue treating it until it has healed completely.
Abscesses that originate in the armpits are manners of hard scrofulas where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those who contain moisture should have their limbs cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess has drained out, fill the wound with old cotton and let it be for another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscesses resemble scrofula sores, make incisions as we have said in cuts for scrofula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
When the artery is cut and skin is stitched above it, many times abscesses form, and similarly, this occurs with a punctured vein and abscess.
And if one knows that for the artery, such abscesses extend fully inwards; And when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense the constriction;
And when it's due to a vein, reasons of escape are apparent;
And it's madness to deal with this abscess, and similarly when there are boils and sores and in the neck or under other things, and they are very large. So it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment. One who has a head wound should also avoid this, and in the one who is inflamed by an artery, do so above the skin for as long;
Then work in small sections, and beautifully remove the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed;
Then stick inside one thread, and make it pierce to the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled string for two loops, just like what I taught you in removing the arteries that are in the temples;
Then take the limb which is between the two loops of an introducer until the pus which is inside is released and thereby relieve the abscess;
Then administer the treatment that irritates the wound, as long as the thread enters. Then treat this with ointment, as long as it is clean;
And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you color your hand with what you can of the pus all over the skin. Then pinch out the needle from your held limb, and pierce it, and place two threads, so that you lead them from the other side; Then tie the pus or vein, just as I told you, or one part of the two shoulders with the thread;
And if you doubt that the child will survive, should you replace another needle with all its thread over the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
Then remove the abscess as long as there's excess, then remove the excess slowly and leave what is tied;
Then place on the bandage a moistened cloth in wine and oil, then apply treatments of poultices and ointments until they are healed.
Also like abscesses appearing in arteries and veins, they appear on nerves when they are cut or due to too much work, and similar things.
This happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are, and this is the symptom of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and it can be found in various positions without pain;
And when one restrains it in form, the patient feels pain, and is not completely satisfied by its harmony with the body, but over the heart;
And moves in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor to the side or above, and that which is in joints does not fit well when covered with iron: By chance it would result in tightening; And that which is on the head or forehead causes the skin to become inflamed.
And that which is on the head or forehead causes the skin to become inflamed. If it's an abscess and small, if you have tweezers, then grip it at its root;
If it's large, lift it at the spine, and scrape, then cut into the bone, and stitch the wound together when it heals completely, and treat until there is no pain.
No disease happens in wombs or anywhere else in this way, and it is a sickness that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and has subtle roots, and the knots are large;
and there are both small and quite large ones;
And I saw someone who had two or three in their abdomen that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had small roots, and were cracked, and corrosion occurred right away with moisture.
I copied them and found that in one, it weighed XVIII ounces, and in the other VI ., and when you look at the incisions during surgery, if you see that the muscles are moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist with a subtle root; If you handle it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
If you handle it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence. For the surgeon often experiences excessive bleeding from the wounds, and if it exceeds your capacity to control it, then quickly use the cautery tool;
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron cut, then take a properly made silk thread, tie it around the wound as we have instructed, and leave it for two days;
And then hold it tight, and do not stop pulling the silk thread until you feel the bone, feeling by touch;
And if the roots are large, if they scare you when handling them for the stomach, but you should only remove half well, then apply the cautery so it doesn't heal over;
Then treat the wound, and ensure you do not remove the gland that is of a red hue and lacks sense and has milk in its appearance.
For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
When the bladder burns The appearance of the boil comes from a searing injury or tear in the scrotum, and it occurs on the abdomen. In some instances, there are boils found elsewhere, similar to what might happen in other cuts, where blood escapes from veins or arteries as one would expect, or due to wind-related issues;
And if it's through the scrotal injury and from the boil opening, its color resembles that of pus, like the color of flesh, and it is a mild thing without much pain, and opens through various exits. And if it's due to the exit of an intestinal tract, then it is more varied. And when one presses it with their fingers, it returns and then comes back again, and by chance gets stuck, and enlarges quite a bit at the entry from the bath and through strong labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a mild thing and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all;
And if it's due to blood, then incisions are made through these signs with large and hard abscesses, and they are punctured according to a quantity; And if it's due to wind, you feel a twitching in the pulse, and the veins show when you look at their appearance as resembling blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness.
And if it's due to wind, you feel a twitching in the pulse, and the veins show when you look at their appearance as resembling blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you allow the treatment to proceed. For there is doubt and fear in such matters, as I have explained or outlined in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
And if their appearance suggests it's the intestines or the liver issue, you should instruct the patient to scrape their bile ducts, and have them stretched straight out, then cut all around the belly. Then instruct them to sweat between your hands, then proceed inside the body where you have indicated, spreading it throughout the entire area, and leave half of the pus above on all parts of the large curve; Then bind it around with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let the binding be tight.
Then have half of the pus spread out under the binding and press your thumb's tip down, and look at the intestine. If you find it caught under the binding, release it and press the intestine to the back of the abdomen;
And if you find the boil, take it at the waist and remove the excess with it;
And if the artery or vein opposes you, then insert them firmly within, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and place the two needles close to what you pierced;
Then pull the pus three times over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the limb until it heals, and discard the dead flesh on its own; when it becomes subtle and yellow, then treat according to what needs to be done, and cleanse the pus as we have said;
when it becomes subtle and yellow, then treat according to what needs to be done, and cleanse the pus as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat and heal the limb according to what needs to be done, and stitch up the wound.
treat the gangrene As we have discussed in section six about the symptoms of gangrene, and how to handle it with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment;
And let us say that gangrene spreads throughout the flesh, and great caution is needed in treatment, and it was said by the old ones: when gangrene is present within a limb or can be removed, such as in the case of gangrene affecting the nipples, in cooking areas, and similar conditions; one must remove everything when it begins.
No one has ever been cured of this in front of me.
And when it's in its place or can be removed, as we've said before, it is that you purge the patient once of black bile;
Then make the surgeon do it if he shows signs of congestion, then prepare the patient well to perform the operation;
Then remove your gangrene or ulcer, and shave everywhere, and cut the bone from all sides without leaving anything;
And let the blood flow freely, and clean the wound well with your hand or nothing, and if sudden bleeding goes against the incision of an artery or vein, stop the bleeding by cauterizing until the bleeding stops. Then the physician performs another treatment until they are healed.
From dropsy We have explained the symptoms of typhus in the division, and how the aqueous assembly is made, and the signs for each symptom, and the treatment done with medicine, and that which is treated by iron.
and should iron be used at all in these two symptoms: This is to say, peritonitis and typhoid fever, for they are deadly conditions;
So when using medicines for this symptom of typhus called "eclites" with medicines, and if the treatment doesn't help, then observe whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides typhus. Such as stomach pain and other symptoms; If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
And if you see the pus very green and it has no other illness but just dropsy alone, and it's neither too young nor too old, then you should operate this way: Lay the pus upright on your hands, and have assistants press the abdomen while pouring boiling water onto the lowest part of the buttocks. Then take the sharp lance according to this form: And let there be two divisions of this. With the tip, and it should not be so narrow that it can only go as far as the intestine when you insert it, and you cannot bend it;
Then look to see if the dropsy has extended towards the intestines: If you must cut above the mouth of three quarters to the right under the knife; And if it drops down due to liver illness, then make your cut on the left side of the mouth of three quarters.
And if it's due to the kidneys, then on the right side, and it must not be that the patient lies over the cut where excesses could flow into the weak one;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pull it out, and lift your hand from the sputumil between the skin and synchial just as when roasting in proportion to the size of a nail or until completely charred;
Then pierce the synchial until the sputum flows out for eight parts; this is the water period, then pull forcefuly and use this instrument as it's been shaped: And it resembles a thin silver rod, or a nimble spider or weaver's shuttle, and in the part over there is a small nodule; and on one side, it has three notches; and two from the other side, and one more from another;
and when dislocating the shoulder, it is cut as if it were a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers draw the feather to represent:
at its peak is the armpit, so when the surgical instruments reach the water (meaning the body), they now descend above the instrument;
then empty out half or one third, for if you remove more than is appropriate in that moment, by chance the patient might die due to the release of their spirit from their body, or they could faint, or they could be brought close to death;
But adjust according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the virtues' dispositions signify in the patient, and its pulse;
Then guide the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held due to the heat which anaesthetizes the tip which is on the spine, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this manner;
Then use the instrument on another day, if you see that the patient is suffering from it, and take a small quantity of water;
Do this every day, and refrain from using too much water until it no longer lingers but just a little amount of water.
And if you doubt about the patient and leave much water, if the treatment of burial or sand becomes hot, and by a little sweat or bath in the sun, and if it gets dyed to drink; And the treatment of medicine dryers until it becomes dry, and cauterization on the stomach and on the liver and spleen after the removal of moisture, as I said before.
None of the times children are born without foreskins on their penis, or if the foreskin is small, or it isn't in its place.
If it suits to pierce immediately so that one does not miss much pus very finely according to this form:
Then insert or attach a thin bladder pipe, and secure it in place for three to four days. Or until when it needs to urinate, remove the stops, allow urination, and then reinsert.
And in case there's no need for this, because the urine that comes does not allow it to be closed off.
Those who want their teeth to grow properly, if they seek a treatment with a cumin clove, as we have said, it will widen.
Those who do not have a bladder pipe in their body become lame, because none are born with a bladder pipe at the tip of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; And they cannot impregnate because the matter cannot come all the way to the spermatic duct, and it is a terrible disease.
And the way to do this is that the patient lies on his back, then positions the head of the penis and the scrotum similarly as wide as a feather, so that they are evenly spread out in the middle, just like it should be.
and protect yourself from bleeding that happens many times, and if it occurs, if you stop the bleeding of the one who stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
Of the pimples of the penis Many times, lumps appear in the penis, and there is an ugly appearance;
and among them, some are malignant and others are not.
it is necessary for you to remove them with great care, and cut and clean all of them, then apply Egyptian poultice on top with a moist cloth. Then the ointment curer is effective until it is clean.
And if bathing is malignant, with pus and discharges, it is necessary that you prepare the fire cautery for it.
When you have done this, and if the bath is in his skin with the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary for you to remove the bath that is inside first; And when they have joined, if the treatment is external.
For when you treat them together, it is necessary to ensure the head of the penis so that it does not get infected, and leads to decay and corruption in his penis or anus.
It is necessary to remove all that is dark and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour which is made from walnut shells and vinegar, then continue with other treatments until it becomes clean.
And if there is bleeding during the operation, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The fire cautery assists with two dispositions together: It means, that is to say, during the expulsion of blood, and in case of decay;
And if the penis head is corrupted and removed, it's necessary that you apply a rod of garlic to the penis or lead the penis down; and let the patient expel afterwards.
And when the hair comes to cover the head of the penis which is found on those who have not undergone circumcision, or where it has occurred due to a wound or an abscess, then it's necessary that you cauterize with a heated instrument until the strings are released and the patient can expel the urine from all around the penis.
And if it's difficult to discuss such things, then you should cauterize on the foreskin near the head of the penis and the skin;
Then, after two or three days, you should insert a thin linen pad soaked in cold water, that it may rest on the surface.
Circumcision is not an interruption of continuity like other wounds; Still, whenever we undertake this work of our own will and for the children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and do so in the most gentle manner for their health.
I say that the old did not instruct circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who practiced circumcision during the day, and under force, and for every newborn baby;
so it was made in a careful manner because there are two layers, and by chance if one is cut above the other it may leave an opening below. Or the patient receives heat, and the pain is doubled, and at the healing where it was doubtful there is not secure the point of the member;
and during the healing of the nail by chance iron escapes and runs through the work, and many times they grow like that which do not require healing and I have noticed this.
From the circumcision done in force on the entire length of the thread I have found the value of experimentation, because the forces cut as well above as below precisely.
For when you squeeze your hand, if cut in the shape of an 'I' it will tense all around; but let the thread be well inserted between the skin;
and let it be done in the way of the first operation so that you make the child think when they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the shaft of the penis only and then let them relieve themselves in all the ways that you can.
Then make him stand between your hands straight, and place the strength between your hands or beside your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then place your hand on the penis and blow or hold it firmly, and guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its knot of the head with a double thread, and tie it gradually from one stitch to another;
then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its knot of the head with a double thread, and tie it gradually from one stitch to another; and hold it at two fingers' width by the second loop in the pouch and the index finger tip, and place your fingers between the two loops, then lift the knot quickly upwards and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow gradually, as it is natural; And put powder on and over the powder I apply glue of a half-cooked egg yolk mixed with rose water, stewed with oil rosy and fresh, and leave it until the next day, then continue to treat with other treatments as long as they are cured.
The formation of forces in the universe is like this:
Let the two shoulders be in harmony and cut them equally, and let the shoulders also be as large as the arms evenly:
The error in creation happens when the kidneys escape during incision;
Therefore, you should extend it to your nail so that the blood will form an abscess;
And shape it evenly, and if you cannot hold it at your nail, then keep it with pliers, and then shape it.
And if they penetrate for three days, and the one who is in the middle of the penis swells, if he leaves them until the abscesses have subsided, and gently scorch him.
And if he can withstand it like you can bear it, and keeps the part of the penis away from him, it won't harm him at all.
So treat the area of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if you endure a little more heat, it won't cause any harm;
Treat accordingly, as we have said, while he remains healthy.
The retention of urine
Retaining urine is due to obstruction by stone or blood clotting, or bowel obstruction, or a dead fetus, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section;
And if his urine is not flowing, and you see there's retention due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, it must be that the patient should be made to squat. And have his feet placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient so he bends as much as he can. And then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, so that the urine starts flowing again.
And if it doesn't come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer an extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", which has this form:
And may it be made of fine silver wire, like the feathers of a bird; And let the length of the cane be one palm and a half long, and be slender at its tip.
And the method for directing urine flow involves taking a double thread, and attaching it to the small end of the fabric or cotton, then threading the fabric inside the syringe.
and cut off the excess of the fabric and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and massage the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil.
then gently place the syringe in the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the tip.
Then push the syringe ahead until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel the sensation going up to the empty thing, and this is not done exactly as ordered because for him who led her where she was going, she was twisted.
Then stretch the thread all the way with a gentle tug, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out gently, making sure to properly drain the urine.
And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and ensure that the patient feels the sensation of emptying.
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction gathers there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if make everything to the instrument that is called 'clepsis', and this is its form:
It's sealed, and if it has been closed for three days: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
And let the legs be positioned where the medicine could correctly affect the penis without adding to its sensation. If moisture can be removed, drain it when necessary;
And when you see your medicine flowing into the bladder, place the patient under moisture and guide him to the one who is doing it.
Then drain the moisture with the knife, and afterwards firmly set the guide in place; If the moisture enters inside now, and reaches the bladder, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the form of the subtle colic where one irrigates the bladder:
And can be made of silver or lead, and the shoulder joint is higher up;
And down to the breast or to the joints of the shoulder;
Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture that you are going to irrigate the bladder with, then tie it between the two breasts using a good strong double thread, and heat one end of this moisture on fire;
Then apply a potion to the head of the bladder in the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder until all moisture is present, as long as the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, then pierce it smoothly around. Then thread a strong string through these holes, then join the circle like one would join a loop, and place inside what you see of moisture and water and steam, and tie it with the tool.
And do this like you did for the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have spoken about the methods of stone extraction and combination of medicines in this section.
And I have explained the difference between a kidney stone that is wet and another, and all the signs, and in which kidney one should operate with size; And in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will explain it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that there is an obstruction of the bladder like an obstruction in its subtlety;
And at the urethra opening, and massage the patient's penis, and let it harden many times, and then return to its original state; and in these cases of obstruction there is a base;
and the healing is lighter for children until they are four years old, and becomes more painful in elderly individuals, and it's somewhere between childhood sicknesses and aging conditions;
And it is easier to treat those with large stones than those with small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient by laxation, in order to remove all the bile that is within the intestines. Because it clogs up every time when trying to cut into the stone.
Then take hold of the patient by their limbs, and lift and move them downward, so that the stone descends into the bladder and comes out only once below their waist;
then have them sit between your hands, with their hands on their thighs, so that the bladder is fully tilted downward;
then inquire and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in space, then hurry to cut on the stone now.
And if she doesn't urinate upon touching her whole length, moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, for if the patient is female; or your middle finger, if the patient is young and mature. And place it at its base, hold the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if it moves in the neck of the bladder;
Then press with your finger, and push the stone outward where you see to cut.
And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to spread his right hand upwards over the kidneys, and use his left hand to stretch the skin beneath the kidneys in the area where the cut will be made;
Then take out the mucus-filled stone, which has this shape: And make the incision between what is between the kidneys and the base, not in the middle but at the edge of the left lung;
And be straight on the stone, and your hands either on edge or foundation, and be tied such that it passes through, and is wide outside but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
By chance if the press is made on the base or foundation, it might leap as though it were doing its own work;
Know that there may be stone parts with corners and edges: If it is strained to exit;
And if it's on parts below, resembling a thorn and round, from which the exit is light.
Above, where there are corners and edges, make the size larger;
And if it does not jump, then you should pull with the tongs that are like a file at their tip, to force the stone so it doesn't escape; For you should use a sharp curved instrument to remove from beneath the head;
And if you cannot use it like that, if it's large or small and blunt, and if it doesn't have a smooth surface, then coat it with vitriol;
And if there are more than one stone, remove the larger one first from the neck of the bladder, then proceed upwards, then pull it down forcefully, and after that, remove any smaller ones if there are more.
And if she is very large, then it would suit to let her out, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out immediately when his kidneys cannot join;
but try to do it with the forceps, or using them as pincers, until you pull it out piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, apply the incision with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, compress it, and place above it a wad of moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the inflamed wound; Then bind the hair on its neck, and don't untie the knot until three days.
And when you remove the bandage, wash it thoroughly with water and wine vinegar, then apply a diaper ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses occur in the wound and blood congeals in the bladder, and is kept there by this means, causing retention of urine, which is known to do so that without jumping with urine: So burn in the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will inflame the bladder, and damage it;
Then cleanse the wound from water, pus, and scum, and assist in all manners that you find, until it becomes clean.
And it is necessary that when you treat all the wounds, you tie both legs together and apply the remedies to the body.
And if the stone is small, and it comes from the penis, being lodged inside, and cannot allow urine to pass; If you treat as I have instructed, cut him many times, and forgive the loss caused by this treatment. I already know this experience like this.
Take one iron branch according to this form, and have it pierced at three points on each side.
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
Then cut in the penis lightly until you reach the stone; And turn the drill with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can penetrate the stone from another side;
If it comes quickly, then press your hand on the one that is stuck inside the stone which is within the penis. If it breaks soon, and jump with urine, and the patient will feel relief;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that obstructs it, tie one thread around the stone and the other over it, then place the penis between the two threads, then force him out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; And treat it as long as there is bleeding.
From the stone of women
A situation arises where a stone might be found in women, and when it happens even once, the treatment is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is still a virgin;
The second reason is that one cannot know who is naked even when she is modest, even if she is pure.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing this art of hands;
And the fourth way is that the stone of the woman might be larger in circumference than the stone of a man, so it requires deeper cutting and great fear. If necessity leads to this, then you should seek out someone very skilled, and lead them to see where you are, and if you don't find a suitable place there, not even from a modest woman.
And it addresses a fine task in the life of women, where a woman who understands part of the art, and is commanded to do what you command about the incision into the stone; and carefully consider if that woman is a virgin:
and carefully consider if that woman is a virgin: therefore, she must push her desire or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, make her follow the path or direction of her desire and seek the stone; I advise her to push with all her strength or power under her desire in the body, and press and urge her left hand against the bladder in its form.
And if she finds it, it's necessary that she move it from side to side as she enters the bladder until under, as long as she comes to the root of the thigh;
Then cut on the stone near the root of the thigh in the middle of the bone, right where muscles are attached, and feel the stone in that area. and don't move his hands near the stone or beneath it, and cut him at the head first with a small incision.
and don't move his hands near the stone or beneath it, and cut him at the head first with a small incision. then open the incision to the head, if you feel the stone increase the wound as long as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that many types of stones exist:
This is to say, there are small and large ones, rough and smooth, long and round, and that they have corners.
If you understand the signs to know the outcome.
And if it doesn't hurt you, put lime water on it and keep it there for an hour until the pain subsides;
Continue with your work, as long as the stone is strong, and have at hand the tools I told you about for extracting stones in your home to assist you in your task.
And if it does not weaken you, and it's an artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the site and hold firmly with threads or strips, and do not repeat this procedure. Leave the stone alone and don't try to extract it, in case the patient might die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has calmed down and the limbs are restored, then return to your work while the stone is hard.
Rice in water is nothing else but a mixture of moisture or white slime, which resides under the skin that contains an egg;
And it is called "slime," and in no case is it truly within the egg membrane if one considers that it might be another egg; And this is the skin between the white fat, as we have said;
And that does not have that pit. And the formation of this gelatinous growth is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads that substance.
And whenever there is percussive impact on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it turns yellow like jaundice, or it lacks redness, or is black, or watery white, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to recognize this assemblage, for if it is white like what we have said, then it indicates pus, and its length is similar to that of an egg, and does not protrude from the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the actual fabric, then the pus comes with part of the egg, and because of this we think it's another egg;
And if moisture is between the skin of the kidneys and the white fat, one will feel it well;
Thus, when you know the color of the moisture, if it proves to be throughout the entire insertable square area, from which its form was previously. Following then those who come after the preparatory step, judge by what is inside.
And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be treated according to our ability and the fullness of their body;
then place it on its back, on something slightly elevated, and cover it with cloth.
then sit on its left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the penis to one of the two ribs under the kidneys;
then take the spatula tool, and hold the kidney skin between it long until beyond the penis, and make the cut all straight along the kidney skin up to the white fat, and gently burn through the fat slightly according to your ability;
Then pierce it completely with a sharp needle, and remove all the water, and then insert your forceps, and there will be no water upstream.
and do not touch the vessel of the kidneys, but only let it be the needle. remove everything or piece by piece his intestines, from his stomach, for if you do not remove it carefully, the water will return.
and if the egg jumps to your work, then reposition it in its place when you have completed the work with the needle.
then join the two parts of the kidneys' vessel with a stitch, then treat it like other wounds, until it heals.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the veins that are hanging, in case there's a risk of blood loss.
Then cut the cord above the scrotum, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the fever is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches; And if you treat the other part in the same way as the first, then drain the blood, and apply wet wool soaked in rose oil to the wound;
And if you treat the other part in the same way as the first, then drain the blood, and apply wet wool soaked in rose oil to the wound; Then put another piece of wet wool soaked in wine and oil on top, and place them over both the foreskins, then cover with double cloths, and secure it all along as per this form:
Then take two cloths and fold them into strips according to this resemblance, have them assembled by sewing in the waistband of the trousers, one of the shoulders being placed at the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow;
And the other two heads at the second angles, and let all assembly restrict in the loop of the winding.
And then this rod of the cautery is medicated in the place of iron size, and you take the subtle fire cautery tool, and remove the skin from the horns, and heat it as we have said, so that the white fluid containing water becomes visible;
If you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that white spot like oncinas, and scorch it with this subtle fire cautery:
And you remove it in all the ways that you can, as long as you have not exhausted all possibilities;
and remember that the fire should not touch the egg;
Know that this work is more safe; And be careful to prevent the flow of blood, and heedful that the cuts are made properly;
And if anything goes against your wishes, or an abscess occurs or bleeding or any other issue, then address the thing that goes against you according to what was previously explained.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not wish to undergo this operation due to its horror, then proceed with a perforation, as I have instructed you, and know that when you are well assured by the meanings we have explained that the watery part is there, make the patient sit on the raised seat; Pierce the abscess in the part under it, across its entire spongy area, and make the puncture long along the artery;
And let the cuts be wide enough, so that all the pointy tools fit;
Then place cotton on the wound, bind it, and leave so that the removal of the water can occur, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary that you press a feather or a tool used for draining water in dropsy patients into it, as its shape was described above;
And if the wound is open, know that water returns and it will be gathered after six months or so, and when it gathers in the same way as before, then this is how the disease passes during its course.
Know that in this branch of the tree there is fear in multiple arrangements, which is why I believe it's better to let them alone;
And I will tell you about the work and appearance of the abscess.
So then, I say that many abscesses come from horns or animals; similarly with birds; and it's due to some cases.
This means that it is due to the spreading of sour and feverish substances, which affects birds, or from impact;
And the color of the abscess matches that of the horn; And you won't find any pain, and it's an abscess of discomfort;
And sometimes an abscess of hard and stony material, with a reddish color, never comes from the heart or from within a vein.
When it's due to blockage of an artery, if you recognize this by the characteristic abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and it is not right for you to touch it.
This type of swelling caused by a vein bulge can be identified by its layout in relation to the touch response when pressing with your fingers, and one can properly measure this on this sort of appearance, and on other parts as well; And when you feel the smoothness of the veins, then they are at your wrist, and have a white spot beneath them, and release all suspensory ligaments from the egg.
If the veins are already stuck to these limbs, then it is necessary that you remove the egg, and take the pulse.
And if it is at the liver or within the vessels, then it must be that you remove all this tension, and round off the cut.
And if the birth of the child is behind you, then you should take it all in hand, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your operations are completed, then fill the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals properly.
This is an abscess enclosed by a wrapping that looks like a collar around it, with the softening of the lymph nodes, and the patient feels severe pain when it moves;
And the treatment for this disease is as thorough and lengthy as what was described before, yet still, we will explain the procedure for it according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull them upwards with your hands under the lymph nodes below the waist, to all the vessels close to the penis, and press gently on their masters, and stretch them out in a formed manner;
Then cut deeply and broadly through the vessels in their place, while they are exposed, and then scorch from each side, as we have said about the removal of arteries which are in temples;
Then prick with a needle where there is thread and tie it at the original place where the thread came out, and tie it right away to the other end. Then cut straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
Then treat the wound in the same way as others or wrap it with bandages, so that no vessel bleeds or fills one of the lungs;
for nothing wrong comes from this, and if all the vessels come into view, then it is necessary to drain both lungs with all the vessels; If the lungs lose their elasticity due to cutting of the blood vessels, dry out, and cannot be helped.
The events concerning this branch occur through the division where it splits or twists, or by extension on the belly in the area of the galls, because the intestines descend from that pathway to one of the kidneys;
And this pathway is where the twist occurs or from the extension of it, and these two ways of many reasons arise:
or through impact, or by jumping, or by bellowing, or by the lifting of a burden, and in similar ways;
And the signs when it's due to extension of the twist, are that they occur little by little over a long duration, and do not come suddenly; And the pus is even up to near the forehead, because the syphilitic pressure affects the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it's an obstruction by suffocation; it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the pus appears varied, close to the skin, and this is due to the pressure of the intestine and the body behind suffocation.
And the bile never descends with the intestine, it is retained there, and causes great suffering to the patient when pressed.
And in these treatments with iron for fear, because it is advisable to avoid them.
And the way to treat is that you order or instruct the patient to have their hand inside the wound, pressing on the intestine if it can fit in; then sew up his neck. Between your hands, lift his buttocks;
then stretch the back upwards, and remove all the skin around the genital area until long; then insert into the waistband one inch according to what you need to open the wound, and do it in such a way that he could be able to pull them out;
then burn the syphilitic lesion that is under the skin of the genital area until the white part of the lesion is exposed from all sides;
Then direct your finger tip to where the heart beats, to the area between the white yolk sack that lies under the egg's skin and between the second yolk sac, and displace the one behind the egg, also in-between the second yolk sac;
And then guide your right hand inside the area of the heart beats, and place the white yolk sac at the top on your left hand, and gently move the egg towards the belly using all the yolk sacs; And instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie the one behind the connection;
And check with your fingers if there's any part of the intestine wrapped or hardened white yolk, and should you find nothing, release it inside the belly;
Then take a needle or it have thick thread made of many threads, and insert the needle in the rear part at the syphilitic sore, which is after the skin of the thighs; Afterwards, cut off the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; Then join them one over the other in a manner of a cross, and bind the syphilitic sore, as we have said is under the skin of the thighs, with a strong bandage of two parts; Then cover the hairs of the threads, and bind them tightly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that are being sewn can enter into them, preventing any pus from spreading; And make the binding according to the first line long two fingers of that length, and after these two bindings leave a space for the sore under the skin of the thighs, as wide as one finger; And after all else according to the roundness that the eye bears;
Then cut in the area beneath the skin of the buttocks, until you reach the bone, and the buttock, as we have said earlier;
Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and use the thread that we have mentioned. And not once is the white scab burned that we have said, after incision, by fear of blood loss. For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it leaks from it;
And if it takes too long to bleed, then immerse it in hot water, and place on it what we have said, until it bleeds;
Then treat the wound with other remedies, until it heals completely.
of fatty hernia
In this part of the treatise, I never see anyone who dare to perform surgery with a metal tool.
And the old ones said that it is made like a bundle of twigs bound together with string, in such a way that you bind the vessels after gently cutting under them.
Then come to me, and clean out the abscess of the one who is working, while his vessels bleed;
and treat it as we have said, until he is cleansed.
Never release the air during an operation, as we have said, and open his wounds;
and do not remove any of the intestines accidentally, and if they do come out, it's a little, repair them every hour;
and always, if he stays too long in this position, suspect the wound or gangrene, until the intestines come out;
this happens due to the extension of gangrene which is within the intestines, as we have said, because it has extended, then softened and swollen his wounds and opened;
And the treatment involves the use of a cautery, as we have previously mentioned;
And it is treated with iron in this manner: And when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then lift the upper part of the swelling according to its size, up to three times.
And then remove the fat that is under the skin where it follows, and take hold of it and put it in front of the fat.
And press it towards the front of the abdomen, then cut the two protruding parts of the fat under the fat above the root of the hair with the knife, and cut both.
Then remove the root of the hair from the fat, do not touch the fat nor spread the egg or any other thing, as I have instructed you in the treatment of removing worms from the intestines; Then he heals through the treatment of wounds.
Then he heals through the treatment of wounds. And when you handle the children, if you cleanse and treat the wound, until it heals.
The surgeon is constrained, and does not appear in the operation, and the cauterizers are burned in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin around the anus
Many times the skin of men's genitals becomes soft in some individuals, because the fluids within are softened, and it can be seen.
And it's necessary, when one wants to treat it, that one allows the infection to spread over his back, and one stretches the soft skin on the natural skin;
Then join the two lips at one seam, and if you see fit, make the first cut to remove the excess of the soft skin in three or four firm seams;
Then stitch between the seams, and treat it like other wounds, until it heals, then remove the thread.
of sexual restraint
Know that castrations have been forbidden in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to speak about it in this book;
And it is necessary for only two ways:
One way is for the doctor to be knowledgeable about how to respond when asked, and know the treatment;
The other way involves needing to know how to restrain certain animals for our assistance, such as goats, sheep, and cows, and others.
So, I say that the art of restraint is done in two ways: One way is through attraction, or through creating an opening.
In the method of using attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its horns soften and during that time; Then take hold of it with your hands, until they are healed and you no longer feel them.
For the tail correction: It is necessary that you dye the beast and press its flanks with your left hand. Then tie the breeching, and operate on each hoof when you have well scalded them;
and let no wound or subtle wound exist under the vesicles;
And this method of correction is safer than that done by attraction because with attraction there might remain some remnants of the genitals causing the beast to crave lust.
Then treat the wound until it has healed.
Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways at home: One way is when between the two genitals opening as in the natural figure of a woman, or having hair, and sometimes passing urine.
The other way is for women, having at the wrist like a penis and two openings.
And the treatment for fever and illness is such that you treat all the joints properly, and the healing process like other wounds;
In the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the kidneys, if there is no treatment.
A tenting joint is an improperly placed joint in the natural part, as long as it looks too ugly to see; And some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is necessary for you to remove the excess of the tenting joint with your hand or thumb, and do it gently;
And don't cut too deeply, lest blood spill out, then proceed with another treatment until it is clean;
And there is another form that arises at the mouth of the womb and vulva, and anus, and by chance it jumps forcefuly, and according to its appearance it resembles a cow, hence they called this old ailment 'Cow Disease'. If it is necessary for you to perform it, just as we said about the scabbing process and wound care, until it has healed.
Erratic if the essence of the female is not understood, or if the parts are small; And is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come about;
And is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come about; Or it's due to the nature of food, or subtle deficiency or excess, and is prepared externally on the vaginal area, or in the chest, or below, or wherever.
And to conceive, and during childbirth, and by chance the flowers of having.
And the knowledge of this one is through the observation of bile.
If the blows are near and visible, direct your hands or stick to them.
If it's sweet and delicate, and close to the two hearts, if you hurry, then do this:
Place your two fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spreading her legs;
Then form both hearts until the delicate syfac is done, and it covers the burns;
Then take wool and the grease of oil, put it on the heart, and make the woman lie each day in bed, so that it cannot weld.
And if it is hard and dense, then you must crush it to resemble the shape of a hazel leaf.
If the burns are from flesh, then suspend them under the oven and cover;
And have the medicines to staunch blood, such as these, dragon's blood, incense, mixed abundantly with one egg;
then administer a thick layer of beeswax, so that the wound does not stick together;
and do this for a while, and then cover it with a tent of dry linen;
then perform other treatments until the wound heals.
And when there is new flesh from the wound, if it needs to be treated according to this method, provided that these abscesses are not drained. For an abscess in the wound that has become infected, one should not touch it with fire.
Of hemorrhoids Thromboses are openings of veins where without proper care, and when thromboses become old they turn into varicose.
And we have spoken about the appearances of this in the division, and the signs, and I will speak here about those that result from treatment.
I say that bleeding and sourness, when they occur through the anus, do not appear by smell, only is their treatment with iron indicates them.
Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can smell, and those are what one can treat.
It follows that you should put the woman in a cold house, then prepare the altar for the tongs, and place the copper on its roots. Then dust with medicines to restrict blood flow, such as achillea, dragon's blood and incense, and similar items;
Then bind her limbs to the frame for an hour, then immerse her in cold water;
And when the bleeding stops, if it occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, bark of pomegranates, and oak galls, and similar things. Then take millet flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and use this poultice on her back.
And if it stops bleeding, this is good. If not, if she is to apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury;
Take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or aglantier with old wine, and apply this to your wound.
And when the abscess rests, you should treat the wound with ointment until it becomes clean;
And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles the head of asparagus; if it suits, cover it as I have instructed for the thigh. And then continue the treatment until it becomes clean.
Many types of abscess come up in the female body, such as gangrene and pustular abscesses and herpes and tumors and fistulas and hemorrhoids and inflammatory abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Therefore, I must explain in this treatise the discharging abscess that occurs during pregnancy, which is not among those abscesses that are sealed by pus.
And if you want to understand the work of iron, look at how these abscesses are hot and feverish at their onset, and full of heat; and if it turns red, you can see it. So don't rush to pierce immediately, but let it die until the pain is alleviated;
and then have the patient sit on the bench, and place two small stools under their knees so they can lean forward, supporting themselves with their back and bringing their feet up towards the body.
and spread his buttocks widely, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a strong bandage.
then have him turn his head towards the right side, and prepare the tool that will be used to open the mouth of the furnace, which comes next in this process;
and it is important that when you see the tool being prepared, you mark the depth of the furnace first to know whether what enters within the tool should not go deeper than its, and not hurt the patient; And if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the skin with cloths, so that the instruments do not harm;
And it is necessary for him to place the nozzle of the instrument above and to sharpen the instrument.
And when the abscesses open and one performs it by hand gently, if it is necessary to cover at the head, at the base of the ear;
And when the wound is emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound moistened wicks in olive oil or in dry green oil;
And place the wound cloth at the bottom of the skin, and place it forward on the skin and on the bottom of the linen cloth that is moistened in water or vinegar be cooked;
Then the surgeon, after two days of ointment application as directed, until it is healed;
and then each time raise and drain the pus and wound with a concoction of water and honey, and afterwards with water or roots of lily and aristolochia which have been cooked; then resumes ointment application.
And if the wound is placed on the marron herb, you should avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have instructed in the previous section.
Of childbirth The first step in childbirth is to recognize the shape of natural labor, and you'll notice signs when a woman approaches full dilatation, and it's best to wait for her body to signal its readiness.
then the baby forces itself to be born; once you recognize that this birth process follows its natural course, and is exiting from its head, and the rest of it accompanies it;
And when you see these signs, it must be lightly pressed on their belly, so that the child comes out soon;
for when it descends on its head, there is the second with it, and it is born with his excesses eliminated through good purification;
And this otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes only on his feet, and emerges in the head or the shoulders, and in the hands, or on its belly, or in the groin, and is transformed by chance at its neck, and through other malevolent configurations;
it requires that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and aware of error and deception, and I will show you all the configurations as to how one should assist them.
When the child comes forth from its mother by natural process, and the woman labors greatly in childbirth, and her strength is weak, if she sits on a chair, or women hold it;
and from her nature derive the essence of fenugreek when cooked, and then place the baby between her fingers the small spatulum which is described here: and cut through the secondary bone, and scrape along her nail until all moisture within it is removed;
and keep massaging her belly until the child descends; if it doesn't descend, then one should administer a treatment with fenugreek poultice and sesame oil to the woman.
then make her take a deep breath and sneeze, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: If you are now caring for an infant.
And if his two hands have strength, it is necessary that you gently and gradually straighten them; And if they cannot enter, make the woman sit up and lift her legs up; Then pull down the chair onto the ground, and shave the woman, so she does not leak upon standing up;
And if his hands cannot enter and the infant is dead, cut off his hands with the knife placed beforehand, and extract the child, straightening them equally.
Of the birth of the child above its feet When the child comes to its feet, it is necessary for him to lift them up; And then turn them gently and gradually, until they are even;
Then gradually stretch the fingers a little at a time.
Can he jump up to his thighs, if the command is given, and make him snort with consideration; If he can jump, may God will it.
And if it does not jump as we have said, if one makes it move little by little, until it is according to the natural form. For then it will be slightly.
And if he doesn't come as we have described, tell him to take the extract of a tree, and oil of juniper, and ground gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and place the mixture of the woman's nature both inside and outside this ointment, then have her sit in hot water up to her ribs;
and when she is moistened all over, have her wear the myrrh collar, and place it on her, and let her keep it for an hour; Then make them sit on the chair, then make them sneeze and hold their mouth and nose, and stroke their belly lightly, for the fetus is jumping now.
From the child's position on its knees. When the child comes in this form, if you place his hands gently and gently; then support him at his neck, and let his feet hang down below, and rest in bed; and bend his hands gently and gently, then place his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions as long as she is hanging down below; and if the child is not jumping, take his feet and move him gently, then move his head upwards, then I squeeze your hands; and guide the baby gently and gently; And instructs the woman to bear as much as the child comes forth.
From the birth of the child that comes out with one hand on the way, It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lie down and walk;
If she can't walk, have her sit up on the bed, and force her legs into position;
Then apply the massage that I've described;
And if she doesn't give birth, have her sit on the stool, then try to guide the hand back; And pull out the child according to its natural shape, have her sneeze, and instruct her to bear as much as the child comes forth completely.
From the baby's exit through its neck, and let her spread her hands, and her buttocks turned towards her mother's back. It is necessary to apply a medicated ointment on your hand, then turn it gradually and gently, and stir it lightly.
And when it is even, if you place on the muscular texture of elevation and oil, as we have said, then instruct that she moves gradually and gradually;
And when you have done this, if you make her sit on the seat, and instruct that she prays; And make her sneeze. In the same manner for the rest of the second part.
In the same manner for the rest of the second part. When it comes in this manner to the end of the first part, if you perform the second part on your finger until all moisture is drained;
And if it grows both on her face and around her neck, when you perform this task at the belly button, ensure she is not restrained, and may die the infant;
Then pull out the child inside, as long as you have placed it in such a way, and instruct the woman to not try at any time:
from the delivery of twins Know that sighs often occur, and every time three or four are born; And this is not an unusual thing, and little happens. Two are unusual things, and do not live at all, if there are fewer than none;
Two are unusual things, and do not live at all, if there are fewer than none; I know that they multiply and are destroyed by the sun which devises them, which is bound to the belly;
And every time emerge as naturally as all under, just as we have said.
And if they are gripped harshly, as we have said for treatment, and there's a subtle opening, then do it quickly and gently in the way she does. And proceed like this so as to promote health. of many children
They are not made in the Maris I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII or more than XV times, and they are all formed like an infant by the measurement of their glory size, and it is necessary that the hand knows all this, for such a thing might happen to them. Do it according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman who has lost her dead child or whose abdomen is affected, as I have explained in the division section, and if it doesn't come out, then you are forced to intervene with your hands. It is necessary for you to know if she possesses sound virtue, and if she has not experienced any accidents or fears of death;
It is necessary for the woman to be attentive on her back, and have her shoulders tilted forward, and her legs lifted;
And let the minister prepare in two parts, or bind her to the bed so that she is not treated during the descent of the child;
Then rub the lips of the pregnant woman with moist olive oil using a mixture of rosemary and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then smear her hands with these oils and spices;
Then let her move lightly on the pregnant woman, then place her in a position where she can easily move her hips, and prepare to ensure that when the child descends through her head;
If the hairs are stuck in his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or on the collarbone or near the ribs, and if he descends into stones, then they should be pricked or pierced near the middle of the back.
And it is necessary that you cut the hair with your right hand, and place the bend between his fingers of his left hand, and he pushes him with all his hand lightly, and insert the hair into none of these parts that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty thing.
Then insert against another hair, or the third if necessary, so that the extractions may be equal;
And then extend them equally by moving on one side and the other, to facilitate extraction, and make sure that the hairs are toothed for holding during extraction, as this is how it should be done:
And if there remains a part of it, let someone oil some of its skin from elsewhere, and place it on that part, and draw out the other part.
And if there remains nothing at all, place this onion or higher up the body, and do this until it exits completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to being squeezed, then you must wrap around the first, until it exits completely; Then apply the paste at the joint of the sole or in the crease, and similarly do this with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it becomes obstructed during delivery, or if its forehead is assembled with sharpness, then you should puncture the bony spatule with your fingers and make the forehead and remove the sharpness; For you will find it in the instrument which is called 'almidach', whose shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus let them pass naturally at birth by the same means;
and then pull the bones with tongs, and if it breaks and is held by force until it splits, as long as the moisture or worse comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it piece by piece according to what you can do;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must let it out as long as the moisture flows.
And if the fetus is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the movement to the mouth of the birth canal is also slight.
And if it is stuck in the belly or under the buttocks, you must extract it through the skin that covers the hand. And they perform on the belly or the buttocks wherever there is moisture present;
And if the other bones are affected by osteitis and the shoulder remains dislocated, he takes hold of his patient's arm up to the elbow joint, and guides it until it reaches the opening in the joint. Then he performs either the first or second method, and forces him to move;
And if the opening in the joint is narrowed due to an abscess that has formed, it is not suitable for manual labor; rather, it should be treated with moist and greasy substances. And the patient is administered plaster, and if there is an aqueous softening agent and moisturizing substances.
And if the child is on its side, you can make it lie flat, and administer what we have said about live infants;
And if we cannot manage it, then divide the patient into parts, and do not leave anything of the remainder.
And when you have done this, it moves towards that which we said about apertures where abscesses emerge in the marital area;
And if there is a draining of blood, it should be immersed in water and restrained, and he moves towards other treatments.
And I saw a woman who had given birth to one child in her belly, then another followed from that womb, and this other one also died. After a long time, an abscess came out in the belly, and it swelled so much that when it opened, it started to cause severe pain.
I was summoned for treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't provide proper care for the wound.
I placed a strong plaster on it, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was greatly amazed, for the belly does not have any bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I want the wound, and by guiding my hands to bones, until the woman was in the best state; And I covered the woman long enough like this, and it would be somewhat better by the end.
And I have included this chapter only because when the masters find an unusual thing, they should know how to provide help.
After this comes the explanation of the presser, which is included in the books;
and at the second turning of the two shoulders of the two beings. Always, let the horns be more subtle than that of the restrictor, and be made of ivory or wood;
and let the mouth of the pipe be twice as wide, and the margin of the trees must be long, and at least one and a half palms. and between the two limbs there should be two attachments of this same pipe, which must be firm in one and the other, at least half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two attachments are fixed in the mouth of the maris so that when one turns the two horns, they open.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, might be made from a cane or buckthorn stick, according to the likeness of tongs. and has two shoulder joints, as you see, of the length of a palm, and two bones wide;
and when you see the elbow opening to the entire tool, make the woman sit at the bed, with her hands hanging and her legs spread apart, then position both joints together in the elbow, and hold the handle of the instrument under her armpits; then guide your hand over the entire tool in the same way as with tongs, according to the amount you see opening the mouth of the elbow, until the force makes what she desires.
This tool consists entirely of mountains and is multiplied like its likenesses; And when you have equipped them, then the work proceeds more swiftly, and they lift individuals higher because of their quantity for those.
Do not lose hope in the tool you have not equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the mother to retain her urine, and then make her sneeze with consideration, and keep your hands on her mouth and nose; And if she jumps because of this, it goes well.
If that doesn't work, take a cup and make the patient vomit or cover it, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wife, such as poppy, rue, fennel, chamomile, clove and thyme; All these herbs, or none of them, whether cooked or steeped in water on the fire;
Then place a reed or a small straw in the opening of the pot, and put another end into the mouth of the patient, and blow until the steam goes inside the patient;
Then make them sneeze, as we have said. If the second one leaps quickly.
And if she still has no power after this treatment, and it is not strong, instruct her to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or rosemary oil, and then use the hand as nature intended, seeking out a second one; And when she finds it, grasp and extend it slowly and straightly, so that the patient does not vomit during extraction;
But you must gently move it to the right and to the left, and then pull; If it comes and gets relieved.
And if the mouth of the sore is salty and there is constriction, as we have said for the treatment of sneezing and herb vaporization;
and if it is not relieved by all that we have said, be careful not to overly pull during the treatment;
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the sore be tied to the woman's ovary, then anoint with a fourfold herbal ointment enema; If it is applied and will cure, and will come to power;
However, if there is a bad smell coming from the stomach and head and reddens the skin, even when it should be curing. Therefore, then you need suitable fumigations for this:
None of the old have experienced fumigation with sow's ears and dried figs.
The shape of the tool with which one fumigates the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is thus:
And imagine it as a cane, and place the subtle head in the fire, and have the shoulders wide above the flame;
And let the fumigations be over the coals, and stay until the head is exhausted, then repeat another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather have subdued one subtle and misguided: Therefore, then at the birth let it pierce that misguided element according to its nature, and do not allow it to be pricked by sharp pain, and guard against it so as not to touch it;
Then place on wet wool in wine and oil, then the application of ointment until it's clean.
And if you doubt that it won't slip back, place or insert a tourniquet cord and leave the hands bound, and have it removed when the child desires to go into chambers.
And here comes the treatment for those sudden injuries to wounds or abscesses; if it is necessary to cover that hot application: either treat with an ointment, as we have mentioned for the snail's slime.
Fistulas that come from the foundation are concretion, and grow larger than those that come from below, or in the space between two parts, if it's one fistula or more;
and when that concretion is old, if it moves, and accumulates moisture causing white or fine yellow fluid, and always these fistulas are external;
And they are known by those who experience loss or windiness when a person is expelling waste, and sometimes jumping from one to another.
And for those that reach up to the bladder, and even halfway down the penis; They also extend up to the knee joint, and even to the kneecap.
And thus one can identify a fistula that occurs at the base, and not occurring there: And if you pierce your index finger or the base, and insert a fine needle like that of an arachnid or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, if you insert a thin thread like that of a spider, or the hair of a horse, as long as you feel the thread or the hair on your index finger;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no sign of decay or wind or disease anywhere nearby, as we have said: know that it does not pierce through; if you hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is passing up to the bladder or up to where urine leads, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be soldered by medicines.
If it has pierced up to the knuckle, then there is a test coming up to the elbow; if there is no twisting and the pain is not internal, then it means that it is embedded deeply, and it does not warrant medicine or immediate ointment treatment;
and for these Persian abscesses there is no effective remedy other than effort and the vanity of those who intervene.
In those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron treatment, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back with the disease in your hands;
And he raises the legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; Then tie up an arachnid bag, or a snail if there's complexity, as long as you know where the bag comes from.
If the patient feels pain in the foundation, then you should push your index finger, and if it is so that the bag has pierced.
And when you can feel between your index finger and the heart or flesh, then know that it is deep. If there's no movement, one cannot judge properly.
We can still say that quite often we can judge well to heal some, but this happens rarely.
And when we assist like this, one heats up the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned. And it boils all the way inside the fistula until it escapes from under the foundation; And do this two times or three, until you know that these burned-out parts are done, which resemble a bird's feather;
Then use the moist wadding in ointment until that burned part comes out, then apply the ointment to seal and mend it.
If it's like this, then it's well.
If this is done, no other means can make it well;
And if you push it through and does not pierce to the root which is the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent you place a thick layer of tissue or flesh, and you see the opening of the fistula under that layer until it comes into contact with the healthy tissue; If it's applied at the start of the fistula formation, and is held in place until the tent starts to come out, then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent. And the tent will be released, and the condition will improve;
Then remove those hollow hairs that resemble a bird's feather, ensuring none remain.
And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the wound, then apply either fire or medicinal treatment.
For the fire cauteries gather two good things: This means, the scorching of these treated hairs, and the bleeding of blood and drying out of moisture;
Then treat wet tents with butter or ground things, until the pus flows out, and out comes the burnt hair in the flow.
Then treat the wound with binding remedies consisting of hard matter, and apply them as dry medicines.
For when it is healed, if it has truly healed and does not recur.
And if the fistula comes just past halfway through the base, and is distant from the body, you should press on or inquire about its foundation.
If you feel the tent [a term possibly related to a medical technique or condition], and there is II something akin to webbing, silk, or rope inside, or it's about to pierce, assuming only paths of love and hope exist, through administering one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you remove it up to the bottom, or if you can identify the tent [a term possibly related to a medical technique or condition], treat accordingly and then apply first aid;
and do not overheat it, so you don't cut into the structure that holds the foundation, allowing for the eliminations to pass by its own will; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; By chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut from the bottom, either by try or with another tool pointed. Then cleanse that area which is in the wound as much as you can; Then study to heal the wound, and allow the fistula to remain in the part below the foundation:
Then study to heal the wound, and allow the fistula to remain in the part below the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
And always follow this manner for the fistulas: And when you bend the needle in the fistula, and it is located under the foundation close to the skin above, if you take a needle that pierces the head according to this shape: And tie two twisted threads together, and blow the tent into the fistula until it reaches to the head.
If it is deep within the margin beneath the foundation, then remove the thread of that torn one, just like you bend your thumb or foundation.
and pull the head of the thread, and join both ends together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
and hold it each time until the threads join these bars that are between the two, and bind them together.
then treat the wound until it has healed and is cured.
If the fistula does not puncture, make an incision in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep. For it is not proper to perform such placement directly and then proceed with treatment as we have said, until the wound heals.
The shape of the thornlike pustule from which one makes a fistula is quite thick and comes in parts, it slices; And on the other hand no, because one doesn't join what one shouldn't join, as you see here:
Illnesses occur in two ways: They can occur internally, like in the resin's core, whether small or large grains are present. They may accumulate with blood and if one or more exist, they penetrate deep into the structure and reach up to the boundary of that structure;
However, those that remain outside can have little moisture, and even a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
And the treatment for those that are inside the core, you instruct the patient to excrete them through their openings until the core discharges and they become visible as fibers; If you are in a hurry, and use tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then pull at its roots;
And if they cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them by the claw, or with cotton, or from a piece of leather; And remove them with your fingers, then cover them, and apply some hot powders that are used in the place of a cautery; otherwise you apply cautery as it is said or in the chapter of cautery, and treat with other remedies until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot come out, then treat the patient with astringent and harsh remedies for bowel issues to help what is inside or the foundation pass smoothly; if the intestines cannot mix, and if the thread is hard at the foundation, then it should be treated gently;
if the intestines cannot mix, and if the thread is hard at the foundation, then it should be treated gently; And indeed you should grasp them with your finger or forceps, and pull them, then cut if necessary in the way that we have said, as long as there is blood, and fear of the metal cut does not exist. It is necessary for you to sew it up in this manner:
It is necessary for you to sew it up in this manner: Take a twisted thread, and make it into a needle, then pass the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and loop the two ends of the thread around the needle, and if they are wide;
and hold the thread in place, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this with all others, leaving some for the excess of blood;
then place on the wound one moist bandage in oil or a poultice, and then place it directly over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
And let it grow until it becomes greasy, and when they fall off, then apply ointment treatment and other remedies, until the wounds are healed.
so that drying occurs due to fire or foundation Many times there is the drying effect of dung in the intestines, and due to the nature's constraint, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer works. It is necessary that you place the tip of a thorn or on your nail the skin above, which does not allow it to become moist. Then treat it until it becomes firm as is proper;
And if it does not become firm, restart the shaving with more strength than before, until a little heals and is scraped. Then treat it until it is healed.
When the tremor A worm is a small external appearance before the body, and goes all around;
And always feel the truth in it when it's cold, and you can also sense its death throes like a shiver, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a stick from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place this stick over the quivering area, until the purplish circle completely surrounds the quivering. Then turn your hand over the entire stick until you cover all of the quivering area, and hold it firmly, and pull out the quivering from its roots.
And if you see something like a spider's cane or iron in this shape, make it thin all around and smooth above: Don't pierce too deeply, for you must hold with both hands, and firmly press.
And if you see it, cauterize the quivering area, just as is described in the section on fire cautery.
Never make a silver or lead paste, or melted spider;
And never use these small and large instruments according to their intended purpose. Therefore, when one applies them in the treatment of infants and those who are weak and painful, they are small.
Therefore, when one applies them in the treatment of infants and those who are weak and painful, they are small. The shape of the small and large blister is as follows, or how the belly is bound according to this manner:
And there is often distress where the belly is bound, as you see, and the bowels are pierced within.
And on one side there's a loss of two parts, and on the other one part;
And in the belly or where one puts medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, it is pierced through completely with many small parts. There should be one inch of space between each part, then stitch into these parts a strong thread made from woven wool, and join the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, bind it with a strong thread using the instrument before, then proceed to cauterize;
and that is in the form of a circle:
And may the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something similar, then gently rub it. Then guide the ministers with both of your hands until it's fully visible. Then remove the swelling, and lift the patient's legs to their side, and if you see that the medicine is about to exit, extract as much as possible; And if they sleep for an entire night, this provides greater help.
And if you perform a colonic irrigation in cases of stomach upset disease, and the medicine quickly emerges, then repeat until it's well.
And if there is bleeding from the wound or abscess, then treat the swelling as finely as for an infant.
and it's the shape of the fine lump under whose skin is constrained:
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the section on wound care;
Or we will tell you about hand treatments and medical practices, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where the wounds are located, and for what reason they were caused.
The causes of wounds are from the splintering of stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or spears or bows or arrows, or similar things;
or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound in the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
And I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and start with simple head wounds, for that memory will come in its chapter.
I say that if a simple wound comes or to the head, and no bone is broken, be careful if it's from stone or similar things, and the skin has been entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt about an abscess heat: If you make it a speedy healing of the forehead in particular, and if there is little blood from the wound, then heal it against the excised part.
And let the patients be filled with wine and large meats.
And if they do not wish to heal quickly, then reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine nor eat large meats;
And place an ointment on the wound if abscesses form, use moistened cotton in oil rose or solely in rosmary oil, or in fortified wine;
And if there are no abscesses at all, place something on the wound if it is fresh and bloody throughout, and not disturbed by air; I will mention a powder later on this.
And if the body has moved it, set some ointments on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut or similar injuries, and the lips cannot be sewn together with sutures, then they are sewn together, like I will explain in injuries to the abdomen, by sewing.
If the wound exposes the bone, there's pain and it can only bear so much pressure, if the patient allows; Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard tissue for skin in its place, instructing the patient to consume hearty meats such as cooked tests and wheat, along with other similar items.
And if you find or discover rotten skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then remove the rot completely, and let out pus, then treat.
And if there's an artery in the wound or vein, then without hesitation, and it cannot be stemmed by medicine, so you should clip the artery, and if you find it protruding, tie it with a thread. And if this does not benefit you, then apply cautery to it.
And if the wounds are small and simple, they receive a light treatment: and take this powder that binds in such a way when the heat has worked it in.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; take two parts of dragon's blood; take three parts of fresh calx, grind it finely and apply the powder to the wound, compressing it until the air can properly circulate and it joins with all its blood;
then mix well, leave it without disturbing it, if it does not swell; For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And you should not do this with charcoal alone, when you don't have the incense or the dragon's blood, but only that the doctor has cleansed the wound.
And if the artery has caused the wound to heal, just as it is healing, so immediately, do not apply this powder in any case.
but apply some digested ointments, or made from oat flour mixed with water and honey, until it begins to bleed; then continue other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it's small, then treat it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
from the wound in the neck
This wound comes from the neck and if it is simple, there should be no difference between it and those in the head, but if a vein or an artery is cut.
If it's the neck, leave the treatment and don't put anything restricting, because it harms the neck and causes them to retreat; And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuity of such things is connected with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let the medicine be cool, like as almonds are washed in mild water and mixed with rose oil, and also washed lemons similarly in mild water, and other earthy substances following this manner, and wet ointments.
And if the wound is large, so it binds in layers, then treat until it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and there is hair and filled with blood, if you puncture or even deeper.
And if the artery is cut, and blood rushes out, if you uncover it, and repair it, and cauterize; this requires skill.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or the windpipe, and the passage must be kept open, by which meat goes; so when you place the windpipe on the reed of the throat, do not touch the throat but keep it according to its natural shape. And then it tightens the addition, leaving him for some days, then treats with desiccating ointments until it is dry;
And if the wound shows on the bone, then one must seek treatment; And if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, and those you cannot obtain, leave them until the wound rots away and is healed by nature, allowing its natural process to finish.
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned on it. And if there are bones in the wound and it has an ulcer, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
If it's from a spear or a knife and the wound goes deep, observe whether there is any wind coming out of the wound; if the patient can't breathe properly: Then you know that the wound is fatal;
And if it isn't deep, and the whole of its blood is fresh, if you don't put any powder there in the first hour or bind it without a clot for fear that the blood won't settle fully, will escape from the end and return to the heart, and let the patient rest; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have an ointment, put in the wound old cotton to absorb moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there is no convulsion, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor constriction due to pain alone; and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is saved. Then treat with various remedies until there is no blood;
and if it cannot heal and work, know that there will be a fistula;
if the treatment is as we should do it. And if the wound is from a single sword or knife cut, or worse, on the back, take the treatment of whoever is in front; if it is large, with stitches;
and if it is small, with powder, and if there are fragments in the bone or have been removed from it, if you cleanse the wound, and if any external treatments were performed; and if they have not been removed, let the wound fester, and facilitate the extractions;
And for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment made, just as we have said.
regarding the protrusion of the abdomen
The swellings of the belly are large and medium-sized and small;
From a major wound, sometimes the intestines rupture, or the nerves of the intestines, through which foreign substances can enter;
And the stitches are more troublesome; and it is not worse to have a small wound than a large one, because in the case of major injuries we do not reattach the intestines as closely, unless they are done stitch by stitch;
Because the intestines swell whenever they feel cold; if we do not reattach them more closely, and for that reason it's better to have smaller wounds; because we must sew the intestines back in their place with care, just like with others II.
And know that rupture of the belly occurs in four ways:
The two common sutures occur in the belly wound, and the suture for other chest wounds is shared with other injuries;
Yet they are more specific to the belly suture, and I will mention each one individually and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small and there's nothing of the intestine exposed, and when a matter is to be placed back, this can be done through one of the two ways: or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because of the swelling of the intestines from cold.
And when it's cold, heat him up in this manner: Moisten an sponge or add salt to water solely, or cook in boiling water with vinegar and lime and needles, and release the intestine until the internal wound is healed;
And once this wine has been strained and made muddy to relieve swelling.
And when you see the swelling leave, moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked in salt, because through this, only little things pass through the entry.
And if it cannot enter, make a little incision with the tool used for extracting worms;
And the first treatment is made muddy that the cut, which we do not have to make without great necessity or purpose;
And these are the instruments to split them:
if you cut from within at the curve and not outward, and see this shape: And when the wound has been enlarged, and the intestines have escaped, if you can place them again according to their natural form in their proper location, then do so because this is beneficial.
When the wound is broad, and it's in the lower belly area, you should have the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; And if it's in the lower belly region, place their head and buttocks higher than the other parts, and similarly, if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two areas, position yourself so that the affected part is higher than the other;
And thus, you should administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what you have at hand, then take the priest's oil in your hands and smear it over the entire rupture with one hand, then bring together the lips;
And this is the common method of suturing, and you take one or more needles according to the size of the wound's width, then leave at the edge of the wound an allowance of space, and place a needle where there will be enough strong thread. and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the thorn, which is inside the skin, as long as you make it pierce that part, and join the two ends of the thorn in four bundles;
then insert two strands of thread through the needle from both sides, then join the two ends of the wound together properly, and then leave an allowance of space, and place another needle;
then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need to use until all the wound is restrained;
And use needles of medium size, between subtle and large ones, for subtle needles cut all the flesh, and overly large ones do not fit well at all. because it is necessary that they be medium;
and it is not good to have needles sticking too far out of the flesh and skin, as they cut and open the wound before suturing;
and then remove the needles when they are no longer needed, to prevent bruising for the patient during sleep, and cover the needle holes with bandages or cloths to keep them clean until the wound is healed;
and this method of stitching needles works better for small wounds, because you can use only one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and it consists of joining the two ends of skin and the two ends of muscle together on one needle with a strong thread in the middle;
And when you have pierced all four ends together, you should then reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner one sews linen;
and place an interval between each stitch equal to that of a small thumb;
These stitches close the wound; I sewed a belly incision that a man had or had lost his intestines to due to a knife cut, and the wound was over a palm's length, with well two palms of intestines inside it, within the belly.
I brought back the intestines until it had been 24 hours since he had them, and the wound was sewn up until 15 days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and it was a wonder;
And I would not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; And I would change the old cotton twice daily over the wound, and wash it with honey water until it healed.
I will tell you two proper methods for stitching:
Take the needle and thread it through from the outer part up to the inner side;
When it has pierced the right in a straight line, if it passes through the sinew or sticks or where you have threaded the needle, and you make it pierce from the inner side to the outer part again.
And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew it as the pelt maker does with the skin, and you leave one side of the sinew on one side, and take it from the other, until the entire seam is completed.
The second method of sewing, as Galen properly states, is such that no one does, who unite the two parts naturally together, and apply one edge to the other edge, in this manner:
Nail an awl or edge at the joint of the mirror near, and pierce only that area, and leave the two edges of the fabric; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part all the way inwards, at both edges of the fabric;
Then pierce both at the outer part all the way inwards up to where it's inside, with two other awls at each side of the fabric that are opposite to each other;
And this is the method they stitch and it is the most common one.
Galen stated this phrase, and no one attests to it, so one must suture the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
and must one stitch with one needle from one side and the other from the opposite, like those who sew bullets;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more painful than others' bellies.
The judgment of the wound is like the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound completely filled with blood, as the art has made it flow, then restore to its normal state, and the intestines, and the cut;
then place on the healing powder for charcoal, and if the art has made it flow, then apply no cream that might be available until the wound heals; And twist the thread, and may theythe needle, and let them sew the skin. Then treat the wound as usual, until it heals;
And if you don't have medicine, place it there, intermittently until the pus begins to drain. Use old cotton, and shake it twice a day until it heals.
For you don't need any other medicines when dealing with simple wounds;
And if you suspect that the wound might affect major body parts, it's necessary to immerse the affected area in a light oil heated with heat or rose oil, and place it between the joints, covering them completely;
And if you feel pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly, it's advisable to use black wine as an enema, and similarly, if gangrene spreads up to the intestines;
And pierce within it, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine which is called 'youth' cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the obstruction of blood vessels that are present there, and because of the subtlety of his entire body, and the approach of its nature towards nerves.
And if the pus jumps out of the wound, set it back in the same way as an intestine, while it is still fresh;
And if it is old and turned red or black, you should tie the black area, so that no blood flows out, because there are veins and arteries;
Then cut out what's between the tie and put the two pieces hanging down from the part under the wound up until beyond it to ease extraction when the pus discharges, and the wound will heal.
from the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is intact and the wound is small, one can attempt to restore it in some animals, for I have seen that a man was wounded or had his stomach pierced by a spear;
And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and formed into a fistula, causing malabsorption and flatulence;
I applied the cure according to what I knew, and didn't stop refining until it was effective, and bound up his wounds.
And when I saw them healing, I worried that the patient might be suffering in their stomach; But there was no harm, only improved condition, and eating and drinking took place.
And they told no experimenter that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: Take large intestines, then join the edges of the wound. And when the intestines have opened their mouths, place them against the two edges if they push their mouth upwards;
And then lift his head, and this is held so that it cannot be released, then another tremor follows in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely healed. and there is no wound left over.
That is the main thing that gets into the intestine, and it causes no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine in this manner:
Take the tip of this intestine thread that has been thoroughly rubbed, and then tie it to the tip of the thread made from fine linen, twist the linen thread around the intestines, sew through the needle, stitch the intestines, and reset them in the wound;
And this way of stitching doesn't deviate from following the path of love and hope;
And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the large intestines, so that there's no embryo or healthiness, due to subtlety.
from a fistula, or wherever it may be. Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and even when it is hair-covered and drains slowly.
And the fistula is along with a hard and whitish lump-like formation, where one does not feel pain, and it's also feathered like the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes in a clear jump, and at other times thick; Sometimes small, and at other times large enough;
And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed and has no pus exits through one of the nine causes: That is to say, by the weakness of blood or bruises; for its wickedness; because of the hardness within it, and above the lips, that does not allow hair to grow; because there is too much blood; or the lungs are putrid, and the matter has bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption happens like a plague; or due to the property in the area being late for digestion, and delayed healing, and escaping naturally; or there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies using medicine in this section.
So it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done through manual work.
Know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the heart, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or on any of the ribs, or in the spinal column, or on any joint of the hands or feet; and if it affects the principal property of the limb, and manifests itself accordingly.
And all fistulas that occur in this manner cause difficulty with healing and there is nothing else except for dirt and lack of knowledge;
And if there is no fistula that does not reach what I have said, and you are familiar with the cure, then find out about it. If the fistula is straight, take an araneous or iron tent, place it where the fistula is, and perform the procedure.
And if the fistula is twisted, seek with a delicate attempt to pierce, for the needles bend and move within the twist.
And if the fistula has twisted sides and you cannot properly search for it with attempts, insert a catheter through one of the twists, because moisture will flow from one twist to another, and clean;
Then guide your hand carefully as you can, to determine if there is bone or nerve and how it feels beneath the skin. Ask the patient precisely where they feel pain when pressed by your hand, and determine the location.
And when you truly know its location and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any of the locations I mentioned, follow as I instructed, remove the bone and eliminate the putrefying substances that are inside.
And then the treatment until it is healed, and if a fistula exists, it must be well cut in the proper location, so you should press hard with your fingers, as much as possible, then I place moistened cloths in an ointment, and apply them up to the tip of the fistula, while the medicine eats away at the excess that has remained at the bottom;
And then I place salve on healthy tissue until it heals.
And if it doesn't heal with this method, then apply the cautery as we have described, and if the bone is rotted by the fistula, then press on it.
If the vein or major limbs are involved, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and blackness, then you should scrape it until all decay has been removed, then treat with salve on healthy tissue until it heals.
And if it is not healed, and you return it as before, know that you are not yet finished until the end.
If you uncover and seek as far down as possible, and remove all the decay, then properly return it to its place;
And if it is so healed, that's well done. If not, know that the decay has penetrated too far, and you cannot rectify it; if there is no other way but to leave it to natural processes;
And if there is a small decayed bone, and you can pull it out with tongs, if you remove it using an appropriate tool; and if there are many bones, then remove them all, do not leave any;
And if moisture causes it against your will, with no mistake or fear, deal with the moisture, muscle and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, put on the wound a substance that promotes gangrene, and let it be until the flesh has rotted inside the bones, then they will have their bones easier.
And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, you only need to let the putrefaction proceed until all of its blackness becomes bone dust, then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part due to putrefaction, and it reaches up to bone dust; And if necessary, he should treat all the way until the putrefaction stops, and then treat it as long as it is healing;
And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in his leg, so that you may take an example and aid yourself in your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, until the materials reached the leg, and then there appeared a large abscess, and no external reason existed for opening it;
but the physician by their foolishness opened so much that in relation to the abscesses opening, they consumed a great amount of material, and it became a fistula, and it caused immense loss that all lamented the wasting and moisture within the body;
And many physicians tried to treat it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to cure him, and what consumed through the losses was with great concern within the body; And became red the bodies of the young, and had a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent on one of these bumps, and then searched all the bumps, finding that some were coming against each other from every part of the leg.
So I quickly proceeded, and searched in one of the sections until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the decay extended up to the inner bone;
It was clear to me what appeared from the corrupted bone, and I thought there wasn't any other decay, just that which I had uncovered;
And I began to heal the wound with medicine for a long time, and was unable to stitch it;
And then I restarted, and discovered the bone as before, and found the decay continuing within the bone, and I removed it, and I was concerned to stitch the wound; But I can't do much until I've measured inside a palm of bone, and treat it thoroughly throughout, then return it with medicine; And it was quickly cured and strengthened, and there was no need to restart the work except due to the weakness caused by illness, which could not endure, and because of my fear of death that I had for him. For in the draining of blood there is often much, but it was entirely clean, and from the place where the bone used to be emerged a hard flesh, and it had good properties and did not cause any harm or opposition at all everywhere, neither inward nor outward.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: Take hold of it, and stretch to the tip of the bone that is exposed, and command that he extend it upwards; and make another rope of thicker wool than the first one, and bind it above the flesh that is inside the bone, and pull the tip upwards, so that you draw the rotten flesh outwards, and reveal the flesh on the part where you need to see, ensuring the bone doesn't hurt the flesh;
And insert a charcoal or a board under the bone to cleanse the putrid flesh;
And one must be as thorough as possible when observing and feeling the corruption, and do it again if necessary.
And if the bone is putrid and does not open, or corruption is within or in a part of it, then remove all the flesh;
Then place charcoal there, and then cover the corruption from one part to another, and let the covering be long enough over any point of corruption, as we have said;
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the putrid joint and cover the bone from the other side;
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there's no other way but to cut it out;
And if the corruption is in or on the hand, or close to the foot, it is very strong but you must inquire about this corrosion, how it has appeared; and cleanse in all ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve does not hinder you;
know that the incisors and the grooves for cutting bones are numerous, depending on the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, as well as their size and fineness, their strength and their smallness. and for each form of work, it is necessary to have the appropriate tool.
and know that the work will show you the tool you need for your task, according to knowledge of this art, and the testimony of how diseases are, in terms of their presentation and symptoms. If you intend to use the tool required according to what is necessary.
The shoulder joints may be dislocated due to internal causes, or due to external ones;
And when you have treated that corrosion by using medicines and if it doesn't benefit, if it should cut off that member until the point where the corrosion comes from, so that the sick might escape through this cause of death or because of malice, which is greater than the fault in the member;
And the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes this corrosion from limb to limb, and takes over all the body;
If you need to cut it off, and if it's due to the impact of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes, etc., when the corrosion is on the head of two, if you cut it and don't give it any space until the hand.
And if it reaches up to the wrist, if you pinch at the joint, so that the poison does not spread up to the elbow;
And if it comes to the arm, if you grip the sword;
And when it passes the sword, that is death, and only its potency can be excused that it could not have been avoided;
and do exactly this when the poison comes or touches anything: And if it comes in the first joint, if you pinch after another joint;
And when it comes or touches anything, if you grip all of it; And when it ascends to the leg, if you pinch at the knee joint;
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other way than to let the patient die;
And the way to cover or sew the limb is as follows: you tie it up both above and below, and stretch one surgeon's hand on the lower side of the two threads, and another surgeon on the other thread uphill. You cut the flesh between the two threads with a wide scalpel until the bone is exposed;
Then sew or cover it, and place one piece of linen from each side, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy tissue, but moves away from other injury and abscess on the patient.
And when blood drainage occurs while you're working, quickly apply a cautery to the wound or place some constraining powders;
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the sore limb with an acceptable bandage, and treat it as long as it remains healthy.
and I will tell you what happened at my house in the garden:
He was struck by a darkness that seemed like the flame's corruption, and this devastation first attacked his garden in the south, spreading until it consumed all of it;
And when the owner saw the corruption, he rushed to cover his garden, and was saved;
And later on, the corruption came back to his right hand side, and it reached me, and I treated him with counteractions after cleansing the body, yet could not stop the corrosion;
And he insisted that I touch his hand, but I refused, hoping to counteract the substance; And I also doubted that if I were to amputate her hand, she would not die, for the power of the medicine was weak;
And he became desperate completely, and returned to his land, and covered his hand with bandages, and he recovered health;
And I have told you this only for those who might need to do something else, if necessary.
No pus comes out in the inner flesh, and stays so long that it causes a large collection of worms; And then burrows and pierces, and the worms jump into it, and the pus remains in the patient's veins, as if they were vessels; And the skin above is as fine as the fabric of a sieve, and does not go all the way to the bone or nerve, and such disease is also called "empty" and is not called "fistula";
But if it is so long that it extends almost to the bone from end to end, then it is called a 'fistula';
And in cooking, if you sear the skin all over evenly, and likewise when it is thin, like a piece of fabric; and does not swell from its decay.
And if you find that the skin is reddening and decay is not fully present, and the skin is full of flesh, then you should treat it with castor oil in this way:
Examine if the testicles are large, and the scrotum is filled with a foul smell, then you should use castor oil made in this way: Take alisil, oil, and lard, equally, and cook them in a vessel on the fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey;
And then use it according to your need, and apply it with water and honey, and with chloride of lime in the womb, and restrain the contraction; And leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by pinching;
Perform this action as many times as the breasts are full and drained, and when the milk is expelled;
And do this without the medicine present, once every time you use ashes of wood from a vine, and pour water over them. Then let it drip and use it as an enema, until you know that the breasts are well drained;
And if the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, or an enema of water and honey, with a little boric acid; For you mix with honey and wine which the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes warmth for the healthy;
And once you have done this, and you have ensured that the intestines are well purified, when you insert into it what causes meat to be born in them, and then you take to cover the membrane with a fine cloth, and do this with rose oil and in wine;
Or you will insert it with some medicines and applications, of which I have spoken about their properties or treated the applications;
And if the opening of the intestine is small and the stick of the catheter cannot enter it, then widen it with a small iron rod, and insert a tent covered with an Egyptian ointment or basilicon balm until it is widened.
And if the wound is too wide, so that the stitches only barely allow it to be closed up until the tendon or muscle can fit inside, and if the torn tendons are located above the wound, so that they are stitched higher than where I am.
And if you cannot cover the wound from below as you see fit, equip yourself in such a way that the arrow goes to the deepest point it can reach within your body. For when the arrow is removed completely, one must not leave any flesh exposed, and if you cannot cover the wound from its location as seen, then arrange your equipment accordingly: So that the arrow slides smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the arrow behind;
So that the arrow slides smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the arrow behind; And take in medicine to consolidate, putting it over the healthy area, and they are on a linen cloth that covers all the healthy part; Then cut the edges of the scar on the breast as wide as possible from the first one, then apply ointment on the other cloth according to the width of the scar, and place it over the healthy area to ease the bowing, but remove only a large cloth for once after many days;
And that which is on the scar of the breast often needs to remove the bowing, and know what comes from the bowing, whether it's poison or less, or enough, or digested, or undigested;
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is pus or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner across you see the nature that jumps on the scar of healthy tissue, then know that the breast is healing already, and brings health near;
And then free it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change to another dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if venomous snakes bite after a long delay, do not lose hope for recovery, because health is approaching.
For there are men who delay in cleansing their wounds with honey, and among those who do the opposite;
and if there is undigested matter that remains in the chest for several days, know that the lungs are not functioning properly;
and if the lungs are slow to breathe and are distant, then adjust your remedies with both wet and dry substances, such as an oil that evaporates, because there is a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
take oil that evaporates, and apply it with rose oil, and soak it in old wine of similar strength;
then the surgeon applies and uses it;
and similarly creates a thicker version of cooked honey, when no remedies are present or when you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and add the powder to honey once it is heated;
and then apply it in a paste, and leave it on the skin, and each time administer a physician's long measure, and the roots of the celestial lily which is also like powdered sesame and cinnamon; and uses simple remedies or compounded ones: grind them, make it into powder, and put it on the honey that I mentioned, and use it;
and if the treatment takes a long time and doesn't improve with this treatment, then know that corruption has spread throughout, it makes an impression in the bone, or affects hard parts of the body, or causes impairments; if the treatment of pus removal, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand's palm, or under the foot, or accidentally forms in other toes;
And when it grows old, and if no care is taken, then the abscess bursts outwards, and runs and spreads across as long as its roots are under the nail, and by chance it might spread all of it;
And the corrosion reaches up to the bone, as long as it brings stinking pain, and the shoulder joints become broad, and is the color turns pale.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you remove all the excess from under the nail. Then, cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is greatly helpful if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
And if the bone compresses the flesh at its tip, and it begins to point, and irritates it, then you should place the needle under the bone where the flesh tips, and keep it in a high position, and cut that flesh delicately and gently. Then put on top of the wound medicines hot and corrosive to remove all; then proceed with surgery as long as it is sterile.
And if the corrosion has reached the bone, cut it through forcefully, because the more corroded the bone is, the less it can heal;
And if you see that the bone is corrupted, cut it out as soon as possible in a way similar to what has been explained earlier, then proceed with surgery as long as it remains sterile.
And if the bone is hardened and you can't cut through it easily, insert forceps, and since it causes great pain, it's best to first cure that area.
Then cut the nail of the thorn by making a crosscut above it, and be careful that the cut does not go too deep to the flesh beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, place something above that soothes it.
I must adjust those who are born with unusually thick limbs in some men, and sometimes they have part or they have bones, and at no time do they have nails, and none of them are born at the root of the joint where the birth is in neither of our thumbs.
That which is born on any node of the knee does not move, and that which is born at the junction of the knee, by chance, moves;
The cut for one who has thick flesh is so light, in such a way: Cut it at its root with a wide thorn.
That which is born in the root of the joint is trouble to cure: so hold it with copper.
In the one born or destined in the buttocks corner, it is necessary that you first remove the fat roundness up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool, and only then treat until it's clean.
The fuses that come together at the joints originate through birth, or through the healing of wounds, or through heat application, or through similar circumstances.
If it is necessary that you repair this scarring, so that it must be restored according to their natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or sheets in oil, so that they do not fuse; or you place between two pieces of fine lead, until the limbs are fused, as it should be.
Sewing should be done with both hands facing down, if you make that seam as it should be.
Their veins are large and filled with excessive melancholic fluids that come from several members of the body;
And more happens in legs of those who walk and work and carry than in others.
So you should then administer a single purge to him, and then heal him with basilica treatment.
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: One way is to apply it and draw out the black blood; And another way is to open the vein, and guide it with all strength.
The size is according to this method: Firstly, immerse the leg in hot water for a strong soaking, until the large veins become fine. Then gently squeeze the leg from the knee upwards until it reaches the ankle region;
Then cut the vein either in position I, II or III, using a large incision. Proceed to liberate and push forcefully the black blood towards your hand from one end until the other, as long as as much of the veins can withstand the effects of the herbs;
Next, apply it and instruct that it be rubbed with blackened meat to darken it;
And restart evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The operations for this are as follows: Lift the leg from the patient; if there is hair, then immerse it in water; and have the leg lifted by the patient until it turns red, and swell the veins;
And if you don't have water to bathe with, heat it over fire and then apply it along the vein from its long part up to the knee or at the ankle in the foot part;
Then scrape the skin with an onion, and strip each vein from both sides until you see it when you touch it;
And it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin as if it were a white string;
Start by heating the metal rod, until it is raised above the skin, then place it on the wrist lightly, then guide it in an 'I' shape for another three inches;
Then scrape the skin over the vein until you can see it, then lift it with your fingers just like you did before, and press on another inch, in the same manner as you did initially;
Then use another size or several if needed, lift it, and press on the second finger knuckle, then guide and lift until you reach the second size;
Then stretch it size by size, until all strength has been squeezed out, then press on;
And if you can't pull and lift it, then insert a needle at the end of a single thick thread, tie it and guide it, then heat a metal rod, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; And make sure it doesn't stick, because if it sticks, one can neither milk nor lift her, causing harm to the patient;
And when you have treated her completely, place moist wool in the wound with wine and oil rose. Continue to clean until it is purified.
And if the body is twisted and curled together into one bundle, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it in a twisting manner, but do not make it stick. And milk her just as we have previously described.
The shape of the iron that one uses to twist the body is curved, and do not cut, so as not to pierce the vein;
And it has a large curve because if it was subtle, it would impede the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is its form:
This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry land where there is no moisture.
And sometimes it appears in other places than the legs, and this happens due to corruption that arises under the skin, if it comes from within the body like snakes and worms, being trapped between the skin and flesh.
And if the symptoms of this vein's beginning show that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then the veins change, and the vein starts to exit outwards, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, it must be covered internally with a piece of plaster about 1/3 and up to 2/3, you tie it, and leave the plaster hanging down the leg, and every time there's need for more outside, you cover inside the plaster and tie it again.
And if it's too long, if you remove a part, envelop the rest and reattach it, making sure not to cut at its root until it is fully exposed. for if you remove it, should it enter the flesh, and cause pus or decay or injury to the body, leading to a bad illness;
for that reason, it is necessary for her treatment to be gradual and step by step until completion, leaving nothing or any remnants behind;
and when this vein has been treated for the length of one or several hands, and a person comes to me with it protruding from X palms in length, where its origin was determined at X palms long; if you remove it, should there be one or more raisings or abscesses, and it is punctured until the bottom, so that everything can come out;
And let the matter inside be emptied out, and apply remedies to the wound for any pus every day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And the veins in this place must be handled carefully, and likewise when it opens at the foot or ankle, or where the foot or ankle is, where there is much pus, and where you must avoid injury;
Treat accordingly as we have explained before.
worms that come forth between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "Calf Disease", because it often affects cattle, and it's a small worm that emerges between the skin and muscle, traveling throughout the body upwards and downwards, and is felt at the onset by each part of the body, until it reaches the skin where it was going, then escapes;
And it is infected with pus from various fluids, if snakes, worms, roundworms or parasites come near and enter the belly;
And there is confusion about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it returns, destroys the eye; And this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot but notice that when it goes:
Therefore, it is necessary that you bind above and below the wound with a strong tight ligature, then cut upwards and drain it, and if the exit is within the flesh, and you don't find it, then apply fire to sear it from above until it heals;
And the greatest harm he causes, if they run the eye, as we have said;
And if you see him coming or his head near the eye, then bind over him with your hands, then lift up, and pull powerfully;
And it is necessary to use the medicinal agent for purging of the body's humors with dissolving medicines, and be wary of meat that causes putrefaction.
The pain coming from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
And I have seen what I told you. I was summoned to help a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein under the arm;
And after this, my face rises as if a worm in the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as hot silver when it is cut from one place to another.
The pain leaves that place and penetrates the shoulder, then a little later spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm;
It was conveying to me that she was twisting inside the body, just as I saw.
I was marveling much how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. Nevertheless, I wanted many times to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it like I saw in the woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a wet body and her veins exposed, and that is where the constriction of wind appears;
And cannot be seen according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens like we said, open it from above and below quickly, then start sewing as long as that constraining wind force comes out of the place. And apply the cautery to the area;
And if you do not see it at your eyes, treat the one who expels the winds, like stinking pills, and snake pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and according to the location of their impact on the body.
The variety is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and fused; And of those with two angles, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
And the one who urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or in the primary organs if it urinates, as with the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and other similar organs. And when it urinates then not in any part of these organs, and the sign of death that I will tell you later, becomes apparent: So it is necessary for you to be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various circumstances; And when that bad sign does not become apparent and the arrow is not fully extracted, you should retrieve it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of brain injury when an arrow has pierced and gone through bone, causing a blow to the head is where blindness, stiffness, vertigo, heat in the eyes, inflammation and reddening of the tongue occur, along with spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps there is weakness in the strength of the nostrils, or the ears; And sometimes affects speech and voice; And the wound shows white moisture like pus, and also burns like a charred flesh in its movement;
And if you notice this sign, take care of the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is still there.
The sign of the arrow when it hits or pierces near the left nipple is that it's close to the breastbone. It also feels like if it was stuck in something hard, not empty; And perhaps the seat also moves as with the hair, and in black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Therefore, you can understand that many die from doubt and fear.
And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its path is when blood spurts from the wound without foam, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly while their body grows cold.
And if the arrow passes through the undercoat of the buttock, it goes out beyond the small ribs; And causes great pain and agony, along with sighing; And it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
And if an arrow or stomach penetrates it, perchance something of the undigested meat comes from the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach pierces it, and if there is no meat in the intestines after jumping from the wound, then there's no hope for treatment, nor extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow passes through the bladder, and the urine springs out and goes in all directions, and the patient feels intense pain: You will know that the wound is mortal.
The other body parts, such as the limbs (including arms and legs), neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, back, spine, knees, and feet, as well as any similar parts, are safe according to various positions. When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you that this happened to me, because what you did was different.
It happened to a house where an arrow hit or pierced near the nose: I tried it and from the other side removed it across the ear wax, and was able to remove it without any difficulty.
And tried an arrow that had hit in the wax near the eye under the paper wax, and the arrow was stuck, and could not reach even its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, all through without piercing any ear.
The attempt was successful, and no unfortunate incidents occurred.
And tried an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and it was the Arab arrow with ears:
I shaved them, and trimmed them as I carried them, and they were healthy for the Christians.
And pulled an arrow at his home, where it was stuck in his back or belly, and thought he would die;
and then after thirty days, if its condition did not change; I cut the arrow shaft, set it, and carried it forcefully, and there was no bad accident.
And if someone at home has an arrow fall or hit their back, and the wound heals internally;
And the arrow stays inside, and does not alter its natural disposition, nor finds any harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man, who was struck by an arrow in his face, and was stitched up the wound; and then endured without suffering great pain;
And many other similar things.
And there was an arrow for the king in the middle of his chest, it had penetrated him up to the heart, and was slightly tilted towards the right side. And the arrow was fully inserted.
I was called for treatment after it had been three days since it was penetrated. I found the wound very tight.
I examined her with all subtlety and did not feel anything; And there was a wound and pain spreading across his right ear.
I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow. I placed a therapeutic plaster on his chest because his lungs were not inflamed; And I saw the head of the arrow.
And I saw the head of the arrow. I applied the poultice to his hands for several days, and healed the wound quickly. The patient then remained in this state for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose;
And he told me. I applied corrosive medication to the wound with my hands until it opened. I tried and felt the tip of the arrow which was moving towards his shoulder;
Then I adjusted the wound opening with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent;
And it passed through the inner parts for about four months, and then opened so that I could use my pliers, on both sides, and it did not come out;
Therefore do not stop refining and engineering ways for instrument tools, until I take just one day using well-made tongs. According to how its form emerges at the end of this chapter, whether I am grasping or moving it around, and then I return to the wound site.
And those who specialize judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: So I would return to this situation, and healed the wound, and fully restored the patient's health.
And now I'll tell you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that when you apply my advice, remember what I don't explicitly say; for books can never encompass everything.
However, even wise masters may not have much information about minor things; they'll find nine new works and six instruments for removing foreign bodies that occur in this craft.
I state that arrows do not penetrate limbs except according to two manners: either by their head or they enter, or from another side;
And the one that pierces through its head or enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and never does this happen again.
And if it doesn't pierce now, leave it until the flesh is cooked inside and becomes tender, and wait for the outcome;
And likewise if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for a few days, and remove it every day;
And then it pierces through, and if it doesn't, it penetrates inside until all the delicate parts are touched, as long as the bones are broad inside, and then remove it.
And if the arrow is returned to the body's wound so that it cannot be seen, one should seek it with all their effort. And if you sense it, lead it to any suitable tool;
And if you cannot do it by the tightening of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, cut as long as the wound becomes large;
And pull the arrow if you can, and if there are holes in the arrow that hold it, remove the flesh which is stuck from two sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it.
And do it carefully so that you don't break the arrow, making its removal more painful.
And if you can't do it in one go, leave it until its entire length is rotted away by maggots, then try to pull it out, as extraction requires effort. And if the bleeding causes you to be against it, then apply what we have said about treatment in our chapter about the cure;
And you must know about the incision near the nerve and vein, and use means so that you may draw out the arrow without risk, quickly or cautiously, firmly or gently;
And guide the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell inside, because this is the greatest help that it be as such; and if you cannot do so, follow what the sign tells you.
The arrow that comes from the other side, or where it opens something in him, or if the skin is swollen at such a place as we can see or feel differently:
So grasp it up high, while you can take the pliers there, and then pull: If it jumps now.
And if she is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone and widens the bone, then pull her out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes out fully;
and if the arrow is inside him, push the whole shaft of it through;
and if the shaft is cut, and you see it administered with force, if you use a proper tool, so that the arrowhead enters through the end of the tool;
and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is pierced, use the tool with a pointed end entering first to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is encased, it must be that you remove all the flesh around or where I am entering, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow is inside or close to the lungs or bladder or ribcage, and it's nearly within you, if you can cover it up, then do so.
And protect against covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound, for this is a skilled trade. And the treatment until it has healed.
The shape of the pincers used for arrows is similar to the tip of a bird's beak, and here is the form:
And in those many ways: Great, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead resembles the feathers of a bird, because it tapers to the tip of the arrow, as this is its form:
Of the veins from which we bleed, there are thirty-one, of which twelve are at the head, namely: Two smaller ones located behind the ears, which are called "the two herbs"; and the two arteries in the two visible temples; and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "sponges"; And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is in the head near the nose; and the two jugulars which are at the neck; and the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "aughers"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins we usually treat are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it's at the left rib, and they call this 'the head vein'; and the median is called 'the fast' and is made up of the cephalic and basilica veins, and they call this 'the heart vein'; And the diaphragm is either on the right side or inside the chest, and they call this area "the windpipe", and it is on the ribcage, and this is what we heal, which clearly opens up on the belly.
And the artery is the vein that's located between the index and ring fingers, and if you measure it twice;
and in the leg and at the ankle there are three veins: one is below the bend of the belly on the left side of the rib cage, and the second is superficial which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that's called "the nesse", which is at the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The cleansing of veins located behind the ears aids with the surgeons of old, and for migraines;
And the qualities of a surgeon, such as I tell you, and it is that you rub the head of the malady, and scrape or rub the area where the veins are with a hard cloth; Then sharpen the neck of the malady like a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: Kneel down there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, mark it with a sign;
Then take the scalpel and cut through the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and open up the skin and the vein properly two inches deep, and let out the blood until you see it;
Then strain and bind until it's healed;
And I have already spoken about the incisions and cauterizations in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it involves ancient gout, and sodine, and ophthalmic usage, and within the body of feverous tears.
And the quality of the surgeon is as I describe: And let the patient strain their throat until both veins appear clearly; Feel the pulse on both sides, and then proceed to examine;
Then gently press on the vein above your thumb at the base of your neck, and hold the scalpel against it. Lift the vein upwards and then cut it, just as you would with other veins, making sure to follow the flow of blood according to your need;
Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton; and then form the pus, and leave it until it has healed;
and we have discussed this and their management as well as their extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The venous swelling of the forehead is as valuable in diagnosing conditions like the ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and hives;
and its quality is that the patients twist their necks in discomfort until the vein appears; then take the tool called 'spreader', as depicted here:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; Then release the patient's neck, and bind the artery until it is sound and when operation has made a broad flame.
Otherwise, it is not good that the flames be too large; And let the flame burn across them, for the bone is close by, and if it happens that the flame burns through when they are fine.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two sinuses helps with the eyes, and at the elbow, and at the knee, and around the ear in the ear, and for diseases of the face;
And the quality of their healing is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting with some ligament, as before.
Then heal it, and let the healing pass through, somewhat along the length of the flame, somewhat wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are fine, by chance they might break;
then drain the blood as much as you need to, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Surgery for the nose near the eyes is worth for water (discharge), and for sudden coldness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and inflammation that comes in the face, and also when it's old;
The quality of the surgery is that the patient's throat is narrowed first, then their nose is stretched to your left hand. Take a fine flame long and stick it in between the two nostrils, as the vein doesn't open properly there, and the process will start now to drain;
And do not go too fast, and make the cure according to your need, then let it rest for a night, for she is very quickly restored;
The treatment of the two intestines helps with narrowing of the arteries and the onset of melena, and many diseases, and in empyema, and corrosion, and herpes, and indigestion;
and the quality of this treatment is that the patient's throat narrows from one side to the other, as we have said;
and let the master be above the patient's throat, and the patient bends over the edge, then cure the artery length-wise for a bit wider, then drain the blood moderately, or as much is necessary;
Then reopen another vein, then undo the ligature, and gently hold the veins in place, so that the patient doesn't choke. And let it be until morning, so that the wound heals.
Of surgical treatment of wounds The care of veins in the mouth aids in collection within the mouth, and contributes to gum decay, and splits in lips, and nosebleeds and internal bleeding.
And to ensure quality of healing, have the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I've described; Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is in the right lip and the other in the left, and you know them by the fact that they are black, and because there are small black veins around them:
Treat both then, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, treat the larger one of each side. And do it similarly for both veins above and below, because it is the same method.
Of surgical treatment of the tongue The health of the veins that are under the tongue requires aid after the treatment of the head vein, and this is focused on the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the iris, and diseases of the mouth;
And the quality of a surgeon is such that the patient's blood should flow between your hands in front of the sun, and you lift their tongue, looking under each side revealing a black vein:
So treat both veins then, but do not overly exaggerate, for under them are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are treated according to two methods:
either by applying to every flame the large mirthin tool, or the subtle olive tool if it's for arm incisions, and they are called "aneil"; And they are wide and fine according to the size and tightness of the veins. The shape of the mirtin flame is very well known, and it's quite wide as you see:
And it requires to open veiny channels full of obvious large blood, and which contain large blood and disturbance; and this is like the form of olive oil:
And it's more refined and pointed, used to heal fine veins, or one with fine yellow blood.
The health of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in diseases that are localized around the throat, and in the neck, and in the stomach, and in the abdomen;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to heal properly, and he must be aware of the artery which is around. And if he cuts into the artery and blood escapes, it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have explained; And it must never have its flames held, but cut as one would with scissors.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary to remove it, and change another one; either you want no pain from it, or you heal through the opening in its place with your arm: it opens clearly; and the opening is by the flame as we have said.
And if you know where the healing is, it is necessary that you pull your arm in this way, touching the area as long as you feel the pulse; then mark where the wound is, and then tie your arm, and open the vein through the flame as we have said; And remember not to pierce through an artery when you see the limb inflating, because that is from the artery: Therefore, this is it.
And if you see it protruding up as much as urine from a child, and the veins are red and subtle, know that these are veins of an artery: So hurry up, and place your finger for a while, then hold your finger in place until the vein stops bleeding, as this has happened many times; tie down the arm, and leave it like that, and do not move the patient's limbs;
and place them in fear, and do not move them until they become well.
And if the veins do not stop bleeding, and you are forced to act, and the medicine is not at your disposal, if you detect an artery if it opens, because the head of the retreat; And stop the bleeding.
Take an almond shell and cut it, then take one half and bind it tightly until the other side.
If the bleeding stops, that's good; If it doesn't, then apply the powders we mentioned which stop bleeding.
And the bandages should not be too tight for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The treatment of the vein in the middle helps with bleeding from above and below, because it consists of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And it's important for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that is nearby; if they don't go too far down and instead find the nerve, and then it inflates causing discomfort or pain, and in such an event they cannot heal.
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any individual due to its subtlety, then you must sever the healthy part of the instrument beforehand; And listen to the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
The treatment of the occipital region helps, as it deals with blood in the head, and aids with eye issues;
And it is necessary to treat the ears in olive oil or in garlic oil, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery nearby. Still, it is necessary to seek the most agile person, and do not discourage anything if one fails at first, and you restart; And by chance swell the limbs in some individuals, but if one fails at first, it does not discourage anything.
The quality of health depends on your thought.
The first thing you must know about healthcare is that it's only provided to keep health intact, and to avoid future diseases;
and let the treatment be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: which means, frontal, temporal, and jugular; and one should treat in the beginning of prayers on knees, and in autumn and after winter after eating, when signs of fullness are seen;
and one should treat on the first or third day, after two or three days.
The treatment for diseases doesn't have a fixed time, but when need is of day or nutrition, at all times and in any situation;
And it is not advisable for a doctor to treat children up until twelve years old, nor pregnant women past the fourth quarter of their pregnancy up until seven months. And it is not suitable for surgeons to heal the elderly who have surpassed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to be treated, in any way whatsoever, if it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines with a gentle cathartic, if they have food retained, if the veins drain the excesses that cause harm to the main parts;
Nor can one recover from those who are too intoxicated by meats, nor those who are drunk, whether they be strong or have alcohol-induced issues.
And if illness is treated after colic passion, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination in women, and hard labor, of staying awake and engaging in work, due to the loss of virtue or from things related to weapon use or injuries.
Then balance the body fluids, if it is overabundant through foods and drinks and by means of medicines; if you have the means.
Then through bathing or a wash, if nothing goes wrong, to balance the blood, and to cleanse from the body's disease towards the lower part of the back by the third part, as we have said.
and guard that day from work, pain, and excess, and similar things;
and be tied and joined, and let the herbs be higher than that which you are treating, and rub both arms twice or three times, then slightly loosen the tie. For if it is too tight or not tight enough, it will not balance the blood;
and then rub the body with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them;
Then moisten the tip of a small piece of cotton with some old oil, then place her right hand's index on that vein close to his shoulder a little bit where she plans to lance, so the vein doesn't rupture and escape under the cut.
For there are veins that escape like strings when lanced, and some have windiness within them, so that when you place the tip of the lancet over them, if you remove it quickly from the flame, it cannot open the vein, and thus they belong to this category; And if the vein ruptures, the wound is too narrow for this; therefore, it is necessary that the one who lances be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein ruptures on the first attempt, that's good; If not, then try once more close to this place or until quickly, if his head is not swollen.
And if his head is swollen, and the flesh is puffed up, let him rest for one or two days, do not bind his arm: By chance, it may come to abscesses in the armpit;
Do not bathe him, then try again with the cleansing if it pleases her;
And if his ear-pit is small, or the hole in the chest is too subtle and you doubt that there isn't as much blood flowing as you see, then pierce it right at that hole all the way through.
And make the incision quickly until his head swells; For this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb is swelling, do not stop applying the poultice and place a bit of oil thereon, for it relieves the body from blood's burden, and when the oil is applied in this manner to the limb, it aids in healing.
And apply the oil poultice to every bandage when treating veins, in order to stop the flow of blood.
And this is also effective for thyme and wormwood when they are placed on the limb; So refine the herbs until they are finely ground, and if too large, it is too coarse.
And if it happens that there is a large abscess, which occurs many times, even when not bandaged because in some cases the opening of the vein is small, you should act quickly and place a damp sponge on the limb in a mixture of water and wine, heating it slightly, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the wound, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or greenishness, then it does not harm it. And if you see that, place some thing of myrrh or mixed with the juice of catmint, basil, or similar.
And often abscesses and appearance occurred in the healing of the basilica:
So place your hand there, and if you find that the area is soft upon pressing with your hand, then this is an indication of the bad appearance. Hear then that you should not apply any of what we have said, for by chance it could affect the artery;
But have them make it dry to harden the place, then give further treatment afterwards, until they are healed.
And for each one give blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if there's no blood and it remains black, let it bleed until it turns red; And if you see it large, leave it to shrink until it becomes fine. And if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And it's necessary for the one who is full and well-fed, needing blood extraction, that they make a larger incision, and let the flames be wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and suitably care for them frequently, and you should care for them by cutting across rather than straight.
And this method of healthcare prevents bleeding and compression of nerves, and it's preferable that the healing goes long rather than wide.
And for the one whose body needs healing, it's necessary to give them moist bread in the juice of quince apples; If they are flushed, let them bleed three or four times. And if they have a cold complexion, drink moist bread in a quince juice syrup before the healing process, or in an aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup has a strong fragrance.
And if they bleed after surgery, once the flow of blood has subsided, it is fitting for them to inhale a broth of lamb, and a fragrant subtle syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if they wish to exercise their arm and strengthen it again, whenever applicable, when they are weakened by great bleeding, they should recover gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And if one wishes to exercise their arm after the first recovery, and they are in good health, they should recover for 7 hours after the first recovery, or after the new hour.
And for those who wish to heal elsewhere, if they must heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already flushed, causing fever; If one needs to bleed significantly, and widen the puncture until it's full of blood; Since you fulfill all the conditions for health, and place your hand on his hairs when he is well, so that the bite does not occur where it is not supposed to (pameson), and this happens many times when the healers are negligent.
And it is not right when you see the arm being freed and blood coming out a second time, and that the limb has been lost, then you should press firmly. If it is bent, he should extend his arm quickly, for this would be badly done;
but let him do so until the second time when it heals. Or you should hold the tip of the flame to it until the blood that has frozen at the end comes out, and place it over a damp cloth in water, pressing gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not squeeze it, until the abscess subsides.
And if you need to bleed again from the first place of bleeding, direct it onto the same spot or into another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein in the arm is clean at its point of connection with the main vein because it is separate from the neck vein due to its composition.
And the way of treatment is such that the patient keeps their hand in hot water until the veins turn red;
Then bind it moderately, so that the vein appears well, then now treat it through, not too wide nor too long;
and make the cuts short and wide, and treat well near the wrist joint, and if unable to pass, then place your hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water, for as long as you need;
and if it's still that way, don't place the hand in hot water again either, because we are more prone to it in winter than summer;
And this treatment of veins is safer than for all other veins, as it has neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of saving the right hand against all diseases of the liver, and this is how it goes:
Stretch the hand, and dip it in hot water, as long as the vein is not collapsed, if you can see it; and if it heals diagonally, and if you hold it fully from start to finish, without hurting anything;
and don't overheat it too much either, because the nerves are completely naked of flesh, and then put the hand in hot water, if it's frozen in the wound, and can't come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place a cauterizing agent or a seal on it to quickly solder until it stops bleeding, and thus do this for each case.
The treatment of the right hand is equivalent to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you for the left.
The healing of the stomach is effective for all diseases present in the body, such as disorders of the heart, retention of flowers, and illnesses of the lungs, kidneys, elbows and old legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of its healing is such that the patient dips their finger in hot water and rubs it over the vein until it warms up, and then applies it to the joint of the toe; And if the vein is at the ankle, and above it runs much blood;
Then heal it or make it wider where necessary, or at the ankle, for that is beneficial.
And if you heal it above the heart, be cautious of the nerves that are nearby, and also heal across in the same manner as when sewing.
and let the flames be inside-out.
And if it cannot pass without difficulty, then place the foot in water, and allow for thorough bleeding of the vein.
And if it needs healing for the first time, then try again with the second dose above a bit more, because the lungs are salty;
Nor should you doubt of nerves, as we have said, and do the same on the other side equally.
The veins of the sciatic region are at the ankle bone, and their health corresponds to the pain in the hip; when it is due to blood congestion.
And the quality of its healing is such that the patient feels better or bathes, and twists above the ankle four times, because otherwise the vein does not open;
And if it opens, heal it in all the ways you can, and across; And treat as you grasp it, for the hands lack force, and she is very responsive to human hands.
And treat as you grasp it, for the hands lack force, and she is very responsive to human hands. And if you do not find it, heal no bone that opens or under the heel, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
And make such a flow of blood that you see it, and then release the knot, and place cotton and tighten it; It is now healed.
Vacuum cups are made from horns, or spiders, or toads;
And suction is performed in two ways: By causing and attracting blood, or means of causing blood to come out.
And this suction, which is meant to cause injury, can be done in two ways: either it's with instantaneous fire, or by means of fire;
and suction which is performed by causing injury and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, from one of which all is solid above; and the others are around the neck; and two more on the two sides of the neck. and the suction cup under the chin; and the suction cup on the two shoulders; and the suction cup on the elbows; And suction cups on both arms; And suction cups on the two legs; And suction cups on the ankles of both legs;
And suction does not treat blood, for there are small veins scattered throughout the body, and because of this it does not weaken us at all, just as we do with bloodletting; And it should not be administered, neither with hot nor cold applications, in any disease that comes from congestion, until all the organs are emptied.
And if suction is necessary due to diseases, or as a routine practice, we should administer it each hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and continuously throughout.
For there are some who, when they must sputum, if they weigh their head;
and for those who discover congestion and warmth in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and dimness in their eyes;
and those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and cough up blood; and for those who think, see through their nose blood and dirt and various things.
And when we see these signs, and especially at the beginning of each month, we command to drink after three hours during the day.
The surgery of the nose helps with the cold in the head ... leading to eye problems, and it should not happen after the removal of everything from the body;
And this suction is part of the surgery for the head, and it should not be used by those with cold constitution or who have catarrh, as it causes much harm to them;
And because of this it is not proper for them to use it when they have cold diseases or if their head has ill conditions.
And whoever uses it often becomes forgetful, and due to this, it's necessary to place the suction cup slightly further down by the suspicion of forgetfulness.
The ventilation in the throat is located beneath the head and near the basilica. Because of this, it is beneficial for it to be narrow at the bottom, and to have an incision along the channel of the heart, and everywhere else, and for repletion;
And it should allow some pressure, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause constriction or obstruction in the stomach and heart.
Ventilation in the second costal area of the neck relieves head pains, eye troubles, toothaches, and constriction, and is situated near the heart's health zone.
And it's important that you instruct the surgeon to express their hand before operating, not to cut the artery, and not to let blood flow.
The ventilation around one's chin is associated with illness of the mouth, and decay of gums, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; and is found in the region of the healthy inner lips.
Ventilation under the shoulders corresponds to disease brought about by heat and congestion.
The ventilation around the elbows is equivalent to three veins of the arms, for it carries blood from those large veins;
Instruct the warrior not to overexert himself, for the lungs are exposed to air and lie near nerves and arteries.
The suction on the back is associated with bloody affections at the base, and diseases near it; it should be that the suction is large and made of skin, requiring good treatment; And by chance, if it were too thin, it would break; And I make great wounds.
The leg vacuums are treated properly because they draw blood from the whole body, and are beneficial for old pains in the kidneys, and the bladder, and relieve the flowers;
And they are located on the two shins and the two ankles, and still they weaken the body after long use, and lead to swelling in many dispositions.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you first place it empty and suck steadily, then quickly put it on and move it evenly without stopping until you see the area turn red and swell up, and notice the color change due to blood.
Then remove it, and reapply the suction cups, taking care with body positioning as some have tough flesh and clear pores: It is necessary to strike once merely, it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep. and gently suck.
And if it lacks strength, it is necessary to strike twice: The first time to subtletly open the path of large blood flow.
And if it lacks strength, it is necessary to strike the third time;
And when we wish to drain little by little from the blood, it suffices to strike only once. And if we wish for little of blood, then we proceed often;
And if it lacks strength, then pierce deeply and at the ends so that the hair is pierced suddenly; this is suitable for those with thick skin and tough flesh who have hardened tissues. You should grease their ears with suction cups from which an opening appears and one that dissolves: If it's in this state, from where it appears, or from the oil of sweet almonds, or from the oil of cucumber seeds;
And if it's in a vein, from the oil of cress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar substances.
And if the pus is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar things.
And if for the sake of thickening flesh and large pores, there is no need to apply oil but it should be washed after the suction with rose water or cold water or water from a mulberry tree or cucumber water or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
And for those who have some moisture, if they rise with it, or from wormwood water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those with large excesses rise from old wine, or from water of sulfur, or from decoctions of nettle or chamomile, or other similar remedies;
And it's not advisable to use suction cups before or during the bath, but rather after the bath for one hour or two.
And don't sleep after suction, it's necessary for them to bathe when they need to be sucked and when they have been sucked.
And watch over him who is being healed and is hot-tempered, and let his body not become too heated and inflamed; It is necessary for him to consume cold things, such as pomegranate fruits and endive and lettuce in water, and similar items; And eat eel, and pork meat, and damp meats.
And eat eel, and pork meat, and damp meats. And for those with cold constitutions, they should consume honey syrup, and fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old and new, and eat small portions, and eat eel, and eat small birds and baby pigeons.
And on the day he feels dizzy from lack of wind, he should drink more than he eats;
And it is necessary to not give any men any parsley or mint before dizziness occurs due to lack of wind, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs; And sharpen the knives but it is not fitting for those who are faint-hearted to drink.
The suction cups that are used to pierce are those placed on the liver and kidney, and in gout, and on the abdomen and stomach and lungs and hips. For this body part cannot bear piercing by needles, and one does not use force only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place them on nipples when a baby is unable to feed.
to thicken the blood flow in the limb, as we place suction cups on the abdomen and stomach to reduce inflammation;
and relieves pain when there is an obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power, it may relieve the obstruction, or remove the stone from its place;
And thus she does it when one puts her above the liver and under the mouse when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty for suction only. And they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such manner that we fill the suction cup with hot water or with water that has boiled herbs suitable for this.
The shape of the suction cup used heated like this is:
And it has two doves half a palm wide and at the side is located in the middle one small nodule, as to place an awl, like that of an arrow, so that it does not wound the patient when placing it on the limb;
And in the middle is a rod of an arrow or iron to place a candlestick, and they are available in large and small sizes according to diseases and the season for those who take them;
For the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and those of skinny people are different from those of fat ones.
And should we place this suction cup on the limb:
Take the wax wick or linen thread, and insert it through the member that is in the suction cup, so that the lightness is at the bottom of the suction cup to not burn the skin;
and then place it on the limb, and do so either at the location we have mentioned, so that when desired, if the steam goes up, remove the suction cup;
and apply the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup that is administered in the illness of pleursin, at all aches, there is no member or location, and it is only administered fully when it is filled with water, and then placed solely on the limb;
And here is its form:
Without surgery, we treat them only in limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on the skin of livestock, such as cows or pigs, and other similar areas;
and the quality of surgery is that when you find mussels in clean fresh water without contamination, then take them;
and place them in fresh water until they become familiarized and have nothing inside their stomachs; and then cleanse with blood and suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place them on the mussels;
and when they are full and they cry out, if it is somewhere you can place suction cups, then do so, because it's not much after that.
If not, raise the aid of humans, and then water, quite well, and then perform incision;
And if the limb heals too quickly after the course of the surgical cuts, moisten it with linen in cold water, and place it there until the wound is cooled.
And if there are multiple wounds, place powdered vitriol or garlic and similar substances on them until they cool.
Or you put half of peeled beans on the limb, and leave them until they heat up in the limb, thus it will stop bleeding now.
And if you need more, take other wounds.
And if the wounds do not heal properly, rub with fresh blood or stick a needle in them until blood comes out, then place them there, and soon when they sense the blood, they will heat up.
And when you see that they are bleeding, apply a powder of some aloes and flour ground, or ashes, let them do this now.
This begins the book of fractures This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoring and resetting of fractures and dislocations.
Know this, you young man, that the people of my generation throw away knowledge from this chapter, which they have never seen in any old books, nor did they ever read a letter about it;
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found anyone good;
And I know nothing of it, for by the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I dealt with this knowledge through experiments and my life's routine;
And in this chapter I have described what is contained here and summarized it at the end, clearly showing the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I did in those two previous chapters.
Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or provide an introduction to this book containing the essence of knowledge and the chapters where the wise person applies their understanding, staying true to reality. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs to anything, it is necessary for you to quickly heal the patient on one side and the other, without letting anything stop you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or elderly people; If it is too tight, or too cold;
And chew cold things, which means cold meats, and liver and asparagus, do not drink wine, nor chew any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with meat that fills the blood vessels, until you doubt about pus formation in an abscess, or spreading of material to the limb;
If the patient recovers according to their usual regimen as they used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you feed the patient with meats that cause significant nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and chestnuts, and pies, and veal spleen, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For such nourishment leads to movement and more quickly heals the breakage.
Know that broken bones in the elderly and those who are weak cannot be properly set or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are also too tender, such as children's bones.
but if there's no remedy, reset the broken bone by pushing on the protruding large ends that have been pulled apart and join the limb together, as long as it feels like it did before. and don't finish his work entirely, and for this it's necessary to nourish him with large meats, as we have said.
And know that breaks come in various ways.
For a break at the neck is different from a break at the knee or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of breaking. For there are breaks leading to war, and others through preparation, as with the size of a feather for writing.
For there are breaks leading to war, and others through preparation, as with the size of a feather for writing. And in cases of injury along with breaks, and breaks resulting from a small crack.
And for each manner it has its own tool, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs when the leg is twisted, and opens well from below, and can be felt under hand pressure;
And when there is no twist or dislocation at the joint, and the patient does not feel much pain in their body, if there's no break;
But it can still have twists or cracks, or small breaks. If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the remedies that come next, and then gently constrain it now.
Know that the break that occurs in the joint and divides it into two parts, now they should be placed on an equal footing, so as to treat abscesses effectively.
And if pus accumulates and comes out, until the pus is relieved, let no day pass as long as the abscesses are still present;
Then equal it to the extent that you can do so gently and wisely. Know that its restoration is easier than restoring those with pieces;
Then he restrains, as will be fitting after this.
And if in the bones there are pieces broken, and it is divided into two parts, whether by hand or foot, or to your hand if it's one small limb, or by two strings, or by one string and to your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member have healed, if you reset it by all means, return any protruding parts into their original positions as far as possible, and be careful not to cause injury or pain with your actions to the patient.
and adjust both ends of the bones well according to the best shapes.
And feel it well in your hand if you think it is not quite right:
If you raise it beautifully, and do not squeeze too much, not pressing as those who remove it by their work of abscess expulsion and muscle contractions do to the limb, as we have desired many times.
And when the limbs are at the right position, if you restrain well the patient so that they do not move, whether awake or asleep, when turning or in any other manner; Make sure the limbs are securely placed so that the patient does not feel any pain. But when they do not feel any pain, if it is not properly adjusted, you should put them in such a position that they do not feel any pain;
Make sure the limbs are securely placed so that the patient does not feel any pain. But when they do not feel any pain, if it is not properly adjusted, you should put them in such a position that they do not feel any pain; And see to it that he is placed straightly, so that no twisting occurs when restored;
And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
You know that limbs broken are diverse in smallness and largeness, and in shape.
For there are small limbs, like arms and legs and similar: So it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen; and those that are large, like the thighs and legs:
So it is necessary to wrap them with a broad and firm bandage, because wide bands embrace the entire large limb and restrict it equally from all sides, so there is no difference;
Then bind with light bandages for the torso, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand firmly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and restrict it less, so that the break can move a little away from the break;
And gradually soften this ligament a little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take up another ligament, and return in an overlapping manner around the broken limb.
Then return to the broken part and slightly tighten it, not too hard nor too soft, just as we said in the first instance above;
Then place the linen or cloth bindings between the twisted ligaments until they are all equal. Then tie everything over the bend, and then place your well-made stars above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing for abscesses above it, and which relieves the swelling, leaving that way for a few days;
Then hold onto your arrows, and they should be half the width of a slender cane cut straight or uniformly, or from a staff from which arrows are made, or from palm leaves, and follow this figure:
But it is necessary that the arrows placed at the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
and should also be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large. Then hold onto the arrows in the same way you did with the first trial, then tie an additional thread on top, just like you did on the first trial at the break; Make it tighter more so, and less afterwards;
And it is necessary that the thread be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made from soft linen;
For if the threads are thick, as in my works where they twist the linen cords for their loops, and that is great mistake, because the loop cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit to have less than two millimeters between each row.
And if the muscles are stretched by the bones after constriction in their joints, put over them bandages of linen or coarse wool, so they do not blister.
When a wound is bleeding and the joints are broken, I will provide the treatment below.
And know that it is not proper to strictly bind all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not suitable to place these rows until after five days or seven, or more depending on your experience with abscesses that occur.
and here is the method of the old plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And you take some flour that settles on the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, and prepare this concoction neither too thin nor too thick. Use this mixture, and this is the common way of plastering to restore fractures in various conditions, as well for women and children. There should be no concern about being too expensive or too cold.
Another method of plastering restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take saffron, garlic, nutmeg, asafetida, and Arabic gum, and add water to make it equal to X parts. Mastic and aloes, and make up to V parts. Add vinegar to the mixture up to IX parts. And make it into powder, and mix it with yolk of egg juice; If the body's condition is hot, then use this plaster as it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly. It is beneficial to many people.
Another method of plastering that is useful for twists: Take a good portion of this medicine, let it work well, let it be effective; Mix with myrrh and aloes, let it amount to nine parts. Let it amount to six parts of caraway. Grind well the Armenian balm and mix it thoroughly with vinegar or enough egg white, then administer.
Another way to plaster for joints and fractures of bones, it relieves pain that comes on, and the cutting is done with bone, and the bruising: Take new wool, mix its grease in oil and water-cooked fat, and place it on the affected area.
Wound plastering does not heal completely but it is better for soothing abscesses and properly mending bone pains.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and leaves of terrestrial poplar, grind them together, and make a paste.
Another method of plastering for the repair of bone fractures and to alleviate the pain caused by the wound. Take root of balm, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of cloves, from each take one part;
And grind it together with wine, and when the limbs are heated apply it mixed with wet coriander water, or just water, and use it.
Another method of plastering more forcibly than the first, when hard pus comes to the healing of the limb. Take roots of balm, and sesame seeds, balsam, melilot, pennyroyal, and violet flowers and chamomile blossoms, from all take one part; And grind it together with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras in his book states that only balm made of beeswax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration purposes, and nothing else. He also indicates it should be between two substances that are neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems like Galen suggests we should apply something to the broken limb for restoration; some things that are dry but a bit warm, such as mirr (myrrh), aloes, and incense, and similar substances, just as we have said.
Another method of plastering that is useful for injuries and pain: Take powdered bone of roasted animals, or feathers from birds, and crushed coriander seeds, and equal parts, grind them together, and make a plaster with it, and use it.
And then apply some of this plaster, and be sure that the patient does not feel any pain or the bone is not moving in its place; nor by manual adjustment later. And if pain comes to the bone, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling, if this occurs, then you should adjust it, and apply the plaster now;
and take a light cloth and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, then lift the bone until the itching stops and pain is relieved; Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry lanolin, moistened in water or rose oil, and secure it with a bandage until you are sure of removing any pus.
And let the inflammation and pain in the limb settle, and relieve the discomfort, then continue with gentle manipulation, and a bit of plaster, but do not apply pressure as strongly as before; And gently until it feels relieved.
And if you notice that pus and redness, pain, swelling are still present everywhere in the area, indicating inflammation, then you need to apply plaster and bandage again, so start doing this as you did before, equally.
And if nothing of what we have said affects the limb, or if it needs to be released only after three, four, or five days; And never leave it for more than twenty days, according to what we observe, until the healing process begins and brings the alignment back;
Therefore hold more tightly than initially, and increase its flesh, as I have explained before.
and if you notice that the skin is drying more than it should, know that no healing can come; Take the person then with hot water, every time you release them, and do this each third day, and cleanse a bit of the wound;
Through this work therefore cut the swellings from the limb, and heal it quickly as the foolish would do, that keep the member twisted:
This is wrong, and there's no sense in this work, and I only see it as a way to rest the limb and open it properly.
Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and their causes are specific;
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone is all bone up to the symphysis which is on the surface of the bone, as it might be done in hunting or with a spear. And this type of fracture is called this way because it's named "haichure".
Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute".
And these two types of fractures result in large or small wounds.
And if there is sequential impact, or a crack or neck of stone, or through stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a break at the bone, which comes up to the membrane beneath the bone, or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
And if there's a wound that penetrates as finely as a hair into the bone, and it's a small crack, for this reason it is called "hairline fracture".
And if the wound is made by striking a rock or falling or through some other cause, causing a piece of bone to enter from below, it's like when a candlemaker works on candles, with the heat coming from below. If between the stone internally.
And this happens more in those who have wet bones, such as bones of an infant;
It occurs in all these ways of breaking, where small fragments cause damage like thistles would; And I will speak about it in its proper place.
And know all ways of breaking through extraction from them, and investigation with attempts, and through the corrupted matter which is upon them.
The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it together, then the dark fracture opens.
In the treatment of fractures, be vigilant about maladies and if you see no adverse event such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever ague, and if the eyes emit and turn red or other similar symptoms in various conditions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see an alarming occurrence, yet still hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the nose comes to you first, and it's in winter, it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month you could.
And if it's in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the pus under the bone becomes infected, and the accidents we have said occur.
And if the break in the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary that you cut through the fractured part like this:
And if you take hold of the bone that is not attached and uncover it on the bone in all the ways you can, and with the appearance of the wound as much as you can, and if blood discharge comes to uncover the bone or an abscess, assist according to what is necessary, and then you should fill the gap with wet cloths in olive oil; And let the wound rest until the pus lesion is calmed down, and ensure there is proper drainage of blood; then begin to work towards the bone, and this is done according to two ways of working:
one method is that you prepare for a narrow cut in front, and this is the form:
And then make another cut of about double the size of the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron;
and work gently, so as not to hurt the head.
And if the bone is hard and solid, it is necessary to pierce through it, in such a way that you perform cuts with prongs, not all the way through so as not to penetrate beyond the bone beneath the testicle, and there should be above the point a margin or a circle, which prevents the point from passing beyond the bone;
And you must have several of them, so that each comes into its place in the middle of the length of the bone, so that you may have holes for all your tests;
And this is the form of three kinds of holes:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one hole on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced;
Then put the hole elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then cut through the space of the bone that is between the teeth, and do it more finely than you can, gently, just like we said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or with none of the tools you have such as forceps;
And beware not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it is fitting that you prepare what has remained from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it should be more robust and finer than the other incisors;
and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, you should gently scrape with the instruments; then treat the wound from the sides and dressings that we have mentioned.
And another method of treatment is as Galen said, which is more harmless; and the heat must be very strong, and this is his word. It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone, where the break opens and moves, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this oblong incision, which has this form:
And do not cut from one side alone, and let the part be divided into two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike on with a small hammer, so that you gently press the entire bone, and be well aware of the cloth which is nearby;
If it's close to the bone, gently press the bone, because bones are very sensitive and can cause pain.
And if the bone break doesn't go through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut above, with small pieces remaining, after smoothing that area it is necessary to remove the scales using a fine shaver you must have in various quantities. To apply the most suitable for each place according to the work and the shape of the break.
When facing large shavers, then proceed to finer ones, and never cease this practice until it's done well.
In each of the other hair-cutting tasks and delicate breaking operations, it is necessary that you handle according to its orientation;
and this matter cannot be handled by someone who has not devoted their study to this craft.
And if the soft spot is discovered, it is necessary that you use linen strips according to the size of the wound, and apply the oil generously, then place it on the wound; Then take another cloth doubled up as one likes, and mix the grease with wine and oil rose, and put it on the first cloth; And do this more lightly than you can, so as not to weigh down the scab, then administer it over another bandage, and do not pull it with too much force until it only touches the wound.
And leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscess becomes calm, then remove it, and administer medications such as lily roots, bran of thyme, incense powder, and garlic, among similar things;
And make a powder from these things, put it on the wound, and administer medications that do not cause irritation.
And ensure that the wound is completely clean, do not leave any pus, nor let it assemble in the socket, because when the ball assembles on the brain's mesh, it will run and resist, causing great mischief to the patient;
for when one places something sharp above oil, it sears from above. Therefore, take heed, if no accidents befall the patient as we have said, if it is doubtful, then there should be no fear.
And if it only comes out as part of the medicine we've applied, assuming that such virtue has been exerted, then you should take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil and one spoonful of glue, and apply this mixture to the ointment. Then continue with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are broken, or just one of them alone, for these are two bones;
And this one is cartilaginous tissue, it does not break, nor does it allow for twisting or bending, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary for you to pinch your little finger or the tip under the nose, and place the break equal within your index finger, and at the bottom towards outside, until the nose regains its natural shape. Do this gently, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to his nose, then it's necessary that you place him level with the head of a rod a bit thick.
And if the break is in two parts, redo this procedure, and try to restore the first day's work, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess is calm, then pinch near the nose to where the linen fabric begins, if the break is in one part.
If you pull on one part of something from another side, then it breaks there; And let the tents be so large that they fill out the hollows in the nose.
And they say that when restoring one must smear the stumps with butter, and change each day. I don't think it's quite right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture from an egg and powdered pepper; Then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage toughened.
And once bound, or goose feathers instead of tents should be used in the place of them, and if it's done upside down, and holds up well, and withstands the wind, and blows the patient inward; Or do as you see fit or as you have observed.
And if pus comes out through the nose as you are working, then put moistened lint or cotton in oil mixed with rose water, or a spoonful of almond oil.
And if abscesses do not come out, then apply a plaster to the surface, made of sifted flour, and incense powder, mixed with yolk oil. Then place it on light bandages, but do not tie them too tightly.
And if the nose break is small, and it has broken into small pieces, then use tools suitable for this task when extracting. Then cut along the wound, and clean out the damaged material, and suture, using plasters and remedies suitable for this situation;
And if there is no injury within the nose, then treat it with the usual methods, and apply snail shells until they heal.
When the jawbone is broken outwards, and there is no wound outwardly visible, only the break is outwardly present, not being split into two parts externally but cracked internally. If one knows this lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you bend your ring finger into the mouth of the patient; And if the break is in the left jawbone, hold your right hand's index finger and gently force the break inside, and execute it with the other hand from outside, apply evenly.
And if the breakage of the jawbone is split into two parts, it should be treated with an extension of both hands until they are even.
And if the teeth are moving or a fracture occurs, then use a thread of gold, silver, or silk to hold them in place. Then place a paste on the broken jaw, and put a double layer of cloth over it; And place on the cloth a large, well-made plaster, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone. Fix it at the parts you can attach it to, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you notice that the shape changes, if it dislocates on the third day, and then correct whatever has changed; And apply plaster upon it, mix with powder from the mill along with abundant egg or meal of ground almonds, after you have removed the wax;
And place a thin layer of plaster, and if the plaster cracks, and the position of the wound does not change, let it stay until it heals; Many times it is healed within three weeks.
And if it comes to incision at the foot, then apply what we have instructed many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove no part of the bone when it is broken; Such subtlety in the extraction requires instruments suitable for this task.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, if the wound is wide, place one poultice suitable for this over it to encourage flesh growth until healing occurs.
The broken force breaks many times forward towards the shoulder, and the break follows three ways:
When it is broken and dried out in two parts, and there are fragments, it's more easily restored;
There is breakage with injury.
And the operations in such cases are when there is breakage without injury, that you have two assistants, so that one marks the shoulder where the strength is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part;
Then place the breakage evenly on your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there should be no appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend more, then place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder for the patient, and it should be as large as your necessity requires; And apply gentle force, hold the pole by your hand, so that you make an equal breakage, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the force to the outside due to it coming forwards, then the patient should lie with their head on their shoulder blade, and place a pillow under one shoulder. The attendant should hold the shoulder down as long as the bone of the force is raised.
And align the break with your fingers, and if you find that it's splitting, then it should be to split from above;
And pull the pieces gently, and if the bone doesn't join for any pushing, then you should correct it towards one of the incisions you have made; but place the full force of that instrument, to avoid this slip:
and make it seem like a spoon, not too thick, and be as wide as it should, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the operation;
and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the wound you made when treating the bones;
And when you are assured of the removal of pus, if you clean the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about removing pus, then dress the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if there are incisions from them that come out, if moisture one, apply oil and rose water and wine, and place it on top.
The grinding of the bone, when it involves injuries and surgery, is that you place on the bone a plaster made from the powder of the mill and some yolk of egg, and lay lightweight bandages over it, and put a sponge under the wound if needed; Then take a very large bandage, about the size of your palm in width, then place the cloth over the bandages, and plaster it; Then take a narrow strip about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down. And place the candle near the wound, and turn the stick upwards to the neck, and over the healthy ear, and over the diseased ear; And reset each part; and when you see that the heat touches the wound's opening, and you clearly see that the candle does not move over the broken bone, then reward yourself every day, and once you remove the bandage, then keep it restrained.
And let the disease flow out on his back, and place him when he sleeps with a small pillow under the ear, to lift the shoulder up; And relieves the pressure of the muscles by aligning the shoulder, or you tie his arm to the neck, and do not untie it for fear of bad accidents until 20 days;
Then renew the plastering, if you see it needs it, then hold and keep it like that until it is restored.
and it is restored by the utmost within 28 days, and in no cases beyond that time limit.
From the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or is damaged at its ends or in the middle, and if only one part seems to have been affected by a touch;
if you adjust it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
then apply on the shoulder powdered flour from the mill with plenty of eggs, and make gentle compresses, and place a doubled bandage on top; then place a broad and fine straw, slightly wider than the shoulder, such that within the straw there are no movements in any part of the shoulder; if the straw is wet with linseed oil, so that the straw conforms evenly.
And then holds it firmly into a large bend, so that the limb does not move from its place, and checks each connection daily;
And each time it is realigned, if it is held firmly in place, and makes the limb equal if it is not displaced from its position, and has the patient lie on their side;
And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, if it is released and you are sure, because it's not an easy task of bone to be placed lightly.
And if a piece of the bone is exposed and not covered with skin, then it should be handled like an abscess from a broken wrist, and you do what we have said about treating a wound in the first chapter.
From the break of the foot
The arm is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the elbow.
And when it is broken within, if it descends towards the knee, causing great pain to the patient, lack of strength in the legs, and dizziness, and occasionally vomiting blood, and reveals the opening inside the broken bone, and you will well understand.
And in the restoration if allowed, when the patient is lying on their back with their arms at their sides, and I place my thumbs between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and align the ribs of the second ribcage with your hands, delicately adjusting them to match all possible ways that you can adjust them, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then place them on the plaster and cover the delicate salt bed, or another light wood, and wrap it in a piece of cloth, then bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; And twist the bandage around the back, and tighten it diagonally, and reward each hour with the string, and if it relaxes, then tighten it;
And if it is necessary to move it due to corrosion or itchiness that comes to the body, or pain or abscess, if you must hurry, and remove this, and smear with ointment, and treat as usual for those who have come in need of cure methods.
Then remove the plaster, and keep it steady until it has healed.
Of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs only comes about in their large parts behind the back, and within, and they bend because they are soft; and feel it well during examination as is due.
The repair process involves making the break equal, just as it should be. Then apply plaster, and bind it with one bandage, if you need to do so.
And if the break of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels intense pain and sharp pain, like tears, as in childbirth, because the bone presses the tissue. And to points, all at once and instantly produces large amounts of blood, and this is harmful for health, and the old ones have used extensive means.
And if someone says it is necessary to give foods that fatten the stomach, in order to expel the gas outward.
We do not do this; if no abscess was there, then no chaulze (a type of cauterizing agent) should be used. And if it did come about, then heal it.
And it is said that when one uses suction cups on the body, for bodily fluids, and this seems reasonable; However, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses towards the body due to its weakness.
And they say that for the body of any one who must have a wet wool cloth with hot oil over it, and place cloths between the ribs to make the wound evenly hot inside, then apply the treatment for bleeding wounds, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that they cannot bear through the bone piercing the skin, there is doubt in the patient, whether it is necessary to cut on the body of the cracked rib, and one should place an instrument over the area to hold the ribs together;
And then one must cut into the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and dress with plasters until they heal.
And if abscesses occur, place them on wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and place it under the wound;
and treat while the wound is suitable for an abscess, and be vigilant where it should be on the back or side of the body, until it becomes healed.
And likewise along the spine of the back.
And when this happens to none of them, and you wish to know if they will heal or not, take heed: if you see her hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend them; and when you prick them with a needle, if she does not feel.
Know that it is mortal in various conditions; if they remain silent and feel well when held steady and not moved, know that the bone's joint is saved, and that the disease has been cured, if care was applied.
And if something similar happens along the spine of the back, and you see that it is not healed or understand its condition, then take care to see if his joints are softened, and if his accidents are those that occur in the limbs, and on the back there is a loss of wind and loss of power against will.
And when one has laid it upon its belly, there is an eruption against its will. And when it is sewn on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if it doesn't work in its treatment.
And if such an event does not happen to him, then it is a simpler matter.
And the treatment is that you should apply it if there's pus present, if you place on the spine where rose oil or egg yolk oil is, until it calms down;
then apply one of the soothing and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and don't let them sleep on that part where they feel pain, until it heals.
And if any bone is broken, you must cover the wound; And heat the bone, then join the two edges of the wound if it's large with a stitch, then treat with ointment until it heals;
And if the bone of the head is broken, which they call "the skull fracture", you should hold your left hand's bag in your left hand and place it evenly with the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the bandage above, if you need them;
Then apply pressure, and if there's exposed bone, do it upwards, and set the bone, then treat the wound until it heals.
From the breaking of the bone in the hip
It sometimes happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it occurs, there might be a little swelling in the head; And it grows long, and descends to the kidneys, and comes to the patient's pain in the back, and bruising, and inflames what breaks.
And for the correction, you extend your hand upwards as long as you are above the irritation; And know which is the break and the shape of it;
And if the break is only at the head, make the break equal, as long as it's in its natural shape.
And if the breakage is along the length or it declines towards the inner side, guide the patient so that their abdomen supports it, until you achieve the restoration of this breakage. And once you have made it equal, place it on the plaster, then put a stick or reed onto it, and hold the irritation so that it doesn't move;
And use your back under the ribs, as long as the spine is equal. Instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
And if abscesses have come about, if there's no need to cut them, until the pain in the abscess subsides, and place on it what we've said before. and then return to the restoration process, and apply it as necessary, if there's no adverse incident;
of the breaking of the shoulder
The assistants are those that lie between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, should one restore it according to one of the two methods:
One method is that you take one thickened stick, according to this shape:
And fasten the two heads with two strings, and place them up high, and have the patient sit upright;
Then place his broken arm on the staff, until it reaches the elbow, and have half of a staff's length in your hand, then can ascend onto any heavy thing or let the attendants extend him downwards;
Then set the injury equal to both his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other method is that one arranges the wound on their buttocks, and ties their hand to their neck, then instruct two attendants that one shaves where there's a breakage at their hands, and the other removes from each side up to half an inch, and extend each person to their respective sides.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold to the bandage across the wound, and above the wound, and extend each of the ministers to their share.
And if the break is near the top of the shoulder, it must be that you place one half of the splint at the elbow and the other towards the knife, over the break;
And similarly if the break is towards the knife, it must be to place one half lightly, without effort, until the break is equal on the side and on the knife;
Then make the break equal, as it should be, and restrain it, if abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses open, do not hold them back for up to seven days, and apply wet wool and oil in a bandage until the abscesses subside;
Then hold them back, and the method of holding them back involves placing the plaster over the soreness, then placing the arm against the shoulder, and putting your hand on the shoulder or over the breast;
And put the bandage, hold it against the shoulder and over the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, without anything preventing it or if the bone isn't bent.
And if you doubt that the bone isn't moving, use braces, and place a larger and stronger brace over the injury compared to the others, with one inch of space between each brace. And make sure each brace is as large as it can be while still allowing passage for three inches on both sides of the injury;
Then hold onto the stumps firmly, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on bruising, more forcefully and less by pulling away.
And if you see the stump of the stumps and the tension, as we have said, during the time you are restoring the broken limb, and if there is doubt about the abscess swelling, leave it bound until seven days, as we have said;
Then look each three days at the bandage, that itching does not cause swelling around it or that the ulcers do not come to the limb because it is too constricted. If there is an address, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, or if it is not released until three days or more later, and let the patient lie on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
And place the shoulder with a soft cloth evenly filled, and watch every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the joints do not soften;
if it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and he gives us the meat that we have placed in front, in such a manner that the meat reaches the first subtle substances; And when it begins to take effect, if it becomes robust.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken in forty days from all ends; And then one must untie and administer baths and remedies by ointment for the injured limb to recover.
And if the dislocation is ugly or tangled, it should be relieved for one day or two months.
"Of the breaking of the arm"
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'fossicle', from one of which the lesser bone is smaller, and it is this that supports the elbow;
And those are large, and this one is on the ground, towards the little knee;
By chance it may only break the large bones, or the small ones, and by chance they may come together.
When the small bones are broken, the recovery is light, and the healing;
And when the large bones are broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they break together.
If only the small fracture is broken, it's advisable to gently stretch and make it even.
And if it's a large bone, you should strain it harder;
And extend it upwards towards the thigh, and pinch the hand pouch higher than the others, and the smaller bones lower than the others' bones. And have the patient cross his limbs over themselves, and the thigh in front of him be higher, so that the limbs don't suffer any strain;
Then extend the ministers' arms to the relevant part above their hand or wrist, and other ministers upwards at the other one.
And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each piece in its own place, and if there is none of them that holds onto his sense, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut on top of and through the bone, as we said previously.
And concerning the stinging of wounds, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; so take the cure.
And if during the beginning of the healing process there are clotted abscesses, apply a dressing made from rose oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and fix the dressing slightly upwards, until the clotted abscesses are relieved.
And then place the wax, and apply the plaster made from powder of the mill with enough egg, then insert the sticks; ensure that the stick for stinging pain is somewhat more pronounced, and slightly wider than the others.
And know that he must have six arms or more in various positions: let it be within one of the bones, or perhaps in two;
and keep it above the fracture rather than anywhere else, and always slightly apart from it, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths placed over the fracture be soft and damp, not hard or rough;
and let the cloths placed over the fracture be soft and damp, not hard or rough; and let the threads that are being tied be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And restore the member and the ligament after a few days. And if any bad occurrences come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you wash the limb with hot water until that itch is soothed;
And let the limb not move at all during rest.
And then continue the constriction, and if the ligaments have been torn and the bone has been exposed, as well as similar matters, address them.
And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can come to the limb because it is too constricted, it is necessary to soften it with heat for a short time and leave it like this for several days until the pains disappear, and then you restrain.
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, or up to 20 days after the release.
Or perhaps in such cases, then one might place their hands on the person's neck, and ensure that both sides of the neck are equal, and guard against any movements or jolts, and sleep while lying on their back;
Know that this healing is restored within XXX days or XXXV, and by chance in XX days, depending on the nature of the remedies and the character of their qualities.
Of the breaking of the hand
You know that on the back of the hand and with us the bones suffer little breaks, and no more than bend many times.
And when the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient keep their arm straightened and aligned directly in front of them;
Then place their hand on the extended table and extend the fingers of the broken bones, placing them in line, until they are well joined;
And apply the plaster and the swabs, if no pus comes out, then place a poultice according to the size of your wound. and be wrapped in an I cloth of linen.
And if the splinter is at the heel between the front of the foot and the belly, make a poultice from linen, and instruct the patient to press it onto their broken heel; and then press with a long linen cloth, and make the poultice as thick as the heel of the hand, and press it, as it should be done.
And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place a splint above and another underneath in the foot part, so that your hand is opened and straight, then bind them entirely around the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
And if the splinter comes to neither of your toes, it's embedded, so place it evenly, as it should be done; And he holds it with his foot, and if you see that placing a small stick straight upward eases the pain, and doesn't move;
And if the pain is felt on other fingers, such as in the index or any of the others, place it evenly, and secure it with a healthy finger that comes next; or tie them all together in an "I" shape, that one is enough, or place them on a stick, like when you have a walking stick;
and always take care in the restoration and positioning of each incision, and support those that come next, as I have explained.
The bone of the shin is often broken; and one sees it well when it turns in front and behind;
And for its restoration involves securing it above the fracture, and the other below. And the sick lie on their face, then extend each minister's connection to its equal part;
And this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the splint is close to breaking at the base of the foot, then one should direct some of the straps towards the knife and the other straps beneath the splint.
And similarly if it's close to the knee joint, then place its connections above the knee joint, and allow its extension downwards;
Then place the sights of the bone equally with his two hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses do not come about.
And if an abscess appears then let it heal and return to your work and treatment; The birth is performed in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the wound with strips of leather doubled in two or three layers, and retain the excess. Then bend the leg until the heels reach the base of the shin, and place one thread longitudinally between the knee and the leg, beneath the knee, and guide the end of the thread over the top of the head.
Then bend the bandage upwards on the leg and on the knee. Place pins on the wound, and place a pin on the bone of the leg;
Then use five threads between the leg and the knee of the same material to ensure equal tension. Then start binding in a form of three or four turns around the wound; And when you go further than the incision, and do not restrict it less.
Then take two threads from the bundle that you have held between the leg and thigh, and secure three pins above them. Then return under the thread at the tip of the thread, as long as you see beyond the foot;
And hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this. Then if there is no pus or swelling or any other indication, it should be left as such. And if there does occur something, loosen the thread and address whatever comes about, as we have said many times;
And if there are pieces of bone that are caught, then it is as one should do, if one can; And if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the limb, and drain the blood; And treat it as we have said, until it becomes clean.
Every once in a while, the cook should add garlic inside the cut if one puts them during the process, as in the shoulder and arm;
Nonetheless, after such preparation, there is no complaint from the patients.
Know that the egg is restored in one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the diversity of body types.
Know that in the knee joint there is some cracking noise, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, except for just a crack, or if it wears out, and affects all injuries, and feels like an injury, and this is felt very well.
And in this preparation, one should put what burns well on its parts until all can move as they should.
Then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put a round bandage, and tighten it as needed. Then reposition all other preparations we have mentioned for other injuries, such as pus-filled abscesses and similar things. If you meet with each incident as it suits him, while he remains sound.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, from which one is called straight by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula".
And any damage or injury that occurs in the arm happens here too, and because of this, the restoration process is similar to that of the arm, uniformly applied, and it involves all aspects. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and can see it clearly; And it turns inward.
Therefore, apply the extension and make it uniform, and secure the pins uniformly;
However, nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are more than a few parts, then the extension should be gentler and of less force; and align it according to its virtue.
And when you have completed all your work, take wooden splints that can be rubbed onto the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as from the leg to the knee down.
Then wrap two bandages around the ends of each splint, both above and below them, and tie them in the middle as well. Also during this time, make sure the leg does not bend to the right or left, and thus it will be done properly.
And no one administers anything from the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and you put the leg to rest in order to avoid any movement, and this is properly done where there is a wound during the fracture.
And move each leg every day to see if there is pus or any other incident; if the treatment continues until it becomes clear.
From the breaking of bones due to injury
Ankle injuries do not come from breaking bones, but rather due to certain positions that the feet can be in, and there is only strength when in multiple dispositions.
And if it happens to the bone with a fracture, and you see these bones rising upon each other, place your hand on the earth like the bone would want to go, and then put your foot on his foot, where the bones are raised, press it so much that they regain sensation in their limbs;
Then apply the plaster and wrap it up, place a small table of two full shoulder boards under his foot, then squeeze him onto the board in the appropriate position, then when you have covered him with blankets and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, repair them, just like we have said about the bones of the hand; Then place the bone fragment with an angle according to the length of the bones, and make it slightly wider; then put under it the plate that I said, and tighten it diagonally.
And if there are two or three or more, and they are broken, place on each one a fragment according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, then tighten the table under it. And stay on top of the table above the stomach of the plate, so that it presses well.
And you must not forget the other things I've said about other breaks, once we have discussed them; And assist every incident as it should.
regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
When the bone of nature in a woman is broken, if she is made to stay enlarged, then she is inclined towards the lower back area, and held from behind;
Then fill the void of nature with cotton, and also place it as large as necessary;
Then stand the woman up, and gently lift her back little by little, and then jump the cotton until it reaches the entrance of nature, and return the bone with this action;
And when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has done so, have her rest again, and do this for seven days or about that time. If the break is healed, and if you see fit, take a goat bladder, tie it at its opening with a rope, and fill the whole bladder inside nature; Then blow on the fire rod until the bladder is inflated inside: The nature will return the break;
Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the elbow or knee of a man is broken, or in a woman if it's left like we have said about the hip bone;
And these nearby fractures should not be overlooked by someone who devotes their study and use to it, and listen to my book.
For the break means in many positions the right way of restoration: Understand it then.
In the case of a broken penis, take an ointment from a goose and apply it to the affected area; Then wrap it with bandages around, and leave it for three days or until the wound has healed, and it will heal quickly.
Of breaking with injury
It is necessary for the one who has a break with an injury, even if it's large, as with bones of the wrist or shoulder blade or similar, that they be now treated, so that the treatments we have mentioned testify to.
And if the wound has healed, you should reapply vinegar, and if there's no other remedy, then start restoring the break in the same hour or day. If abscesses occur, apply them immediately.
And if abscesses occur, allow the restoration up to a new day, until the abscesses are pacified. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about bad accidents.
And if the bone is broken and visible through the uncovered thigh, it must be gently placed with your hands, in a small extension.
And if the extension does not allow you to make it equal with your hands, then use this iron tool if you have it, which should be seven or eight inches long, and its width should match the size of the wound; And for that, the surgeon must insert it three or four times, depending on how many times he needs to do so in each fracture treatment;
And make it round and a little thick, so that under the pressure on your limb when you are opening it up, it does not bend at all, and have roughness at the front, and be thick in the middle ahead.
And it is called "palainche", because it must have the crooked head placed on the top of the visible bone; and beat it once, until it regains consciousness, and ensure that each side is equal against the other. And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot properly take hold of the bone, it is necessary that you grip the top of the bone as long as the instruments have control.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, using a suitable tool for this purpose, such as an incision blade or awl, with your strength;
then rub the one that is stuck in the hard bone and small scabs.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Do it until it is in its place, then moisten the wound with black vinegar and properly if it is in health; and do not put wax or any other thing over the wound that could cause gangrene and decay;
After administering these treatments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and make sure to protect that the wound is not strained with breaking.
And many times this has happened to the foolish patient, and there is no occasion where they have caused death or corrosion on the body. And may the crushing be softer and more effective than other breakages.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that past accidents have caused it, as we said, and you find pain in the limb, then it would not be appropriate to apply these treatments; But instead of applying these treatments, wrap the area tightly, and secure it with hard bandages.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound has begun to heal, remove what you had placed with all the wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as the four-formula ointment and similar.
And you must dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is united and sound.
And it should be that the limbs are placed so that the wound heals in such a way that the bone comes together lightly.
And if the days pass and it cannot heal otherwise than at once with the bone, know that there are small fragments of bone, which is why you should work on the wound with traction, and remove all these unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
And if a sinus appears in the head or any other form of infection, it is necessary to treat it according to what he instructs in the chapter mentioned earlier.
And when the bone is broken, and opened on the body part, like the bones of the elbow or shoulder, or other similar large body parts, if you do not treat it immediately, for many times death results from this, but let it until it heals.
By chance, it may heal on its own after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can;
And if you cannot do so, leave it as it is.
Many times after the healing of the bruising, especially when it is near the joint, comes a difficult thing to see in the figure of the limb; And by chance, the limbs may not be able to do their natural tasks.
Therefore, take care when it is fresh: If he administers strong medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, sarsaparilla, carob, or similar others, you should use any of these substances alone, or all together combined, and mix them with a stomatic wine, or an abundance of egg white, or honey. and place them on the wound as poultices, and bind it well, and do not loosen it with your hands during the day;
and place them on the wound as poultices, and bind it well, and do not loosen it with your hands during the day; and then reposition it, and start another poultice treatment until all the swellings have subsided;
or you bind with a well-made piece of plaster; because the properties of plaster are such that it relieves all swellings on the limbs;
And if the dislocation has already become like stone hard as a bone, and it is necessary to extract it, even when cut open, then remove the excess that becomes noticeable. Or you would take it out at no small cost, until it is extracted, and the treatment until it is healed.
The limb that is weak after a siege
When bone fracture repair is restored and after that the limbs remain weak and subtle, if this happens due to various reasons: Of which one is because it was tied too tightly and not tied as it should have been; Or because there were too many ligatures, and the movements could not come to the limb; Or due to an abundance of bleeding; for too great movements, not at their time; because they have little blood in their body, if they are weak.
And the treatment is that you feed the sick, and make the body tender, until the pus has multiplied in him; and he administers baths, and gives him joy and delight;
then put grease on the limb, so that the grease attracts to the large artery, and frequently washes it with tepid water, until the bleeding corresponds with the limb; and restores him to his natural appearance.
If the member is twisted after recovery. When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if the bone is broken openly, even though the form of the limb may be ugly, it does not lose its natural substance:
If you do not believe those who say one should break the limb entirely anew, and many a person has done this in our land;
And these actions are criticized, causing great harms, and indeed death befalls the person.
Nonetheless, if the nodations or tortures are fresh, they should be treated with hot water, or by cooking soothing herbs, such as leaves of marjoram, roots, and clover, among other similar things;
And make an application of a soothing paste, such as well-prepared duck fat, and take marjoram's extract, mix it with fat from geese grease or saffron oil, and apply this paste.
Or take dried figs, grind them with cow's dung, and similar remedies that alleviate inflammation.
And never let the dislocation occur by rubbing constantly and for long periods with wet hands. And allow some movement in the limb every hour.
And if the hardness and stiffness have developed and become like bone, so it is with stones, and requires removal by the iron tool; thus, if necessary, one must cut up to the bone, carefully and slightly in the delicate incision. and apply attention and study to the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, because it cannot move then, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation affects none, if it suits now to bring back without hesitation.
For if one delays, they swell the limbs, and by chance they reattach to the bone in their current position;
for heaven forbid that one should move it at the time when it is swollen: often bring about discomfort and other pains;
however, when this happens, if you make the patient see a surgeon, then let them rest until all the abscesses have subsided;
Then apply the member of hot water and oil, then gently remove it, and treat each limb as if its treatment comes naturally in place.
And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
It often happens that the jaws are dislocated backwardly, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: or they have a slight stiffness at their joints, and become slightly softer; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the back, causing saliva from the mouth to spill out that they cannot contain it, nor can they close their mouth, and their tongue wraps around with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
and in such a way that the attendants cut the head near the injury, and push the pins of his pocket into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides; And let the other hand's fingers be spread out, for setting things equal;
And instruct the patient to soften them, his jawbones, and move them in all directions. And hold the thumbs in place until they settle back into position.
And if it hurts when he returns them, even if they are the two jawbones together, if they are immersed in hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset them;
Do not hesitate to return them, as we have said.
And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well with softening, then place it on wet cloths in a poultice made of oil rose and wax, then gently bind it with moist bandages;
And let the patient sleep on their back, and keep their head between two cushions, so they do not move left or right, nor strain at all, but only eat light meat, until the pains are relieved, and bind the jawbones;
And then test it to see if it can be moved lightly, and not allow any opening of the mouth for eating or drinking until the mandible is well healed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be placed in their proper position within an hour, and are not returned to them, it leads to fevers that become habitual, and at times abdominal pain, and at times vomiting of clear contents.
And when you see this, then know that it's destruction; And many times, death has befallen the one to whom it happened, within nine days.
The forces cannot relieve the pain from within the body's continuity or from its backside; it can only be relieved once outside, and this is clearly felt.
And the healing is that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms; And then press the body shape to your palm, and it will return;
Then place on the plaster and the bandage, and tighten;
And the head which is towards the knife cannot be moistened; If it's not dislocated, and if it does dislocate once, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
Then apply the plaster and bind it tightly, and secure it. Instruct the patient to rest until their wound has healed.
And similarly, bring back the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated according to three methods:
The first method is when it dislocates at the part of the humerus under the axilla; And the second type is when it dislocates near the base; And sometimes it dislocates above that part, and this happens rarely;
And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor dislocate within for the nerves;
And it repeatedly dislocates from above towards the elbow, even for those with little muscle, because in these cases force acts quickly;
For those with enough muscle, it jumps to the bone and returns to the bone.
And by chance happens to some men through impact or bruising, and swells the shoulder with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Therefore, you must experience it, as long as you are certain; And then begin the treatment.
And when it moves inward towards the elbow, you will recognize the dislocation, and distinguish between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear manifestation of their diversity; And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and as it goes from the elbow to the wrist, the top of the shoulder resembles that, just like if it were an eye; And the patient cannot bring his hand back to his nose, nor move it with any movements;
And similarly, if it is dislocated at the top, even if not entirely hidden, because you clearly find it at the nape;
This manner of dislocation can only be remedied through realignment when it is new, or when the child has just been born.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand from the skin at the top, then place their thumbs under the arch, and lift the joint upwards forcefully at its natural position. And the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, then place it under; If it comes quickly.
And if she does not come as we have said after a few days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should gently soothe and alleviate it, as in decoctions of rue, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be administered;
then sew the patient on their back, and place a cushion of equal wool under them, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the heel on the cushion, and lift the head off the shoulder, and lift the arm away from the side.
and have another attendant hold the back of the patient's head so that it does not move downward; this shoulder is now coming back, and if you see whether lifting it follows this manner:
And make it so that you ensure the presence at home, which is larger than the patient; And have them face towards the costeit, support their shoulder above the patient's side by the bone beneath the skin, and lift the bone upwards so that the patient hangs down. And have another person guide their hand from below towards the belly underneath the patient. And if the patient is too weak, so he cannot bear any weight with it, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And it can also be reset in another way:
And consider putting the long stick in the ground, so that the shoulder is also bent like a bow, and neither too large nor too slippery; Then place it under the patient, but so that there is dirt underneath, and have the patient lying on their back.
Then extend his hand up to the other side, form it into a position, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if she does not want to return through all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: Take two large thorns from the second branch and four broad sticks, which have their tips rounded to easily enter over the armpit, according to this shape:
Then bind the tip of the shaft under a cloth so it does not burn the skin of the patient, then place the shaft over the armpit near the sore.
And extend your arm above the shaft for its entire length, and attach the shoulder to the shaft, and place the arm at the tip of the hand's wrist, then place your arm on one side of a large board, and keep the hand extended downwards, leaving the body hanging from the other side: The joint moves now.
And when it is done, no matter how it was done, if it should be that you place upon the joint a rod of hair equal, then apply an adhesive plaster with ground powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then remove from the joint addition, and rebind over the plaster, and hold your hands in this way. And let your hands remain like this.
And it must be eaten little at first, until the limb is strengthened, because it will heal faster;
and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not made soft, it will be healed.
And if the joint has moved out of its place because of moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three burnings to it, as was explained in our previous chapter about burnings.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly placed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the buttocks and breasts, or behind, if it's caused by pushing and stretching of the hands, and is administered elsewhere;
And treat until it has healed.
And if after the healing comes redness to the limb, and delayed movements, then immerse the patient in hot baths many times, until that redness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
of the shoulder joint issue
The joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pricks, and by pricks it returns;
And it is dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation does not respond, for you can see it clearly and feel it well; And dislocates according to each figure. And when you connect the cut wound with healthy tissue, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm or reach his shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in this way when the pus bursts and spreads, for if it bursted and spreaded, it would be a complaint to bring back;
And by chance cannot be brought back entirely, even when it is at the back; It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance it leads to death.
And this restoration occurs, when it's such that we can bring it back, you extend his hand to your two hands; And his arms be spread outwards and inwards towards the elbow joint from both sides, forwards and backwards, then set the joint to its place or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its normal position.
And when it comes to dislocation in front of the body, it returns as soon as he doubles his hand on his own and holds the joint at the base of the palm with a tool that is set back.
And if it does not return to its original position, administer strong extension;
And if two people assist in extending the arm and support it together, so that it does not move during extension;
Then turn the arm in each direction, then when you have enveloped it with a long and wide double band;
And when you place the joints at their joint with your hand, if you smear them with some oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint properly, until it heals;
And when it's in place, put it on dry plaster with an egg yolk, hold it steady, bend the arm at the neck to the side, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, release the tie, and leave it;
And if you see that the joint is not fitting well, redo the plaster and the tie, and leave it like this for a few days, until it is firmly set. Then release it.
And if it feels sore after the return of the joint, and it moves, should it be bathed and well rubbed, and squeezed until it is soothed. Or you place a fat sheep's fat on the joint, then leaves it for a day and a night, then apply the plaster, and let him bathe in or enter the bath; And when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put back the fat, and then let him bathe in or enter the bath; And do this two times or three, until it heals.
And if you see that, put wet cow manure heated with butter on it, and apply it;
If it returns to its place.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates easily, more so than other joints. Otherwise, it is necessary to return it to its place immediately while it is dislocated, as soon as it becomes dislocated. It should be noted that the limbs swell or an abscess forms.
And the repositioning is done by placing the painful hand on a board, stretching out the assistant's hand, and guiding them to make it equal. You should have your palm facing towards the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it becomes normal again.
Otherwise, you must check if it is properly in place; Therefore, have the patient lay down their palm of their hand on a board during stretching and repositioning. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and you look to place his hand at the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it's simply so. If not, if the removal of plaster dressings that calm abscesses is done, and he leaves like this without needing to start again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you do not put him in the right place after a few days, if the joint remains bent;
And it does no harm to the patient as long as his arms are immobilized, and he cannot strain anything at all: So know that the nerve is cut, or the artery;
If there is no other way than to apply the cautery for removal, and by chance there is no other remedy.
And when the hands are in plaster, apply what we have said on plaster, then apply it and leave them for five days, then remove it and leave them as is.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no pain, if the water is warm, and rub it until it becomes clean.
Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand.
No dislocations are ever done to either hand, each part alone, or on the back of the palm or belly.
Therefore treat the shoulder, and maintain the dislocation in your hands until it heals. Then support the head of the shoulder, and guide it towards the side where it was dislocated;
and leave it for two days, then set it evenly on that day;
and fasten it as we have said, and loosen it each day, let it move, and fasten it again the next;
and repeat this often until it is tightened, and do the same if dislocated in the hand's belly, perform as shown here until it heals;
And do exactly the same thing when it has dislocated on another side.
Dislocation of the ankle, dislocation of the back
When it is dislocated in the back or neck, or when there are multiple dislocations, if no cure is applied, because time rushes the patient into harm.
And the signs are that the discharges go against one's will, cannot be held back, and many times they soften some limbs, or both legs, or both arms, or the neck.
And many times the buttocks move to four sides;
That which moves at the backside is called "gibbosity":
The treatment consists in returning the gibbosity, which has come from childhood: If there is no cure or healing throughout.
And that which comes from childbirth or impacts or similar things, according to the old methods of treatment using big words, is not benefited in all great ways;
But I have summarized it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that when in pregnancy there is a disturbance before the anus, no one remains healthy;
And similarly that which comes directly to the two sides, and one can only cure inside what comes to the back, as I say;
And it is that the patient stretches on his back evenly to the first part, and there is no strain on him, so he does not blister;
Then place the first stick in the ground and form it, and the other at the ankles, and tie a string under all the knees of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
And two helpers know how to bind them, one at the head and others at the joints, among the two pokers;
And be well closed, the poker as we have said, and the mirror place her palms on the spine form, until she recovers.
And if she does not recover from this treatment, take a plank of three spans long and set it over her back, and if the patient is on their side, place one end of the table under the spine. Then lay the middle part of the table on the spine; And have the mirror place her feet at the other end of the table, and press well until she recovers to her usual state;
And if you notice that it twists at the elbow which turns towards the hand. And you should place two sticks at the head of the sufferer's arm from half a span long, and in between each stick, there is an area of about one palm's width.
And place a notch in each stick, or where the elbow corresponds, and have the sticks firmly set into the ground, so they do not move.
And between each pair of sticks place another stick turned, at the point where they would normally turn, and have two small turning sticks, about one palm's length, to help turn the elbow.
And tie the junction point between elbows at the elbow towards the head and the other joint towards the feet on the other elbow. Each servant turns their elbow to all the joints equally, as we have said, and the master applies the spine evenly in this manner.
And when they are even, place on it a desiccating plaster with plenty of egg whites, then coat it, and then apply turpentine, and then rub it with a tablet of three inches long, which penetrates the fatty part and the healthy portion of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient to endure slight blisters until they are healed;
And if nothing comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the turpentine that we have mentioned before; And each time one administers a piece of cork, and every time there appears the appearance behind the spinal bone in the back, and be careful that it is dislocation; And it is the bone that opens, for which one must not have presumption: By chance death might come about.
Know that the joints of the hips and the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, not like other joints.
And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: Inside and outside, in front and behind;
And even more inside there, and only partially dislocated forward and backward.
And the knowledge of such a dislocation inside is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens further than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend over the fire; And it is where the limb is swollen due to an abscess, because the joints of the shoulder come there.
And the sign of him who approaches death, so it is that this event is contrary to what was before.
And for those who have it in front, if their leg is well according to completion; Otherwise, don't double the calf without pain, and if you want to make it stand up, it can't before and holds its urine, and swells the leg, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who is behind are such that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and that leg is more curved than the other, and his ankle is flattened, and that shoulder comes up under his back.
The process for this simile of dislocation is that you reward it when the dislocation is old, and it stays according to its position, if there is no treatment; And it should not have any assumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you rush to correct the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it right and left; If by chance it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, then you must apply great force, and hold the leg strongly with both hands, or with one tie under the knee. And stretch out another's hand over it in such a way that they push their hands under their armpits, then pull it with one strong tie up to the thigh. And hold the head with the other hand of the rope;
Stretch both upwards and downwards at once, until the patient stands off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is typical for four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's correct.
If not, then you should treat it according to its appearance.
When a dislocation is in the pardedens area, it is necessary for you to recall the condition on their healthy side, then put the tie on the root of the leg, and the part which is around the artery. Then adjust the tie above the artery, and against the force.
Then take hold of another attendant's arms, and hug the thick part of the leg on the diseased side, and extend it to the rear in formation: if it returns to its place now;
and this way of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot compress it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie both feet of the diseased side together with a strong ligature around the two ankles and the two knees, and let the diseased leg extend two hands more than the others;
Then have them hung by their head on a pole, and above the ground two feet long;
Then command the minister to embrace the head of the goose, and have other ministers hanging with the patient, who embraces firmly the goose, because the joint is now returning quickly.
And when the dislocation is behind, if the patient lies, as we have said in those with elasticity, and stretches the ligament properly on the affected leg, and also on the waist;
Then place two prongs, one on the head and the other at the waist, then insert the prong between the goose's legs in the shape of a dislocation; And plant wet cloths inside to prevent the patient from blistering, then extend each minister towards him, and place them evenly on their hand for the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good.
If it doesn't, place on .ie., the table, and press on it like we said in glibosity, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when there is a dislocation present, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the patient's limb so that it is over the diseased ankle, then press with one hand, and extend it backwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not need to extend the limb downwards or lift off the ground, but rather should be placed as if the hip was dislocated backwards as we have described about lying on both hips; and under its back, and the limb should be extended as we have said previously, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be correct when the diseased leg extends its legs, and they will be equal; Therefore adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three days or four, then release it, and apply the plaster on top;
and if you see that they are even, hold them in place as before, and let it rest for three days;
then release it, and allow him to move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The knees are dislocated according to three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their hip. If they cannot bend it towards their hip, know that they are dislocated;
And for the restoration of all this, you should make the patient lie straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their buttocks, and set their foot on your feet;
Then take their knee with your hands, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee to form. And another helper extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that they bend their leg lightly towards their thigh.
And place the plaster, and allow the leg to rest against its thigh, and keep them together tightly for three or four days, then release.
And do not move the injured limbs until the members are reinforced.
And if the limb is not in place, apply strong extension, as we have said about treating the hip, until it becomes stable.
On the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never perfectly reduced or completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs so are that the ankle is swollen, and moves forward to the part where it has been dislocated.
The readjustment must be quick, and when it's only slightly out of place, we should gently stretch his hands towards it.
And when it's dislocated almost completely, you should have the patient sit straight, and guide his left hand down by the leg, above the ankle;
Then pull his foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, then extend it upwards, and firmly keep the foot up.
Do this twice as we have said, by squeezing and pulling on the foot;
If it returns, that's good;
If this does not work, then restart the operation, for it is remediable.
And if it cannot return this way, then have the patient sit up on their bed with their back touching the ground, and bury his penis between his thighs in the earth, and firmly plant it into the soil between his legs, and tie cloths around him, so as not to bruise the penis;
Then scrape the soles of his feet with ministers (which likely means tools or instruments), and others spread his legs out to his hands or knees, so he ties them around his neck on his chest; Then spread each minister (presumably meaning instruments) equally, and place the penis between his thighs to hold it when one extends.
Then place the mirrors equally to reset the dislocated shoulder at his hands, and others use ministers (tools) to scrape the healthy leg above the wound, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the correct point, then apply the plaster and bind closely above, keep it steady and firm, tie down the foot, and guard the nerves that are located under the ankle from behind, ensuring they are not too tightly bound.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage becomes loose, due to the firmness;
Then release it on the third day or fourth, and guide the patient to move for three days; And if he goes beyond this period, it's not safe that he will still dislocate again.
And if abscesses are pressing on him and it comes to this, you must soothe him, as we have said elsewhere, until he feels better.
Of the fire cautery, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When the arms are dislocated, if they need to be properly stretched as part of their work, it is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in neither the neck nor leg bone, it's necessary to have the patient lie completely flat or on a table straight up and down, and place your foot where the joints are open. Then press with your foot firmly until it returns;
And when they are even, and there is nothing open, you place under the foot of the patient a table with two shoulder rests. Then adjust them firmly, and leave them for three days, then release. And make them rest until they are healed.
regarding wound care and dislocations together
When there is a wound with the dislocation and one seeks to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not cautious in the treatment, if you do not know the art and have not practiced it for a long time, or if you are not compassionate and merciful and delaying, then do not be reckless;
and start with calming things like abscess removal, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope for their recovery; And when you see hope, immediately reset the limb back to its place, so that pus and wound can heal.
And when the limb is back in place, administer treatments that soothe the pus and wound. Care for the wound, as it requires, with dried ointments;
And if there is fracture along with the dislocation, and small bone fragments, set them back into place, and do as we have instructed for simple diseases;
And guard against entering paths of fear, as I have said, for you must act according to your Creator's will, and by the knowledge with which you arm yourself and protect your body.
