To you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latter part of the science of medicine combined with its completeness. And I have done the end through its demonstrations and by its statements. And it came to my mind that I should complete this book with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the art of hands is practiced in our region and is unknown everywhere, it has been lost and discarded, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been performed by hand. And because of this, errors and vanity have come about, and minds are closed, and knowledge has become distant.
It seems I might revive this treatise altogether, according to the path of exposition, declaration and abbreviation; And will come together the forms of the metal cauteries and other tools of the operation with the adjustment of exposition and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been extended. And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master in the art of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the measurement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and tendons, and the number of bones, and their movement and mobile and stationary veins, and the location of their exit.
And according to this says Hippocrates that without the tool we are little and with the work is less; And similarly in the art of manual skills.
We tell you at the introduction of this book that if someone doesn't know the things already mentioned, they might make mistakes and deceive people;
So often, many have entered this science and then abandoned their knowledge and experimentation.
For I saw a madman looking at an abscess or neck of a woman, and cutting the arteries from her neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another madman treating a stone in an old man, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder from it, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been summoned to extract, and saw the location of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they were well cut it would kill him.
And I saw another madman treating the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage he got an injury;
and the surgeons full of ignorance caused the breakage on the wound in accordance with strong luck, and did not allow any medicine to reach the wound, and left it like that until the end.
And he commands that she not loosen it at all;
And wait like that until the leg is completely healed and the feet came to ruin.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come to release the leg; And when I heard it dislocated so smoothly that he felt no pain at all.
But the entire corruption was already confirmed in his body or limb, and it could not be cured;
And the corruption continued to spread through the body until the limbs were completely lost.
And as for another instance where one abscess weakened another intertwined abscess, and then it inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humours, does not allow one to touch it with iron if it isn't in its entirety within what can be removed all that which has been corrupted.
And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: This means, "it refers to," or "this is known as," where there's danger in multiple positions.
And I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it's necessary that you keep them in mind, so that the ignorant may not speak ill of you.
If you take your tools in hand and treat your patients with both gentleness and firmness, and use the best method so that through the grace of God, you come to heal them and remain just;
and leave the unbearable diseases without cure;
And remove from those who make you doubt, and have faith in your skills so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens states in some of his admonishments: Never apply an inappropriate remedy for illness, lest you be called mad instead.
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicine-based cauteries, and they order the chapters from the head down to the stones;
and descriptions of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything else that is necessary for this task.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters.
And these chapters are arranged and describe the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters;
And it is arranged concerning the position of the head up to the neck, and regarding the shapes of the instruments.
Just as we recall our work, it is fitting that I explain the quality of each aid and the harm of each constitution.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest word and subtlest science, and the secrets of response;
And many wise men spoke about this, and they agreed on it;
And their words satisfy me, for I fear the length of them.
I say that the cautery helps universally in any complexion where it has matter, for there are two complexions: This means to know hot complexion with substance, and dry complexion with substance.
In the hot and dry complexion together having substance, they devised nothing and said that the cautery is a great help; And others said the opposite: that the cautery is only beneficial for diseases that come from heat and drying. For the nature of fire is so hot and should not be used to treat diseases that are caused by heat or drying;
And it is those who say the opposite, that the cautery provides great assistance to hot and drying diseases that manifest in people's bodies. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the constitution of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
And in every case, do not intervene except for those who have tried it and know the chapter of cauteries by long usage, and understand the variety of people's complexions, and their conditions and causes of diseases, and the occurrences and span of treatment;
For other complexions we have none, just as in cold and wet illnesses. And all these matched and agreed with the cautery.
And know, children, that when assembled in fire, a cautery has secrets of healing arts, and it offers more benefit than a hot medical treatment.
For fire is simple, and does not come out except at the body part that is heated, and does not harm other parts if you do not name it.
Medicines originating from one body part to another through circulation generate illnesses within the body. And by chance, it affects the patient.
The fire, due to its height and the goodness of its quality, does not do this thing if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it aligns with the truth of things;
And for this reason I apologize for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to reveal the secret that lies with fire and the quality of the work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher demonstrates in his demonstration; Receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they decided on what times the cauterizations should be performed, and prescribed them carefully.
And I say that the cautery is suitable in all circumstances, because the injuries caused come off easily with the help of the cautery; And indeed, if the cautery is for necessary pains that cannot wait until greater mischief befalls the limb.
And never think like, silly child, as fools do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and he says so;
and he says so; but it is not as they think, for cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries the fluids which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine because of its speed in increasing its power, and because of the virtue of its work and its authority.
And it is possible that a disease may occur at any time depending on the constitution of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature;
And in him they assemble the excesses through acquisition of meats and similar things; if one does not administer cauterizations at this point or where there is little excess and moisture, such as with dense cauterization for pain, then that particular kind of pain does not return. But this happens slightly.
And few people understand why cauterizations are called the ends of medicine; it is to be seen; and that's how it is.
But they don't believe that cauterizations come after medicine; rather their understanding is false. Instead, in the realm of medicine, it is cauterizations which are considered as a final resort because whenever our treatments for any disease fail to produce results, then we administer cauterization and it becomes effective.
Therefore, it is true that cauteries are at the end of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
The old ones said that gold instruments' cauterizing tools are more effective than iron ones, and they mentioned this because of the quality of gold and the purity of its substance;
and they say that the blades of the cauterizing tool do not cause rotting, but this is not visible because I have tested it and found that it does become visible in some people;
And gold cauterizing tools are better than iron ones, as they said. And even so, when you heat gold tools, you may not know if they are hot by the color of the gold, and it cools off quite quickly;
and if they are heated too much; if it is put to the fire; And thus there is enough prevention.
So I have ordered this chapter on how to find the shoulder joint until this point, because it makes the search for it lighter.
The use of cautery is appropriate in cases of moisture and cold within the brain. There are two kinds done by reason of an illness called 'soda', and due to various humors descending from head to eyes, and ears, as well as from numerous dreams and toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be cleansed by a dissolving medicine altering the third or fourth part of the body, depending on what the properties and heat and habituation of the patient can bear; Then resume the original function of the organ in the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the back of his head;
after place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his second eyes; and leave where your thumbs arrive; if it bleeds from the cheek, heat the cautery called "olive" which has this form: And mark its position on the body with ink, and guide your hand down and steady it little by little as you readjust. Then ease your hand slightly, and check the joint if you can see the bone has settled somewhat; And if you don't see it, start using the cautery again until you see the bone as I have instructed;
After taking a small amount of salt, and put wet and soft cotton inside, place it on the joint, and let him rest for three days;
After place moist butter on the cotton. And leave it until the charred part is removed; After treat the wound with the ointment known as 'tetrafarmacition', until it heals properly.
And if one spoke of the old, saying that when more remains open the wound, more purges out; and because it moves with this assistance.
And it was said that one should leave the cauterization for so long that part of the bone gets burned, and then remove that which is burned from the bone, and treat it.
And they say that one should apply the cautery until it heals, and press so hard on it as to make the opening as wide as a woman's pubic area when she gives birth; because this allows the body fluids to flow out.
And should we leave the wound open for a long time; After that, one must clean and heal it.
And these two methods of using the cautery do not seem to be good for everything, except in cases where there is a way of fear;
And it seems to me that I should leave it as it is;
For the head of the shoulder is weakened by continuous exposure to nature, as we witness with other limbs;
And even when the shoulder blade is weak by nature, and the first sign of a cautery is more healing and harsh for me, and with this I work together gathering health.
When there is chronic pain in the head and it lasts long, one should use remedies like herbs and pills that are called "cochines", and treatments for cleansing the head and ears and bandages; and if one performs the cautery as we have described before, and it is effective. Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong constitution, and do not let it become too cold; Therefore, apply the cautery to that fire weapon a little as we have said above. After you have made the cautery on each hoof up to the bone, just like we explained before, and apply the cautery where the term 'knees' is called; and place them in the area where suction cups are used. And move your hand gently, so you do not see up to the bone: Patients feel much more intense pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere;
And it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than that which cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is how:
For the fire cautery, When pain comes suddenly in part of the head, and extends the illness up to the eye, and the joints are treated with purging medicines, and other treatments that I have described for disease divisions, and nothing benefits from all this. So you do cauteries using two methods, namely with medicinal sweat and through fire.
The medicine-based cauteries involve taking a spoonful of oil and applying it to the skin and covering it with I or II pieces of cloth; then heat it so that you can place the hot oil over the skin where the pain is located, allowing the oil to permeate through.
And when it has been placed there, if you hold and press well and leave it thus for twelve hours; And then the dislocation and treatment were removed after the use of garlic oil for twelve days or three; Then place a butter poultice on it until pus begins to drain out.
After the ointment treatment as long as it remains clean;
And if you see fit to use any of the burning medicines that I have written about, or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery operates in this manner. Heat the cautery which is as follows:
And it is called "closed" because the head has the shape of a bell or it has one small curve, and in the middle there appears a little outline;
And place it at the painful head, and hold your hand and twist it a little gently, until half of the mustard seed is burned;
And lift your hand so the artery doesn't burn, which has been exposed, and there is an abundance of blood.
After placing cotton in the wound site, and let it sit for three days; Then put moistened cotton in oil, and then treat the wound with ointment as long as it remains clean;
And if you wish to cauterize this inflamed area with the fire cautery, which is called 'cultellare', all at once, and be careful not to cover the artery in this inflammation which isn't old.
Regarding the use of a fire cautery, instruct the patient to allow their hair to grow long and evenly; if they are pricking at their base, hold them steady so they don't move until they fully grow.
When you treat inflammation as we have previously described in divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't improve, and you see that the cauterizations mentioned earlier in medicine and iron don't affect it, then it's necessary that you heat up the cautery which is called 'cultellare' until it becomes white;
And so when on the limb a line half the length of one's arm is drawn out, and you take hold with your hand once, and steady it so as not to cut the artery and do not ascend up to the bone.
And beware that the jaw remains quiet when one chews, and the tongue should only focus on remaining silent and avoid spasms occurring in the body, and beware of bleeding from the artery if it is cut, or if cutting has caused significant fear even to those who are unaware and inexperienced. And let the work be done according to my path;
but I will tell you how to properly stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it occurs in this book.
And if you notice that these cauteries do not help with the illness, and the patient is suffering, apply them to the back as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
And if you observe, administer the cautery as we have said or in the chapter of artery extraction, with the cautery that has two blades; And indeed, these cauteries are better and more effective than others.
The pain of the ear from both cold and heat
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "points", according to its form.
After marking the entire area around the patient's ear or in both sides where pain is felt, and move away a little from the base of the ear after you have indicated its position. and mark ten points around each ear;
After treatment until it becomes healthy.
Of the torment of the mouth
Tortures that should be treated by cautery can only include those that move with the blood, as we have mentioned in our discussions of diseases.
And do not use cautery on symptoms that come from scarring and infection in the flesh.
When you treat this symptom of blood-moving torture and the discharge of bodily fluids and purge from the head and gargling, if it doesn't work, then it should be that you apply three applications of cautery to the skin. One at the root of the ear, and another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips;
And place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and apply it to the area above the ear's top until slightly over the corner of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger. And let the cautery burn until half of the thickness of the flesh is consumed;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And it resembles the appearance of the scalpel that we showed before, but it is a bit more subtle. It is necessary for the knives to be a bit larger;
after treating the wound as I have described previously, until it heals properly.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and if it does not benefit, and the patient has a fever, then make four cauterizations: Two on the two horns of the head, and one under the head, and one where the neck is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
And make the treatment as we have said before.
Of Liturgy
For this illness, one must give the patient large grains and pill-like things to alleviate the head;
After removing the head's pain, place it on the back of the head with the tallow plaster that is written or treated for plasters;
and this is the way to apply the cautery: Do it as I have said if you do so.
If it is done like this, well done; And if it isn't, you should apply three cautery treatments descending from the head to the neck, and leave two inches of space between each treatment.
And treat it similarly to other cases, and if you find it properly setted, and the patient is suffering, then apply a fire cautery in the middle; And if it's needed, do so on the two horns as well, and treat until it becomes healthy;
and may be that which is called 'olive fire' by the cauterization, as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and what we have mentioned previously;
After cleansing the head of the patient, then apply the fire on the head and on each horn, and later on three places near the neck spine;
And if you need more, and the horns are moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is persistent, then apply four fire cauterizations on the spine of the back. And let him go until the most gentle wound is healed, and lift your hand; after the cure until it becomes clean, and use the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have already discussed.
Regarding the application of a cautery with fire, instruct the afflicted to allow hair growth until it is long and even; and if they poke at their origins, restrain the eyes so that they do not move until they grow.
The epileptics should only use fire cautery if they are of the phlegmatic type, and it is necessary to first modify their diet with years' worth and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division where the diseases are large and suffer from medicine.
And if it's a child who cannot endure the pain, make them gargle and chew frequently, often mixing their brain with good meats;
After the king's head is in the middle, and I apply the cautery as we have explained before, and apply the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; And if the patient is in pain and it's external, apply cauterization as I have instructed for those with paralysis and softening of the flesh, on the spine both at the back and neck, and use the olive cautery according to the method I have explained.
If the patient is young, make him a fine fire cautery according to this method:
When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or moisture are corrupted and blood is thickened, then apply the cautery of partial cauteries as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
And if it is due to the cause of melancholy that the excesses decline towards melancholy, and there are symptoms in the body of moist maladies, then let them drink something that purifies the brain according to what was stated previously in this section.
After obtaining the head of the animal; after making a linen thread well done, like a circle, if you place it around the head;
and the patient should lie in bed, and make sure they are well restrained from all sides;
after applying the ointment, and using old burberry butter to spread it; and heat it on fire moderately, so that the patient can bear it or it can be handled; after removing the circle from within through the head, and let it cool down;
and do this to the patient once a week each time with another effective method, until they recover completely.
Or, if you see that it has been burned by making marks on almost the entire cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain more so;
and then place damp cotton in butter and fat from gelatine.
regarding the wisdom of the eyes When the eyes first come by means of the signs that I have described in division, then you should start and continue to provide the patient with things that cleanse the head, and protect it from all moisture. Make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
After instructing to hold their head again, and have them cauterized while holding the head, and perform two cauterizations on the two temples when the pulse is descending in the head or at both eyes together, where one eye's pulse is descending into one;
and apply all the cauterization to every vein and artery that is around the head, and have them cauterized long according to the width of the temples;
and beware of blood clotting, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by pressing with part of your hand as you did.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions with cautery on how to apply it.
And whenever one applies the cautery or heated iron between the two bones at the back.
And you can see that they are cold, wet excesses, so I apply the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this treatment when descending to the eyes: I apply the cautery at the top of the head, and two applications of the cautery on each temple, and two applications of heated iron between the two bones; And if there is need for more, sear it carefully above the eyebrow with every small cautery.
When you administer the remedies as we have discussed in the division, and if they do not benefit, then give to the patient three raw fowl soups; After the reign of the head, and I have it cauterized or in the middle of the cauterization with olive oil; And perform two cauterizations using the 'clavil' cauterization on the two eyebrows, a little above the hair.
and be careful not to cover the artery as you do this.
And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive". Of which the form is:
And if you see that two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
And do not let your hand rest until the third part of the paper is burned away, according to the method I have explained.
of the hair which points the ear Never has it happened that the hair of the nose turns into the nostril and reaches the inside; one does cauteries according to two methods: This means that either fire or burning medicine is used.
With the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and become even, then put the patient in their healthy state; After drawing on the page about eyes, make a figure that is as such as the leaf of myrtle, and let it begin with the sign at the start of the hairs;
Then I put moistened cotton with the yolk of egg and camphor of garlic on the eye, then warm up the cautery as shown here.
After that, apply the cautery to the figure you have drawn gradually and very little times, so that the heat is evenly distributed across it.
And the signs of health in this operation are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand at the angle of the eye;
Then lift your hand and let it be thus for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the scab is removed; After the oil cure until it has become clean.
And when this comes to the hairs and the parchment has become soft, then resume the fire on that same place, just like you did at first;
And when the hairs have departed, apply the cautery until the parchment rises to its natural place and remains even, not prickling the hairs with the eye.
The burning medical cauterizers instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make parchment take on the shape of a bay leaf;
Then take French soap and fresh ashes, one of each, and grind them together well; And make haste, so that it does not cool, then stretch upwards towards the shape you are made like a leaf of myrtle, and place the eyes on paper; And if the illness lasts in this oil only, one must open in this way, and if it exists in both similarly; And put over the oil cotton saturated with moisture, like an egg;
And the flesh of the disease be in your healthy part and place your hand on the medicine, and press on the spot several times whenever the disease feels the medicine's bite, because it feels the bite just like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine prescribed to you is needed. And when the bite has passed, lift up the limb from under, and reward if you see the paper lifted in the same way as it would be lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; And if this is the case, then do so well.
And if it's not this way, then reapply the medicine to its place or let the medicine take effect until your actions are equal and your eyes are focused;
Then place wet cotton with butter until the oil burns out, after which cleanse the area of the ointment known as "dyafenis" and others, until it is clean.
And if it's your business that you must guard well to your operation by great care so that no medicine leaks out from the eyes.
And if the paper becomes oily and the hair catches in it, then apply the medicine to that part of the skin which is softened by the clean paper, just as you did before. After cleansing until it is clean.
and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your restrictions;
and do not let the right path be rejected by him who studies this art.
Of treating fistulas by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply a cautery treatment according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy direction; and guide the guards of their head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or let go of their head;
after that, place cotton moistened like an egg or garlic juice on the eye;
afterwards heat the cautery which is prepared:
and place it on the head as if it were the tip of a goose feather, ensuring that there is contact with the cautery;
If you see it, if it points from one end to another, and if you see it, if it is also like a tent;
However, this is what happens due to your work.
After pressing the fistula opens, and one treats the putrefaction, and dries it; And if it is closed, let it heal, and remove from the belly;
After placing the fire cautery above it, hold your hand on the cautery near the part that is sensitive beneath the eye, so that your hands do not cause mischief; And place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the start of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If this doesn't work, then apply the fire cautery once more, and repeat if necessary, letting it sit for three days.
After placing moist cotton and grease on it, continue the application of the ointment until it heals. If it does not heal within forty days, then apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. And observe the king according to what would come in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand about fistula, and do as described; After placing in the incision a slender camel hair of this form: and it is done to the amount of three parts of a spoon; hold your hand or the camel hair firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the heat does not escape to their ear;
And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient cotton soaked with moisture or under wax:
The plucking is done in the manner of the disease at its origin, and the healthy one through wondrous health maintenance.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good. But if not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child and return the fistula to its proper place under the child's neck according to what is suitable in our own way.
cuts in lips Rarely, there appear tears in lips which are called 'hair', and similarly in infants' lips.
When you treat these tears as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't help, then apply this: take a small surgical instrument for cauterization according to this form:
And put him quickly into those openings as long as he lives until it grows.
After the treatment of the waxiness, while it is still healthy.
When it comes to the root of the throat or in the ovary, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after rotting and swelling and becoming inflamed, it turns into a fistula; And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it yields nothing: So, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the mouth or the end of the fistula, and keep your hand until the metal reaches the bottom, and on the other side.
and do this once or twice, after the treatment as we have discussed in treatments, as long as it is clean;
and if it has been treated like this, it is good. and if it is not treated like this, you should expose the bone and remove the infected bone according to what you find in your chapter.
When the gums have softened due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and if that does not work, then put the head of the bone back into its healthy position; After the heating of the cautery, its shape will come later in this manner that you place a stick under the tooth;
And place inside the cautery until it heats up quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
After ease your hand and continue the cautery according to your will;
After fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and then remove it.
And in this way, the teeth that were moving are stabilized, and the gums that were soft are made firm, and the moisture that was corrupt is dried.
Of toothache
When toothache comes from cold or if there is cold or fever, and the treatments of medicine don't help, then you need to use cautery according to two methods: And butter cautery and fire cautery.
The wax cautery is such that you take tallow from a cow, and the tip in a spoon made of iron or spider. Take cotton and envelop it at the tip of a tent; in this place, moisten the wax with butter until it melts, then apply to the aching tooth as quickly as possible and hold until it cools down.
And thus perform it often until the virtue reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton cooled in the wax, apply it to the aching tooth, and place it on the heated iron until the fire reaches the warmth of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take an iron or spider tail; make it large so that the flame does not reach to the base of the skin.
After heating the cautery, from which its shape will come afterward, place it on the skin and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down.
Do this often, because the pain will be tolerable either that day or the next.
And it's necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then press it firmly.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And apply the cautery according to how you desire and in accordance with what you can do;
and this is the shape of the needle:
Of scrofula When the scrophules are due to cold wet and don't respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as its shape will come afterward, and keep it open for two openings so that the vapors can exit from the other side of the cautery;
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; And place moistened cotton with butter until the arrow is extracted;
After treating and bandaging the wound until it heals.
When the moisters prevail in the channels of the heart, and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed by diuretic medicines first;
After applying the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to go all the way up to the throat, but only a little bit beyond the chest.
After this, another cautery is made at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, and it should be the kind of cautery called "clavicle" about which we have a depiction in front.
and treat the joint as we have described until it is sound.
When all and diseases of the womb are due to cold moisture, and patients do not have fever or chills, and it's an old disease, then one should perform two cauterizations on their strength in their veins; and apply another cautery under the buttocks between the breasts;
let it be the kind of cautery called "clavicle" according to the description given above.
And if you see fit, apply a cautery where it touches the entire "point" cautery which is called "point" according to this description in ear diseases;
And let the points go up to XXX, or beyond this point.
After treating it according to what was said earlier, perform the cauterization in three rounds according to this form:
And for these, make the fire cautery lighter, because you do it three times in each area.
On the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, bandage the wounds on their back and sides; afterward gently lift the lump inside the testicle with your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, apply the fire cautery which has two nails just like this:
and apply the cautery to the testicle until it penetrates up to the sides, and bring together four applications of the cautery figure.
and for this, use the cautery with three nails, because there are four applications of the cautery figure;
and they follow the subtlety like a tent and this is the form of the cautery with three nails:
And always attach this one on this first nerve because there are seven cauterizations needed.
After placing the cautery on, prick with a needle; After making the patient lie down, do not let his limbs move long enough until he is well comfortable.
And if it has dislocated upwards, where little happens afterwards, then apply the cauterization on the thick part of the 'clavicle' cautery, or do a small number of cauterizations.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is drained out of it, and blood returns to the patient.
For when colds and moisture in the stomach cause it to be strained according to its nature, they multiply his discharge, and he doesn't benefit from usual treatments. Therefore, it is necessary for the patient's back to be enclosed with cloths, and their legs and arms extended. From that on, I apply three cauterizations on the belly of the thigh per the amount of two, for each cautery along the clavicle, and two cauterizations further out on both sides until the pattern of cauterizations forms at three angles, and there is a space between them so they do not join together when they develop gangrene;
And let the cauterization extend to both sides of the knee, and have the pattern of cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
And if you see cauterized by a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
And he who has fear from this cautery, apply it by pressing and governing at the stomach I. spot according to the amount that you observe of its application; then cauterize over the entire cautery which is called 'points'.
After the treatment we have undergone, as long as it remains clean.
As for the liver, it experiences pain due to cold and moisture and excessive wind; until its natural condition is relieved through excesses. And the patients should be treated as we have instructed in sections; if they do not benefit from this, it is necessary that the patients are surgically treated close to their spleen. And apply three points of cautery according to this form and figure, and this quantity on the liver; release them under the ribs, where the stomach's pain is felt;
And let there be space between each cauterizer the size of two; And make the cauterizers as long as your arm length, and do not push all of your hand onto the cauterizer;
And let only half of the tip be heated, and have the patient lie straight on their bed;
And if they cannot, let them sit up, and extend their legs, and lift their arms;
And if you wish to do so, cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, should you be skilled and prudent in this art; and beware that you don't burn all of the tip completely, for you would dry up the whole body. And until it boils there, for the kidneys are very delicate in that area, and you need to know how to see.
When it has migrated towards the liver, and you must know whether it is in the liver flesh or on the membrane: If it's within the flesh, the patient feels moderate pain;
And if it's on the membrane, they feel an intense pain.
And when this treatment thins out the blood, it is necessary that the patient be on their feet;
and then guide yourself to where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, according to this shape: And apply the cautery until the kidneys become red, and go up to the thigh, until all pus is out;
After the treatment according to the treatment of the roots until they are healed;
And it should not be that anyone uses this cautery except the one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrected.
Then he can boldly operate, and always I think it better to let them move.
of the weeping cautery
The old ones said that one should do full and frequent cauteries with the roots of aristologe, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, let it be dry, and also make it as thick and as long as your fingers; And make it hot in oil, and hold it to the fire, and apply the heat between the nose and the neck of the cautery, and do two small cauteries a little downwards on the part which is below the beard;
And among the fifth rib and the sixth, two cauterizations between them, declining a bit behind. And one cauterization near the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two among the ribs further from the cauterization that is between the two shoulders.
And don't squeeze your hand, instead do it openly as when you're smelling something.
And it was said by some old ones that no man uses a fire cautery at the navel area, they heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess. And when the pain jumps out from where the pain is, as we have said about the abscess near the liver.
But in this chapter there is fear or the patient has died now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
Of mice
When you treat the disease of the mouse in those that we have said about divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they apply three methods of cautery which are all good.
There is a way for this that you make three or four cauterizations, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before.
And do not hurry your hand with all the cautery, and let the patient remain long on their back;
And another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two ends, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder;
And lift the ear that is at the mouse's mouth, where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and make the elevations by which you lift the ear according to the ear, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After burn the two ends until both ears are pierced, and then remove the cautery, and in this way there will be four.
And if you see fit, burn with all the cautery at three points.
After the treatment when it has developed gangrene over a long period, and this warrants that you change to the other methods of treatment as previously mentioned.
The cautery is not suitable for erysipelas, except in the way it is called "asclepiate".
When you treat according to the methods we've discussed in our divisions and your treatment doesn't work, then it is necessary that you perform four cautery burns on the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the place of the anus. and have the cautery burns very close to the kidney's edge.
After that, allow the cautery to remain for curing a long time, and do not cease the treatment of the disease after the cautery; And healing would hasten, and both intentions together with God's help will be united.
The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is like the illustration we showed before; And if it concerns the back being olive-shaped, according to what was stated before.
When the joints swell in someone who is prone to dropsy and are filled with yellow bile, it is necessary for you to apply a cautery on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; And lightly use your hand with the cautery without turning.
And don't enter too much in the yellow bile, so you wouldn't go outside of it, operate with the cautery according to this shape:
After that, perform two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the cutting edge; And make the cauterizations long, one over the knee in front and the other behind, midway down the leg;
Let the cauterizations burn for a while without curing them, so that bile emerges;
After performing other treatments we have discussed.
For the remedy of belly ache due to cold and moisture, as long as the restorative and digesting virtues are active in the stomach and within the intestines, it cannot be cured by conventional treatments; And you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you apply the large cautery to the stomach according to what has been discussed before or to the gastric cautery, within the circulating cautery; And apply four small cauteries on the inner thighs under the small anus; and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each knee, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the large one. Because the treatment is advantageous when there's good help present.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the empyema is either at its base or elsewhere and contains old, large cold and moist pus, if this is not alleviated as we have said in the sections, then apply cauterization: In the area of the spine at the back, where it is completely removed from under the skin little by little in a triangular pattern, and on the fire cautery around the anus;
And if you think that the stomach has cooled down and the meat is not cooking, and you see the mesentery swell up, then to the mesentery apply a large fire cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and do it again on the liver, and apply it once more on the spleen with all the fire applications. And let the cautery remain in place for as long as necessary. After treatment until it becomes well.
When you reach the end of the bone sawing, if the fire cautery appears to be in good condition, then place it entirely ablaze on the bone that was cut; And let your hand and the fire reach to the opening of the vein from which the blood flows;
Perform this once or twice, and if there is much almond oil, apply fire to each as we have said. after the curative remedies for abscesses while they are still intact;
and if you apply large cautery to almond oil, it will provide more aid.
When the patient cannot bear surgery or opening [a wound], as we will describe in its proper place, if such illness arises that can only be cured through cauterization.
When there is no hole coming from it and it becomes infected with rotting pus and corrupted moisture, if you need to thoroughly test for a subtle opening, and ensure that you know the size of the opening when it's completely formed.
After heating the cauterizing tool to resemble a rasp, and applying it inside the fistula according to how much the patient's obstruction has entered, continue with the cauterization until all the diseased tissue is charred. Do this once, or twice, or three times, depending on your need for quantity;
and you will experience burning in the nerves that are irritated, and large veins.
If the tube went to the bladder and to the intestine, then beware of these errors, and do not perform this outside its natural place, and remember that it is not a human action;
After the treatment as long as it is clean, and if the lesion is sauny (possibly a typo for 'sanguineous'), and the materials are hard over a long time, then you will know that the wound has fully healed;
And if the materials are not hard, know that the wound is three days old, and the bone has been corrupted at its root; And like one of those we will tell you in its natural place.
When abdominal pain comes from the kidneys and strong windiness, and affects no woman so much, then it is fitting that you apply a cautery to both sides of the kidneys and to the clavile where we have previously mentioned;
And if we cauterize it halfway, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will make more help.
From the bladder When the bladder is swollen and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then we should cauterize in the lower part of the bladder, where the hair begins on the penis, on both the right and left sides. Each cauterization should be as long as one inch as indicated by us.
And have me cauterize behind the back, or do it twice if you need to;
And let the cauterizations be in the form of a 'claw' as was described before.
When the uterus is cold and moist, and leaves none to conceive, and the flowers are rotten and their ends are delayed; And when they come, one feels great pain: And when they come, you should perform three cauterizations in the mouth area; or as we have said, cauterize the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back.
And let the cauterizations be for the knee, as we have said.
When the viscous fluids descend to the socket of the hip, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
And find the parts of departure visually, and it is necessary that you cauterize the hair on the hip socket at one cauterization resembling a circle, and mark in front of the parts inside the socket where it turns, so that the socket remains within the circle;
And if such cauteries are like those used for stomach cauterization.
And if you do not have these cauteries at hand, make three olive oil cauteries, and ensure that all the others are similarly well-made;
Continue with the cure until it is effective.
 When pain comes in the thigh area, it is due to cold and moisture, and the treatment prescribed earlier for this, if it doesn't work, indicates that the disease is old: Therefore, it is necessary for you to cleanse the body of the large fluids using bad-scented pills or other similar good-smelling pills. After this, perform the cautery;
And the method of the cautery is according to two methods: This means "and it consists in assembling hot medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery can be done in several ways, among which one is like this:
You should apply the fire in an oblong area of the buttock, using three triangular cautery tools according to this shape, ensure they have good depth and size, place each tool with space equivalent to that of a coin between them, and use olive oil for these procedures;
Never apply the cautery in the middle of the buttock because there are four places according to this form:
And if you see fit, apply the circular fire tool that we have mentioned in front regarding the dislocation of the buttock;
But do it with care so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the points of the wound are cleaned.
And this is the way it's done in sciatica, when pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
And if it goes up to the thigh and leg, then apply two cauterizations there or where the patient says the pain is held, and one above the ankle three times, on the left side a little.
And either use surgical cauterization or burn the wound's thickness;
And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to two or three inches below the knee or near there, then apply cauterization where they feel the pain for three points or four at the cauterization called "points". And if this requires it, do more;
And if the pain is near the knee towards the thigh, you should use a cutaneous or circular cautery on him. Make sure to take great care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave any remainder of the cautery and burn nerves and large arteries when you are using it. And don't cause the patient more harm and constriction with your actions.
And I have seen several who applied the cautery on the ankle bone, and it was effective until their legs swelled completely and likewise their feet were pierced and corrupted in all of them. After an abdominal treatment that led to death.
And if the pains are together in two parts, make a cautery on each one according to this manner.
And the wise said about the cautery of the hip, as follows: make it a piece of iron that is as thick as a small finger or perhaps a bit thinner, and ensure there are rows along its length with each row being spaced just enough to cover the area roughly equivalent to one inch.
And let the rows be two-thirds in length, and let them also resemble knots, and have a well-made iron hook.
And this is its form:
And when heated, keep it until it is thoroughly red and steaming, then place it over the buttock of the ailment, and twist it towards the healthy side;
and once burned after the fire has been applied and it is left for three days; then apply a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open as long as necessary; after the ointment cure until it is healthy.
Albucus says that we use little of this cautery for the fear of his judgement, and few see fit to use it;
yet this is one of the better cauteries, which can be tolerated, and where it becomes necessary.
The burning medical instruments for use are such that you make an implement with intertwining parts into which the edge of the door descends. It may be made of bone or iron having one long surface, and in its height it has two notches, and between each there is the size increase of a thumb; and let them extend forward and upwards, and join together in this form:
After placing the thigh bone on the lying patient's healthy side at the hip joint, and press your hand very near to the thigh bone; After placing it between the two circles of the hot fire which is heated by flame for one point, and leaves it to an hour of warmth, and allows the patient to feel heat and burn from it.
For he finds a bite also as from fire;
And when the bite has passed, lift your hand with the tool and raise the buttock gently, and leave it like this for three days, and put on butter until what is black from the scorching is whitened; And let it be for three days as decay sets in;
And this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is sound.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, you apply the same tool that marks the buttocks according to what you did on the hip equally.
And this is how one handles the hot application, and I have written it out as part of my treatise on correcting medicine. Take quicklime and fresh chalk in equal parts, grind them together, and put the mixture into a new jar. If there is a small opening so that the tip of a razor may enter;
If there is a small opening so that the tip of a razor may enter; And place another pot well filled with water, and put it on an oven and some heat sources under it, until there are two layers of powders above your hand when you have properly taken it in your hand;
And let it stay like this until all the essence, dung or grease has drained out or water boils, then take all that essence, and pour it onto heat sources such as charcoal and alkali in the same manner before.
And then it will become water and be administered in the form of preparations for medicine and in cauterizations for other parts of the body.
For it achieves the same effect as fire, and is used with other medicines such as when cauterizing well in the hip like turpentine and almond oil with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a remedy that was used for the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and to a great extent. He says that no other treatment was done, and it worked miraculously on its first use when this cure was applied, and he took baths as is instructed below.
And instructs in this manner that you take dry and fresh verdigris, and grind it finely with a little fat, and spread it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain resides, and bind it;
And leave it for three hours, ensuring that the patient does not feel any burning from the remedy.
And then make them enter into a warm bath until their body is slightly revived, and make them rest on a bed, and the pain will leave them completely and they will feel well.
And know that no one should use such medicines as the cautery, unless after the removal of the body.
And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is treated with donkey's milk, it helps a lot;
And the application of the cautery should be done in this manner. Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the depression that is between the first toe of the foot and the other one called the foscile.
After obtaining dry donkey's milk, apply it over the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the cloth, leaving it until it turns black;
And repeat this again, and never stop doing so until you think by sense it will come up to the waist, and that the pain should cease.
And this method of cautery is called "goat cautery".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact or from too much evacuation, or due to exposure to cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cauterization, for it is akin to what arises from the infusion of cold matter.
After which, when the body is void of fetid pills or other similar things, one should apply them on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked in a cross pattern, and in each line perform V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the body can endure;
And let the cauterizations be done according to the cautery which is called "points";
And if you see fit, perform three or four cauterizations halfway along the median line of the cautery in this form:
This illness often befalls young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have pale cheeks when they sit up, and fear; and you find in the last spinal vertebra of the back and within us the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this and observe its cure, if you apply it with a hot iron in this manner on the body. If the cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
And if you see it, apply the cautery to the spine along the line where the cauterization burns for two or three lines, and have the points close together.
After the cure as long as it is clean according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery in a state of excitement near nerves.
of the pain in joints
When joint pain is due to moist substances that spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes into bones, which they call "gout" properly, and when it's caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines alone, if it needs treatment with cauteries in this manner:
Make the mouth of the cautery inside the joint of the foot, and apply the olive oil cautery according to this form:
And if there is need that you touch on the thigh by the foot, if it is cauterized with the entire cautery saying 'point'. And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, have it apply the cautery on each knee three or four of each part, for all the olive oil cautery;
And if you need to do more, do it more, but don't keep your hand out of the way until the wound is well healed.
And if the pains descend as far as the thighs and back, then it is administered to them the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points inside the wrist region;
And if there remains any pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the back of the hand;
And if the pains come up to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and administer remedies.
And if you give them good governance and cleanse the humor, they will be helped by God to recover their health.
When an injury affects the lungs and the bowels descend into the womb, if this is a new occurrence, it's important that when you see the wounds being treated, you do not eat on that day; And when one consumes things which relax the stomach, so that his innards descend from his belly;
After you have made them sit on their back between your hands, and instruct them to shave their armpits until the hair is neatly trimmed, and remove it with your fingers, and pay attention to feeling under the cut at the bone, and at all times make sure it appears as half a circle above the chest;
Then heat up the cautery tool described here:
Until it is white and emits serents. Then remove the bowels to their proper place; and have the assistants shave his hands so they don't twist around backwards;
work well on the thighs with the patient, and place a servant and a sergeant by his legs, and another at his feet who will shave his hands;
Then place the cautery at the mark on your hand, and hold it straight until you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it in the first try, keep trying again as long as you reach to the bone. and know that the boil should not overflow when you apply the cautery; so as to not burn it; and so that the patient does not die or suffer any other harm from this treatment.
And know that when you do not come all the way to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be subtle according to their size, and also large enough for adults according to theirs.
after three days, apply the butter cautery until the scab is removed;
After the treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well.
And it is necessary that these remedies be given for a long time so that the urine does not overflow when they want to go to the chamber.
And after forty days, if he wants to stand up, have him supported by a well-made belt, and wear it for another forty days;
And have him get proper rest, so that he doesn't overwork himself and avoids too much drinking and eating, as well as shouting too loudly.
And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
And I will say after this chapter's treatment of tailoring.
When ulcers occur in other bellies and are noticeable, and you see that they no longer grow, then treat them with a fire cautery according to their quantity, and heat it three parts of the pot. Following the treatment as we have explained;
And none of the old ones said that one should be cauterized with a three-cornered cautery according to this form:
The first sign is the beginning of healing; draw a line across the width above the wound and another below it, and hold your hand with the fire tool all along.
The first cauterizations are lighter and heal more easily.
from old pain in no limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and the pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cure doesn't help it, then it should be cauterized with what is called "points" cautery, and the cauterizations must match the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its function and location of twisting and its pain.
If it responds well to the first cautery, that's good;
If it bears this name, start another cautery on that spot, for such injuries typically require the affected limb to respond, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient shows improvement.
The healings take place once every cautery with considerable assistance, and similarly the disease comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Can't you see her being cauterized? Take care that the disease is in its beginning stages, and if it's treated according to what we've said in this section, without getting worse or staying stagnant, and you're unsure whether the infection will spread throughout the body, then perform five cauterizations on the head: I lead the head towards nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. and above the two horns, and one behind on the back.
and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches up to the bone, and until the scabs come out sufficiently that the fumes of the large humors can escape.
and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front.
And if the mixture spreads everywhere; And if it becomes clear that it is lost, then you should cauterize with these cauteries as we have described: on the head with one, and over the nose with another, and two over the spine of the neck, and six over the spine of the back, and one large on the ribcage and another beneath it, and two over the two shoulders; And on the cuts, and on the tendons at the heel, and once on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
And beware of the nerves that are behind the heel, do not burn them;
And never apply a cautery to the bone of the thumb, and once on the bone of the stomach, and once on the liver.
And know that the more I apply the cautery, the more aid I give, and it benefits him;
And know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy would, for their body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterizing fires be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the methods of metalworking.
After the treatment, use flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it becomes healthy again.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and bandages, but it remains uncured, then I will apply cauterizations to the limb according to its size and dimensions;
And let the cauterizations touch slightly within the thigh's depth; Then apply the ointment cure until it becomes healthy.
And then perform cauterization to the arm and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that makes the limb move, and thus it is healed.
And yet, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" has progressed and medicine treatment is ineffective, then apply a small cauterization using a cautery, according to the depth of the thigh, until the boil is drained and its color changes.
Then mix with flour of almonds and lentils and rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colostrum and blood of quail, from each a part; And mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and expose it to the air until it heals.
The treatment of a sore by cautery
When gangrene begins, and you see it start to halt, if you notice it at the outset, apply a cautery instrument that appears like a circle, all around the circumference of the gangrene.
And still, some surgeons advised that one should apply the cautery also in the middle of the ulcer;
And still, I don't think that's good either, for fear it might get infected and rot, and I've already decided not to do it that way ever again;
And the more effective thing is to apply the cautery internally, with the one called "circular" cautery, as we have mentioned in terms of various types of cauteries.
When someone has an illness which is called "adubelati", and it prolongs death or because of the excess she does or due to age in the weakening of the malady when it becomes old (meaning too old) and they have little blood, or due to tension; and you see it hastening towards death: therefore, apply the cautery around with several small applications; afterwards leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced through with all the cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
And place your hand in the middle of this illness which is called "adubelati" as long as the fire points through its heart, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels it beyond in such a way that the course of corruption becomes easier.
After the cure until it is completely healed.
Another form of illness exists which is called 'corrodens', and this is nothing else but a member affection, as it burns the limbs just like you would dry wood.
If you see this disease in them that can bear a complete fire cautery, then apply small and large iron cauterizing tools, according to what is suitable for the place or where the illness is;
Afterwards apply the cautery from all sides until you remove all the corruption, and leave nothing behind, making sure that every corrupted part is removed.
And leave it for three days, and apply burning with oil on the burnt areas until the burned scabs have healed, and all the corruption has disappeared.
After the treatment of ointments that generate pus.
And if after three days you see that a clean one does not emerge, it is good;
And if not, then restart the application of the cautery on what remains stuck beneath the corrupted shoulder.
And this method was once treated with herbal medicines instead of applying heat to the cautery;
However, the heat cautery is still greatly beneficial, and I have already explained the treatment with herbal medicines in this section. Take what you need when you need it.
Of the roots coming to stones Sometimes it happens that a disease arises through cracks in the skin which we call "cyst," according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that irritates the foot.
And the cauterizations for this disease do so in two ways. This means fire cautery and hot water cautery.
The fire cautery should be prepared as if you were sharpening a piece of iron like a feather, and it should be made from good quality metal in such a way that it can accommodate nails in all directions, and it should have thin edges;
After setting everything on fire under the nail, and turn your hand fully around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; and leave him like this for three days until signs of gangrene begin to appear; Then make him a poultice of wild marjoram ground with vinegar, and leave the poultice overnight, and he will pull out his nails cleanly from their roots.
Then treat the wound by cleaning it thoroughly until it is clean.
And if they have turned outside the nails, and this happens many times in hands and feet, then you should bring them to a hot water cautery; and is done like this: take an arrow shaft or iron rod, or a feather from a goose, and place it on the nail and the thorn, that is to say, for warts; And place the coal on it until it burns all around, then add a little warm ash, and keep your hand firmly. Squeeze your hand as you turn so that the edge of the coal reaches to the base of the nail, and then find the deep hot water source down to the base;
And allow the patient to endure for a bit, the application of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it like this, and all its roots will be eradicated completely.
Start one after another, until you have treated all those inside the body, then treat the sores that produce pus.
When there are tremors due to cold or nerves, or a quartan fever or any other ailment, it is necessary that you apply four fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each vertebra. And for the fire cautery, place it on the stomach with an olive oil cautery.
If it causes trembling, and hasten the recovery of the cold illness's health.
When any sign of disease becomes visible through the skin, or pus-filled ulcers appear, these come from large decayed materials.
It is necessary at the beginning when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the boil: A fine firebrand from the wood of myrtle, whose points are taken by the flame, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with a lentiscus cautery.
And each time they cauterize them at the beginning when they are visible, according to this method, and they cannot grow any pus further in front, but it discharges all the excess that causes them, and they become healthy;
But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there were great flows of blood from the artery that is tied at the wound, which comes outwards, or during an incision near the abscess, or with the cautery on the member, and similar things. And it's very unpleasant to stink.
And yet, when this happens to none of them, if you rush to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold tightly until the pulse subsides under your finger, and no more drops come out.
Then place several small and large olive oil cauteries on fire until they are all red.
Then take me, large or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, place the cautery near that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the pulse is completely stopped.
And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
And keep doing this one after another until the wound is healed;
and be sure not to burn the nerve that lies within, and let no other harm come upon the patient;
know that when you cut off the artery, one cannot properly set it without damage even if the artery is large; this can be managed through any of the four methods we have discussed: or by cautery, or by extraction if it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong threading of the wound with a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to heal blood; and bind and restrain it properly.
Who will administer the reattachment, by tightly binding with cloths or placing hot things on, or other similar actions, if it doesn't benefit them.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no means or medicine at hand, should place their finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is healed above the wound and above the vein; And it must not be moved; but it should be moistened with cold water often until it is very cold, as long as the ice remains frozen and thickened and stays put.
And prepare for those who need cauterization and medications.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases for which fire cautery or hot medicines are needed, and we discussed their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of application.
And I have placed this chapter about the shoulder joint until the elbow, and I will proceed with this chapter in a similar manner for those who find it easier to understand these concepts.
And as I start this, it must be known that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of using the fire cauterizations, and for this reason, more caution is needed.
For in the treatment of this chapter, there are often blood evacuations when opening veins and making incisions on abscesses, as well as treatments for wounds, extraction of arrows, and incisions into stones, among other similar things; For there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
And I advise you that you do not engage in foolishness. For none of the ways of people come to remedies. If they come from those who suffered so much with their illness that they died lightly due to the panic they found in their disease, and the severity of their suffering; And out of this, one should have fear.
And concerning these, I am given the sense to say: Wait, I am afraid"; And the disease is malicious.
It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you in this manner. Instead, place more emphasis on your dignity than on your greed and do not rashly but wisely open up about what you are sure of and where you can take control;
And use prognosis and guidance in your treatments for ailments where health is converted.
And this will help you to gain good reputation, fame, and lasting memory.
Dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire by the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or I have instructed you this chapter by considering it in parts, according to what is before or the section about cauteries that I have discussed up until the foot, so you will find it easier to understand for those who need it.
Know that this disease often comes from when the baby is born, and when the mother holds the baby's head too tightly;
And it never comes about due to any fault that we know of.
And I never saw this disease occur except in children, and among all those whom I have seen, it hastened their deaths; And because of this, it seems to me that I should divide the work into parts for treatments.
And I saw the child of whom the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day to the point that it couldn't withstand it anymore;
And he suffered so much from moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone at the elbow, between the flesh and the bone;
And the operations are like this: when moisture is between the flesh and bone, and the abscesses are small that you cut through with a large incision in the head;
and as long as II thumbs, provided the moisture is contained.
and here is the shape of the sputum:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner, according to this form:
And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the signs that I'm talking about - when the corners of each part of the head are open, and when pressing it with your hand internally causes a sharp pain, and this does not respond to touch: It is necessary for you to make three cuts within the head, following this method:
And after the incision, remove all moisture completely outside. After holding the cuts with lint and powders, and I put wine and oil, then leave like this until the fifth day;
Then release it, and treat the wound with bandages and dressings, and allow the head to heal evenly, and afterwards give the patient dry meat from a small animal while the limb is reinforced and healed.
And another method of incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and gather together the water;
because it is not always in front; nor always behind; No once in the right; and no once in the left.
So cut or incise the wound open, and fill with water, and let the process follow according to your capability;
and be careful not to clip the artery; and observe for blood flow, so that the patient dies from the circulation of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When it comes to any illness that is called 'catarrh' in the eyes or at the bottom of the nose and such diseases are old, and the cure from medicine doesn't bring benefit, then the final treatment includes cauterization along with cutting off the two main arteries.
So, when you see them clip, make sure the patient has moved past their head; After rubbing the wound with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull the patient's head back with all the cloth; Then look where the vein is placed, and the ears of each are after them, and the back is properly recovered;
Then mark the ears of each, then cut both with a sharp scalpel for two parts, until you see the vein up to the bone, and this must be done by cutting across the main artery.
And if you see it, pinch off the sperm on both sides of the artery and vein above, cut them also as two inches through.
And when the veins are incised, let the blood flow out continuously from up high.
And if the artery does not open upon being pressed, it is necessary to measure three digits of space there, then cut into the ear until you reach the bone;
And what needs to be removed of the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance either a little more or less, depending on how the patient can tolerate it, and the filling of the artery;
Then look at the wound: If it stays at the spot where the spur touches, then cut off the abscess and if there's no residue, then clean the wound and bind it, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
This line seems to be incomplete in the provided text, so there isn't a clear translation for "de emigrainne". It might need more context from following sentences to properly understand its meaning or purpose within the medical treatise. However, considering "emigrainne" could refer to something related to grain (as medieval texts often covered agriculture and farming techniques alongside medicine), it might be suggesting instructions on managing grain storage, planting, harvesting, etc., but without more context this is speculative. When old age arrives, and severe coughing comes along, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere throughout one's aging body, as well as similar things. The treatment is done through ways of medicine cure techniques and all such methods do not benefit it fully; we would extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, just like what we have recounted.
And the way of their extraction is that the physician makes incisions behind the temples of his patient, and listens to the artery which appears in the temple, because it opens well through its beating, and is only responsive in some very cold men;
And if it responds, then hold the neck of some cloths under the artery, then rub its back with some rough cloth, and immerse its body in hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula of which this is the shape: Then lightly remove the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with forceps, and carefully remove all the webs that are in between each part.
And if the artery is delicate, twist it with the tip of the hook, then cut that part according to the size of two fingers. For if it isn't cut, neither does it spring forth without pain completely.
And drain one sixth of the blood, up until three.
And if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it with two threads of a strong silk thread, to prevent gangrene from occurring before the healing of the wound, and continuously bleeding;
Then cut off the excess that is between the two threads at this moment. And if you see, then cauterize with a cutaneous cautery up to the bone as long as the shoulder heads are cut;
And it is the healing work, if the sick person does not have fever and has a warm disposition. For the cautery helps to complete the drying: because it is of greater assistance for drying.
It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that we fill the space with old cotton and place properly made meshes;
And when they are released, if you apply dried medicinal substances that create pus and meshes, until there is healing;
And if you don't have a cut to the artery as much as you work, then hurry with the cauterization, or you fill the space with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the wound becomes dry. And if you don't have this tool with you, then place it in the water until the ice forms, and lift the object from cold water as long as the ice continues to form, and hold it so that it is necessary.
It should have a large space between the two knives about one inch wide. Then, when you have indicated where to cut both lines, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone and cut the vein into two places; And make sure the two heads are far apart because there is no joint of this cautery from end to end;
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the one that is softer and more easily extracted in removing a vessel, you should apply this cautery to cut the vein with two parts, but make sure those cuts are well spaced to retain heat for longer periods. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Of tears When tears from the eyes are draining through the veins above the head's backside, and no medicine treatment yields benefit, then you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel or perceive the forehead as if it were trembling; And in those places that are damp and moist so that the paper's hair falls, and the papers heat up, being scorched by the fire of tears, there is need for this treatment. And they called the old "treatment for scalds", and you do this again to the patient with this illness who has hair or a forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to the length of the forehead;
And they called the old "treatment for scalds", and you do this again to the patient with this illness who has hair or a forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to the length of the forehead; And let one of the cuts also like two do in swallowing down till near the nose, and the others two through the ribs above the papers, and be careful about cutting into the arteries that are above the papers.
And move your hand away from the continuance of the two jaws, and let each wound have the size of three thumbs crossing joints.
And have ready a piece of sponge and some linen cloths for it to wipe the blood, then use the sharp part of two parts where this is formed:
From the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; And burn all the flesh that is between the two cuts up to the line of bone, then cut further from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this pus. If you insert a tool in the first crack that is called "cultellaire", and it has sharpness on one side, and on the other side it is hard, not sharp, and this is its form:
And make the cut towards the soft flesh on the knee, and the cut meets the bone in the middle, and hold the blade until it feels the smallest crack.
And cut all the hairs that descend from the head as eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens on the wound, and then further make cuts in the middle crack up to the other exit.
And then extract blood evenly, and empty the wound for the blood taken;
Then place a tent of old cotton in each crack, and put wet cloths soaked in vinegar and oil and basil over them. Make sure no pus escapes;
And on the third day, release the bandage, and give them a large dose of tepid water, then apply basil salve with oil and other treatments for wounds as long as they are healing.
When there's no usual cough coming from the lungs, and you see that the eyes are tired and small, and weaken sight, and burned papers; And the hair grows, and one feels fullness up to the bone with pain, and the patient coughs; Therefore, know through these events that this matter and this cathartic comes only from many veins, and the moist cure that is present, if it is such.
And you must instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then create a large cut above the forehead, and another one somewhat below it. And begin from the crease of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
And when the bone is revealed, let all the blood drain onto a sponge, and then soak it between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen; Then drape it with wet cloths in wine and oil, and beware of pus forming;
When it is extracted, you should rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat with excising substances that encourage cartilage growth.
In this manner: Take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of the flower of comfrey, and make it into a paste; and apply it to these wounds to encourage the growth of cartilage throughout.
Regarding ear piercing
Everything that drops in your ears is one of the four things: it could be grains, or an animal, or stone from earth, or anything similar like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or anything that flows out like water and oil and similar substances.
When it comes to piercing the ear or any other way of doing things that do not fit with the ear or does not grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun.
If you see a stone, if it discharges any drop of purple oil or nut oil, then proceed with extraction; and you make him sneeze with consin, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and keep the ear above.
Many times, strength comes through this cure;
and if it does not come about, then one proceeds with the extraction using fine forceps, which is done in this manner:
If it jumps out through the forceps, that's good;
if not, then proceed with the extraction using a small slender scalpel;
And if it doesn't leap from this, make an armpit needle and pinch the tip of the needle or the stem of the ear strongly, and immerse whatever is inside the candle wax so that the wick cannot enter with the needle; Then let the treatment continue, because many times it goes like what we have said;
And if it doesn't come forth in that manner, take some glue and mix with it its oils, and insert with each an instrument that suits for this task, and put a little cotton inside; Then press the glue onto the stone or anything else, and continue with force.
And if it doesn't leap with all these things that we have said, then you must hasten to pierce the ear in such a way that pus and bad things may come out, and do so without delay.
And the method of making the incision is that you first make the patient bleed from the cephalic vein and drain out blood according to its size, then place the patient under your hands and turn their head upwards, and create a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs down. And make the incision as wide as a crescent moon until you reach the bone. Then remove the bone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth;
And treat until the patient is healed.
And if it's grains that have formed and they're swollen, then perform an extraction;
And if it can't come out, then administer the thin paste below according to this form: and make an incision on that seed.
But do not do this when you think that the beans are wet due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces of work;
Then extract the delicate pinpricks and from the sweat gland, just like we said before, so that the extractions are smooth.
In water then, when a person vomits in the ear, it is required that the patient uses spitting of cold liquids first, and fully fills the ear with old cotton. And let it rest on the same ear or where the water is. If she jumps for heaven, that's good.
If not, take many stones according to the length of your finger tips and gently, and warm them slightly on fire; And place the patient's ear in or slightly to the side of their own ear, and take another step away from it on one foot, and cut open with another stone inside the stone that is in the ear; And do not stop changing stones from one to another until the heat comes out completely, and thus it will come out all its strength;
And if you see it, take hold of the branch, and push one end into the ear, and the other end with fire until the most tender part is charred;
Then repeat this process for other branches, until the sharp tip comes out completely, as we have said about stones.
In the extraction of a small beast, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the case of dissection;
but if it's large and could be felt, undertake the extraction using forceps; And this is the easier thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worm-like things from the ears, when you have tried as we have said in dissection and with steam treatments, if the treatment is not beneficial, then you should observe the ear under sunlight: If there are no gaps, then use fine needles to pierce, and if not seen, take the thread from which this shape is found:
And may be narrow below and wide above. And apply the finest tip in the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient's complaint, then fully shape all the vein; Do this often until all the blood flows out.
And if they do not flow out, then immerse the cotton thread in the vein as I said for cutting into the stone;
And if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the old have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find guidance on distillations;
And if you apply your oils and medications to the ear using this tool, as depicted here for you to see: And whether it be made of silver or of a prickly weed, place it under the small openings and use it to distill;
And to press inside the distillation with a well-made arnica tool for this purpose; and if you see that you are grasping and enveloping around the cotton appendage at the tip. Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicine in the cane, let the cane be inside the ear;
Then place all the cotton inside the grasp, and press your hand in rhythm until the oil is distilled or the ear has enough exposure; And within it you feel the sensation of the patient, and if there is a distillation that is heated in the fire thus it's distilled into the ear; And remember that it should not be too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
Regarding ear piercing
No child is born without any perforations in their ears;
The same thing happens with adults due to wounds or birth in the ear of a fetus, and these injuries often enter the ear from behind, unless one can see them;
And it never happens that the hole disappears from the perforation, and you will see this well.
That which comes from behind, if you cannot see it, is usually a sign of improper healing in various conditions. And it appears that you should place the ear near the patient's face towards the sun; And look inside: and if you see the superficial pustule, if it is of this form from what has been mentioned:
And may they be equally deep in front and behind, without touching the ear;
if the pustule is of new flesh or part of the ear, use delicate pricking and gently scrape it, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the wicks go into the ear canal, take a fine, light wax and melt it with fire for a little bit, then put it inside the ear.
If you feel the pustule that causes pain in the ear from the patient, prick gently, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear;
Then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the pustule, and smear with the Egyptian ointment. Continue this treatment every day until the wound is healed. Or take an emetic and mix it with pink water, then powder the vitriol ground.
And if you see the ear swelling up, it's necessary to take the emetic and stir another wet emetic made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is removed. Then continue to treat it as long as it remains sound.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse an sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and perform other treatments that stop bleeding which include remedies for distillations.
By the end of the month that comes written on the papers about the eyes when they are wet and dry, it's necessary to spread them with tongs and forceps, and use a poultice from its roots; Then place sulfur on the area of vitriol ground.
And if it cannot be stripped off, then use a fine lens cautery to cauterize it, and the cauterizer should do so after making an incision.
And many times they return, yet nothing remains of their roots; And when they are cauterized by fire, their roots are burned and do not return.
Regarding ice or cold treatments Many times come in papers some things that seem to have a crust by their shape and hardness, and for this reason it is called "hail disease", and it's an accumulation of moisture within the paper above and below. The work proceeds as follows:
The work proceeds as follows: Take care that the hail does not move from one side to another, and it is a light matter to know;
Begin with a wide cut, then lightly sear each part of the body, afterwards grip it with forceps, and hold.
if you can't hold it without piercing a bit of the paper, so long as you don't harm the patient;
and if it splits widely, then stitch it up with a seam, and treat until it's healed;
and if it's small, do not exert much force, for the ointments will heal it quickly and nourish flesh.
And if the stone descends into the ear towards the upper part, then turn it upside down, and get the stone to one of the forceps, hold it, press from both sides;
And if paper is removed by incision, this causes no harm;
And when the ice is removed, wash out the salt water and cleanse the wound as long as the patient's health improves.
of the fat of the lumps Exinach is a grease that accumulates on the sheets of papers above it, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing much trouble for their eyes. It causes them to urinate early in the morning, and they cannot look at the sun's light because tears rush to their eyes;
And because of this, they lie down in their own feces and sleep there, and have wet papers under their buttocks that smell like excrement and give them an appearance covered with the grease which opens in the eye. And when you press on your hand with your fingers and feel exinach between them.
And the method of treatment is such that the patient puts their head back to its healthy position;
and then take flax cloth, and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity that flows out from each part, then place it on them; and press with your thumbs on both sides, so that the discharge is collected within the circle;
then in the middle of the moisture at the skin, cut a slit diagonally, and make it neither too wide nor larger than the wound we do for vein opening surgery;
and stretch the skin around until you see the discharge; and in various positions, discharge comes out of the slit, resembling a piece of white fat.
Pull out then take one whole strip of surgical cloth between your fingers at the front end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out;
and make sure not to adjust in the cut, that you do not bleed all the way up to the eye, that you do not blister it.
And if the cut does not open at the beginning of the cut, so enlarge a bit gently the cut until it opens;
then pull it as we have said, then moisten with water and vinegar and place on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Then the treatment should continue as long as it is effective.
And if it comes to the point of an abscess, then the treatment with plaster remedies until it is healed.
of the paper hairs When hair begins to grow out of place instead of naturally and are aging, if they harm the eyes, and lead to conditions like accustomed tears and paper moistening and albuginea, as long as this is the cause of eye damage;
And treatment takes place according to four methods: And treatment can be carried out by means of a cautery and fire together, or through the use of remedies and potions as was discussed in the previous chapter on cautery, and this is done whether by incision and stitches, or by sutures, according to what I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your healthy side, then turn the paper from your eye to your left hand;
If it has been turned, that's good; If not, then insert one needle with all the thread above; And either from the margin of the paper or where the hair grows beneath these hairs, and draw the thread above across the entire paper, and then turn it with the razor;
Then place over the area on the paper, above the neatly arranged hairs, all across the broad chest to the small one.
Then draw a line, and place on the paper a small cotton gauze tent and a piece of cloth, then draw a shape on the paper like an ivy leaf, as if it were a laurel tree, and always ensure that the shape corresponds to the height you see when lifting the paper which is marked for you.
And if it's necessary to cover a large area of the paper according to how flexible the paper is;
Then start from across the entire chest over the two lines you have marked, and begin at the broadest part of the chest down to the smallest. And make a cut near the natural hair openings in growth of a root, then place the onion in one of the two angles close to the ear, then burn completely.
Then join the two lips with a stitch using a needle and all one strand of fine wool thread, and cleanse of blood, and burn off excess threads on the two ears for any sticky substances you see. If you do this properly;
And if this does not work, then take no concern, let the stitch and threads until three or four days;
Then treat the wound with dry and binding things, because paper gets wet from the heat of the wound and its joining, but stitches are damp (as the old ones said), and it's work without fear; And if there's another way:
And if there's another way: And it is that you seal the paper with a figure as round as an holly leaf, just like we have described, three inches square according to this shape:
Then, cut those that are above evenly according to the shape shown here:
And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and if it's not equal, then take a needle or wherever there is thread, and stick it through the figure; and thread another piece of wool through the large loop, and the second piece through the small one, and join the threads evenly between your thumbs;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have marked, just like we have described, then join the two edges of the wound by sewing, and treat until it heals.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and similar restorative balm;
And sometimes happens that the paper's hair gets converted:
It is necessary for you to use what we have instructed about incisions;
but the stitches in one and the other are more artificial.
The treatment for scabies follows this form: and you must convert the paper and cut it internally according to what I have said. Then make two incisions with an art, and also make two fine threads as long as the paper is wide, taking into account its thickness; and place two heads of each part where you hold the threads;
Then gather both together on what stands above the paper of the eye, and hold the two strings of each side firmly; And leave it like that for some days, and the skin which is being held will weaken, dry up, and peel off, until it falls out by itself.
If it lasts longer, if the wound takes time to heal, then treat it as long as it remains healthy;
And when the wound has healed, and if you lift off the paper, and no longer will grow hair;
And this is the form of the two strings that you will make according to this shape, and according to this length and width:
The operations are as follows: you take a fine needle and thread it with silk string that is strong and fine; Then gather together the shoulders and do not mix one with another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length;
Then instruct in hunting another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the hair with this thread;
Then place the patient's head on your sound part;
And let the sunlight reach to all parts so that you can see clearly; because this is a delicate and small operation. Then thread the needle through all the hunting grounds at the base of the adjusted hair, and pierce it in the paper swiftly while you pull it above the natural hair.
Then remove the hair up to the hunting ground, and thread that hair in the hunting ground, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then remove your hand until the hairs grow out all around on paper with natural hair.
And when the chase is treated and the hair does not grow out with it, then remove the chase at the end to all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase grows out smoothly from almost above and you see this through the eye's vision;
Then remove the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair thickens in its place and grows the flesh out;
And if the hairs are small, accompany them with one hair as long as a cow's hair, and lift it up alongside that or where you leave it, until it is fully grown out, then lift it.
Regarding eye infection When this illness, called "aleacrati" or gangrene comes to the eye, if there are two ways:
One naturally, and the other unnaturally.
And occurs suddenly from injury, or due to surgeons, or by means of cauterization, and through similar things.
And the way of treatment in this is that you cut open this seam and expose the eyelid, and place linen wicks inside, and keep it until it has healed;
And it is not right to use in the treatment of this any things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first one;
but work with things that soften, such as fennel; and wash it with hot water or vinegar and linseed oil, and apply onion juice in none of the oils, and cover it with a linen cloth, and treat it with this.
And remember when healing, you must guard against the wound not mending according to its original form;
And these remedies that we have discussed apply only to this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
This disease which truly is called 'axacrati', and it occurs naturally due to accidents.
The accidents come from wounds and tears, from cauterization, and similar things;
And the method of performing this operation involves inserting an awl with a doubled thread into the skin, threading it through and piercing just to the left of the right eyelid as far as you can reach inwards, so that the thread goes through two layers of tissue;
Then the skin is held above all along the awl, and it's cut wide over the spur. And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is proper, it is good;
If not, then seize it with care and place it in the groove, and turn the paper, and make two cuts where they would have been inside the paper;
Make the two corners of the two cuts corresponding to the two angles of the incision you made, and make the angles such that when they are assembled together, the figure will be like the figure of a letter that is "Greek";
Then set the bone according to the quantity that its thicknesses require, following the size of the paper hole, then adjust the two required parts and sew them with a thread line's length.
Then apply the cure as we have said about softening medicines and treatments, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a wound or seam or cautery, then it is necessary that you cut an opening filled with hair on the paper, and according to what was mentioned before; Then dig between the two rows of a tent, as I have said;
Then dig between the two rows of a tent, as I have said; And one must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in its form, and the wise surgeons arrange themselves with all their skills to show how they can return the shape to its natural form;
And even the patients themselves, according to what needs to be done and with various instruments in many arrangements.
When this sewing occurs with people's hands in such a manner that the paper above is glued with the white of the oil and cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then it is necessary to poke the tip of a scraper under the paper and lift it up;
And the length should be as pins, until you find the one that is inserted into the subtle sphenoid bone, which should not be too large or too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from a needle that is too large and stings the eye;
And make your incision, by which you excise the assembled tissue lightly, so that the paper heals according to its natural form;
And heal all the assembled tissue, and perform no piercing in the sharp eyesight, but lift with mild water and from a basin;
Then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put damp wool on top of the eye from an egg's content; And after three days, use mild water and other bland substances until it is healed.
Know that the nail occurs in two manners: It occurs in two ways: one is nervous and seems like hard bone, and another that isn't nerve-filled but appears like white moist lump frozen over, such that when iron is touched to it and cared for with the use of prongs, it won't move.
Both kinds start near the large tear duct and grow gradually until they cover all of the eye and all light and vision.
And the method of incision is such that the patient positions their head over your hand, then they pull out the eyes. and hold the paper in your hand, then pinch the nail with small prongs, and stretch it upwards. Then take a needle, and attach a horse hair, or a calf hair, or a cow hair, and strong thread; and double the needle point and insert it into the nail bed, then pierce through the entire needle, and bind the nail with a thread and extend it above, and burn all the hair on the nail bed that surrounds the artery and the fine hairs until the root of the cuticle in the fleshy part under the nail bed. Then cut out the remaining parts along the groove up to the sensitive subcutaneous tissue and small muscles, and leave the natural tear, so that no liquid comes out like usual through the incision.
And each time, the nail is extended only to the edge and with thread, as we have said; Then for the scorched one, remove all the burnt flesh from which this is made:
And see to it that no more of the burnt flesh touches the fatty tissue and doesn't tear it, and that the wound does not become punctured;
After making the incision, pour a little of the broiled fat into it, and create a ring from stearine, and let it heal until tomorrow; Then treat those who require it as long as they are sound.
And if the nail is not nerve-filled, and you cannot push the needle through it, and the cuticles cannot enter, this kind of nail-like condition is treated many times with medicinal remedies;
And it happens just as I described in the division, and if you see that it is coped, let the eye work with the help of the diseased flesh, take out a small amount of burnt flesh gently according to this form: And raise the nail slightly, and if you see that it is not diminishing at all and your reason presses on, then from your mouth, pour into the eye ring made of stannous oxide and red necklace and yellow fluid onto the eye until the next day.
If nothing obstructs your view, such as pus-filled sores, then proceed, and first treat the pus-filled sores until they are clean. Then resume the work procedure just described, until they are clean.
Then repeat the other operation according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
And if the cheek of the eye, by great discomfort, appears in the eye at night, then suspend it under a gurney, and take out a part of it, not all at once, so that no tears come from it;
Then pour into the red eye ring which is made of stannous oxide.
There are some men who never pass urine red, and covers the pupil and remains on the papers, and turns outside, appearing as a candle flame;
And the operations are such that the patient places their head in your hand, then guide their eyes, and all that flesh up to the bone is brought down to sizes suitable for this, and you hold it with strength;
Then cut the first layer of flesh, and saw everything down to the bone until the end, and be sure not to hurt the eye in the operation.
And let the cut be like what we described in cutting nails and using small force of your hands, just like the figure shown after this chapter regarding bone separation;
And when the cut is done and all flesh has been separated, use oil of sulfur or distill it with red colander-like medicine, and place a cotton ball soaked in such substance on top of the wound to prevent infection;
And if it remains unchanged, and the person with no shoes surmounts you, and you doubt over an abscess in such a case, then let the eye and treat the abscess using remedies that soothe such an abscess.
Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make as many characters as are attached by this resemblance in the eye.
However, nevertheless, it is necessary that you adapt the treatment of each natural weakness in the eye; and from the accidental path, in the work of iron;
And do not let your hand stay in any of these works until you see that this limb endures the pain of this operation.
When the veins are red and covered above the eye, and affect vision, causing weakeness in sight for several days.
Therefore, the first skill is to observe where the eye is, and from which side, and apart from that, there is no other disease except for the boil; Therefore treat him in this way:
Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend all vessels throughout the entire body according to their wisdom, and let the arteries be twofold subtly as this form:
And let there be two inches by degree in one side according to this shape:
Then treat that way forcefully suspending those subtle vessels, and let blood flow for an hour after another, until you see the vessels leaving the eye;
And ensure that you don't pierce the eye at the tips of the spathamides, and perform this operation at midday in front of the sun, and be very zealous in your work so that you do not cause injury only to those vessels.
And when you have done this, if you distill in the eye a collar of green and red to corrupt what remains stubborn against the blow.
And if you do not have the power to do all this at once, make a poultice on the eye with things that calm the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is soothed and sure there's no pus in it, then restart according to this method as described until they are healed;
And it is the shape of strength:
The method for something called "arissati" is a fistula:
When you cure it with a cautery and with hot medicinal fluids as I have said before, and if it's not yet healed, then it remains within the place where you incise on the pus, near where it should die. Drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when you see the bone has been exposed, and you will notice the decay and darkness, if you retrieve with all the instrument which was previously described;
and is called 'hard head', and made of iron, directed towards the head region, and should be sharpened like a file as it appears in its current form:
And place on it the part of the decaying bone, then turn it with your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has stopped;
and do this once, then restore the head to its state of medicinal desiccation.
if the bones are joined, and flesh has begun to grow, and the skin of the wound is joined, and remains like this for forty days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no bad incidents occur, know that it is healed.
If not this, so other means must be used to bring back the fistula to its proper place at the tip of the nail according to this form: And if you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the wood according to this form, and have the iron rod of three angles, and the staff should be thinned out until its tip as you see here:
Then place the wood over the bone inside the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the nose slightly. Then hold the stick firmly until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain in the patient as if the wind is entering them while holding your hand on their nose;
Then restore the joint with dry medicinal substances as I have taught you, and when the flesh begins to grow and harden, let it heal at the nose; If it's something lighter for the patient.
When the eyes open fully in all respects, and there's no disturbance to the heart or diminution of strength, it's necessary for you to bind the patient.
Then when he's well, apply suction cups or plaster without piercing to help heal, then place on the eye a bandage made of cataplasms containing aloes and incense and waxed gutta percha, and then allow the eye to heal, and cover it with strips and cloths.
And the way to cover them involves taking soft cloths and doubling each one, then layering them one on top of another according to how many that the eye needs.
Then place on top with a hard bandage, and then reapply the suction cups without piercing.
Then apply the suction cups and let the eye be held day and night, and if you bind it loosely, it should be held tightly.
Then apply the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye heal, it's good;
If not so; if you have to redo the plastering and bandages, as well as the eye wrap and suction cups until it heals.
of the breaking of a woollen bandage When tears come in the vitreous membrane, then open it, and bring out pieces like gum resin, and it is astonishing to see;
Then if you see it coated, the operations are like piercing at the root of what's above the part under your vision up to there, then pierce another point with double thread coming from the area where tears occur; And make a puncture, and leave the first needle according to its placement;
then tie the eye with a double thread and wrap some of its exterior with it, then firmly tighten it, then remove the needle and put a wet piece of linen on the wound, generously soaked in egg.
and leave it as long as the thread sticks to the eye, then dress the wound with things soothing until the injury heals.
and every time the wound is kept in place by each half of an eye circle of cloth, until it heals.
And if the eye does become too prominent, then pierce it at the delicate sinus that passes under the eye, and drain the watery humor out of it, and lower the eye fluid, and do this immediately.
Then extract as long as it is clean.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" can only be found where bile is present in the gallbladder, resembling falling drops of water, and it is not real water;
And the way it appears in operation is that you make the patient sit upright and straight on their apparatus, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move them as you see bile come up to your eyes; Then continue until it's thoroughly drained and doesn't descend further, ensuring that the light sees all the bile contents as they used to.
And if it doesn't descend at all, know that it is bile, and if the descent of the bile is not as we've described.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and proceed on the corneous sheet by making cuts from the corner of the conjunctiva with the corneal sheet and crown, until the bow comes out;
And when it is out, if you pour in the warm water mixed with honey, or boiling water and fenugreek then honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey. After that, apply other remedies until she is healed.
From the drops of the eye We have the indications for water in division, and what needs to be pierced; if done according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and attach the healthy eye very tightly;
Place the paper of the eye on your left hand where the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand where the eyes are on the right;
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the tool known as 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
Then place the tip of the tool underneath the cornea through the thickness of one finger in that corner of the eye to the part near the minor tear duct, then push the 'almagda' tool vigorously and rotate your hand until it penetrates the corner of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty thing;
And it is necessary that the size of the almagda channel be equal to the size of the space which exists from the pupil to the end of the darkness; And this is the crown of the eye;
If you see the bone within that paper by the transparency of the corneal fabric, and then place the tool until it reaches where the sharpness is, then express across one way after another.
Let the patient feel now as he sees his wounds before him and the instrument in his eye.
After laying him down, and if the edge ascends on the second passage, apply force with the tool, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, gently remove the splint little by little while turning your hand.
And then add a little bit of oil stone to the sharpness again, and remove the eye from this. Then place at the front of the eye an ointment or wet wool in oil of roses and plenty of egg yolk, and bind it with healthy oil.
Yes, and those which are our own, let us place on common bread with plenty of egg.
And if 'almagda' can't enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people with very rigid eyes, then you should take the tool called 'alberit', which has this form:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too far inwards, but make it subtle; then take off the splint as we have said.
And upon completion of the task, the patient is prepared for the doctor's intervention, where he sleeps on his back in the dark room.
And be of no movements, and pray for light meals, and do not move your head either to the right or to the left, and tie him according to his position until after three days;
Then release him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see nothing, and then again tie him until after seven days;
And it is not suitable for you to do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but it is appropriate for you to wait, because the wound has swollen rapidly.
When abscesses rupture, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and prepare for the one who heals abscesses.
And when it is calmed, release the eye and place an eyepatch over its face with an edge of one inch to cover for a few days, and stay in that gloomy house.
And then leaves the house little by little, and turns into its nest;
Know that no disciple should intervene in this situation. And one came to us who was from the Earth, who told us that in their region, everyone was making alcohol out of apples, with which they used water, but still I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever hear about it in old books; And perhaps it's a new thing.
These are the appearances of alcohol forms, because those who do not know them see them;
And let them be of iron properly: And their head is from this same subtlety, and the tail at three angles on each side.
No birth or offspring comes from mixed animal figures, some of which resemble scorpions with the feet of birds;
And if there are such cases or if the animal has a colored coat, and if it has a good-colored beast. In this case with the animal that is yellow and not colored, you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun;
In this case with the animal that is yellow and not colored, you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun; And breathe through his nostrils, and pour vinegar onto those animals, and pull them out; Hold onto that which you can bear under the subtle sharp point of a needle until you know that this animal is completely bone.
And if there remains anything that we cannot accommodate, should you open it all with fine delicate instruments, ensuring nothing is left behind. And if it doesn't swell up, or if pus accumulates, then you should assist by applying it as seems necessary;
And if it's malicious pus, you should act quickly and apply the cautery until the wound is clean and all tissues are seared, then pour or wash with cold water or use wine. If it fails to heal, and moisture causes issues until the throat, know that it is infected;
And if moisture doesn't pass as it should, know that there is dead tissue within the bone above, for none of your instruments can reach to cut it:
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert a linen thread a bit thick, and tie with your hands, and leave an allowance between each knot of about one or less inch. And place the patient's head with the thread in its neck towards your power, and pull it outwards as long as it comes through the neck inside the mouth.
And many times do this with the child at school, and it is a simple task for whoever wishes to perform it;
Then hold the head that comes through the neck with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and distinguish them one after another according to what we are or thread.
Do this until you know that the thread has corroded that flesh, then pull out the threads, bleed it, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in place at the neck as before.
Do this for three days or more, as long as the ointment eats away all that remains of flesh;
Then apply or inhale some opium for several days as long as it relieves the pain, and if you need dried medicinal substances, then use them;
This is the form of the instrument for purging the liver, which one distills with oils and medicinal substances or fumes:
And it can be made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way.
And if you see fit, make a closed rod, and let the instruments be filled for purging the liver;
And have your hand ready on the liver when you heat the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh near the nose
Many times, at the nose's root, a disease is born which is called 'Telul', and grows becoming large until it is something visible to see;
And because of this, you should cover it at the beginning, and have all bones set, then place the fire or burning medicine where the cautery should be;
And if you delay covering it until it is large, take care if it is hard, shows a change in color, or exhibits poor sensation:
Do not touch it with iron either, as this is an internal abscess. For if you cover it even once, it will cause great harm to the patient;
And if the abscess is due to pressure from the skin, not by a change in color, and you see that it can be completely covered, so relieve the patient and cover with something soft, and treat the area using drying and restraining methods.
Know that when remedies of continuation come into one of these venous areas, it benefits little, for in some men.
Then one must ensure this does not happen to anyone, if you see that the wound is fresh with all its blood; Then adjust the two lips to suture them, then treat him as long as he is sound.
And if the lips are dried out on both sides, it is necessary to char all parts of their inner lining until they heal. Then adjust the two lips with a stitch and tighten them. Apply powdered dragon's blood powder and ground incense. And place the powders on a plaster of great strength or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself. Then treat with ointment as long as he remains sound.
The method of stitching is that you join the solution: by needles, as we have said about the stitch of the belly; by thread, as I have informed you.
removal of lesions from lips
Within the wounds of abscesses were found hard contents inside, resembling grains sometimes, smaller and larger;
Therefore, you must open the wounds again, and cut through each knot, and grasp it with forceps, removing it in each part;
Then apply the limb after the vitriol incision, as long as the wound is cooled down;
and then remove the dressing, and clean the wound of dry substances as long as it is sound.
Many times, there appears on the gums something yellowed, that the old people call "albulus";
If it is necessary for you to hold it with tongs, cut to its root, and let blood flow out or allow the blood;
Then place sulfur, vinegar or other drying anding powders;
And if that flesh returns after the incision, and happens multiple times, if you cut it again the second time, then cauterize: If it does not return after being cauterized;
Sometimes they gather at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and there are scaly and rough layers. And sometimes they involve the black and yellow tooth with worms, until the decay reaches the gum, and make teeth stink.
If it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands, and his joints be in your correct position, touch the bones or the scabs until nothing remains. And then make them appear in blackness and greenery, and yellowishness and other tints, until they are healed.
And if what is removed at the first reason is beneficial, that is good; But if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have everything touched.
And know that teeth have the skill of various tools for extraction according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasps used in removing teeth from between the gums are different than those used for teeth at the surface; And these forms and others prepare with you.
When treating someone for tooth pain, it is necessary to draw out the tooth as much as you can while delaying its extraction, because this should not cause them any harm. because it is such a high substance that one would not have any excuse for piercing it.
Therefore, when the patient is compelled to strain for the extraction, it is necessary that you are certain of which tooth is causing pain. Many times the pain leads to the body, and be sure that it is or a tooth, and extract the good tooth; yet still do not leave the pain alone during this time, until the bad tooth is removed, for we have already wished to do so with these soldiers;
And when you are certain about the tooth that is causing pain, it is necessary to burn inside of the tooth with quite a large amount of spittle in order to preserve the gum from all sides;
Then move to your hands or take hold of the delicate forceps at the first pinch and pinch again, until they are well dislocated, then firmly secure the forceps. and have the shoulder under the knee in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it doesn't move.
After extracting the right tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out forcefully, take no concern with these instruments and gently push them in from each side. And move it just like you did initially.
And if they have pierced and eaten through it, then you must fill with cloths where the holes are; and when using delicate forceps to hold it, make sure not to break it during the holding.
And one must cut quite carefully under the gum to extract the tooth.
And see to it well that you don't break it and leave a piece behind; this will cause the patient even greater pain due to the malady of the root.
And beware that you do not do it as the ignorant surgeons do, who break the bone every time out of haste and audacity, and do not carry out what we have told.
But they cause to occur from time to time by the opening of this great disease through their roots that they bear, or through the matter they break, as we have often found;
And when the flesh is torn, wash the part with wine or ale and salt;
And when blood leakage occurs, which often happens, cover the area with roasted vitriol;
And if that doesn't work, apply cautery.
The shapes of the tools you use to remove teeth should be those with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out a tooth;
And these are the shapes: And let them have large parts that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of very sturdy iron, and should have teeth to hold the pieces in place.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains at the draw, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in moist butter inside the wound for one or two days until the wound softens. Then pinch the tweezers called 'algefri', by which the blood seems like that of a well-tended animal;
and they should be as fine as a file and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire mass right up to the root, and then place an instrument known as 'althali', which is essentially an awl, as depicted here:
And make it strong and thick so that it doesn't break, and if the root jumps out due to this, it is good;
if not, assist with all your tools, of which the descriptions follow:
And if assistance is taken from the instrument that has two points, as depicted here: and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and from this tool which seems like large forceps, as depicted here:
And make these instruments strong so they don't break, and know that many tools are used inside; And also other instruments, which are not counted;
And the wise surgeons discover their instrument by themselves, according to what their operations and illnesses demonstrate to them. For there are diseases where old men did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of these and they break part from the carriage or others' bones, or if it rots away, then he seeks out the instruments that suit him, which I have told you about, and helps with movements, whose form is this:
And be thick and well-suited to hold onto the bone, so that it doesn't slip away, but can hold and remove it;
and then restore the limb using suitable medications for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, if she retrieves all of her instrument:
When the teeth seem not according to the body's natural course, and their form is ugly, even in virginal women, you must know if they were born after a tooth and are not in its right place, and cannot be seen or shaved.
Therefore, the tooth; And if it is next to the tooth, take this tool described here, and it resembles a small beak, and it should be made of sharp iron.
And the hole is made small and smaller in my hands by its hardness due to tooth, and because you do not move others, and if it becomes apparent that one can shave it off, then I will shave with one piece of file as this forms:
and is also like the file used to make needles;
and gradually file down the tooth bit by bit with gentle hand movements, so that it doesn't move until it finishes;
Then smooth it in the end for any rough edges, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, you should file down the roughness until it's level, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue or impair speech.
When the teeth in front of the mouth, through impact or bite, and if the patient can't push on it while eating without vomiting, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, then this is not effective;
if you need to restrict them with an gold thread, because the silver threads turn green and rot, but the gold never changes;
and make the thread neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth;
and if you see the teeth moving, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated teeth between the diseased ones, whether there is one or more than one, as long as you can feel them safely up to a healthy tooth on the other side; Then restart the covering until you reach the part where you stopped, and apply your skilled and gentle hand pressure, without letting it move at all.
and make sure to bind around the tooth root so that it cannot escape.
Then clip the threads with some forceps, and join them together, placing them between healthy teeth, and place them in such a way that they do not irritate the tongue;
and leave it that way as tight as can be tolerated, and if it loosens or the threads break, apply a different thread to tighten again;
if it can be tolerated for its entire duration, and this is the form of teeth and the position of the two healthy incisors and the two premolars as you see:
And when the tooth is withdrawn, if it is placed back in its position, time after time, as we have said;
and don't interfere with any that aren't experienced and endure it, and not once do we shape a bone tooth like that of a cow, and place it in the spot where the defect is, and hold it firmly as we have said, and remains and serves for so long.
Not once does a tongue lien come from underneath the tongue or jaw, that one is born like this; or by mistake due to a healed wound;
and the procedures are such that you work on the mouth with the patient, have their head in your healthy position, and lift the tongue;
Then cut the nerve link in the middle, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place. And if there is hardness or swelling, and it's due to sudden injury, should you break the hook and cut the larger link.
And make sure that the wound is not too wide at the base, for there is an artery beneath it;
And once done, if you have used water that is pinkish and warm or cool, then place the head in a container of cold water. Afterward, put a linen tent under the tongue;
And let the patient's wounds be treated every night, so that no pus may accumulate.
And if there is blood drainage, then put vinegar under the head; And if it doesn't respond to you, then apply the gentle cautery, which is suitable for such cases; then apply another treatment until it becomes clear,
and if you see it is of a red or black or hard color, yet the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for this is a gangrene;
and if it is draining pus and there's moisture, let the honey flow, and apply a thin needle cut, and relieve from both sides; and if it doesn't respond to your treatment, while you're working on it, put sulfur ash until it is coated, then return to your work until you use up all the strength;
Then raise up the patient from bed and from rest, and continue other treatments while they are well.
Extractions from the throat No sickness enters the throat glands which are called 'godath', and they should be properly referred to as the second pair of lymph nodes. And when you treat them, as we have explained in the division, if they are still inflamed, take care:
If it's hard pus with small sensation and is colored, don't touch it with iron.
And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch it with iron either, for the running of blood; but let it be until it heals, and then you will remove it, or it would burst on its own;
And if it has a pale white color and the root is subtle, if you prepare your instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess's swelling rests and has calmed.
Therefore, have the patient sit facing the sun, and let their head be in good health, and make them open their mouth and place your forefinger between their hands on the tongue, pressing it towards all the instrument, as this is its form;
And may be made of fine silver or very sharp like knives:
Can you press the tongue onto this entire instrument, and see the abscess? If so, take an onion and a thorn, and drive them in from above more forcefully than you can.
And take nothing off the skin with it, then grasp the object with the tool, from which there is this shape, that seems like some strength; And always the head is curved and one place to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
And if you don't have this tool now, take scissors instead; in this way it is formed: And be sharp on one side, and the other unnamed;
And when you have gripped one of the kidneys, grip the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the wounds with hot, then cold water, or with both hot and cold water. If bleeding occurs during this process, gargle with hot water, or use cooked pomegranate peels or rosemary leaves, among similar things, until the wound is fully healed; Then continue the treatment as long as he remains healthy;
And no more abscesses form in the throat than there were two almonds, if they grow like so with exactly two almond-sized lumps.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born within her throat, this being known as the small airway abscess;
And it had almost completely blocked the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage and could neither eat nor drink, she died if she had continued like this for a day or two.
And the abscesses was so high that it had forced to make two holes through both nostrils near the nose.
I acted quickly then, and inserted an instrument in the one inch opening, after which the straw came out, and with great force was a large portion of the food expelled.
Then I would proceed to cut another piece near its other nostril, and open the wound with my knife and force the tongue.
After inserting the needle into these abscesses, and removing some of them, only a little blood came out. And thus, the woman's throat passage was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine from now on. I didn't stop cutting out from that abscess for a long time;
And the abscesses would reoccur immediately, filling up almost the entire cavity that I had emptied, until it became quite large.
And then I would insert something and cauterize inside the throat: So it didn't grow further;
And I leave these parts, may God have mercy on him after me.
Of the eye
When it bends towards the eye, and it has lengthened and become elongated, this is called "perpendicular";
And if it becomes swollen and round, it's called an "eye".
When it is treated as we have described in the section on treatment, and if the treatment doesn't help, and you notice that the pus from the abscess has subsided, and there's a thin layer left, then it's necessary to remove it;
And that which is round and not elongated; And if it's red or reddish or black in color, then it's necessary to make an incision into it. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, concerning its shape and length, you should have the patient face the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument about which we have made mention previously. Then place the onion in the stomach and treat it there, and cover it with the two instruments that I mentioned for incising the kidneys.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
because if you cover too much, you harm the voice and speech.
And after making an incision, use what we have discussed for the incision of the two kidneys, and treat her until she is healed.
And if the patients are afraid of the cut, it is necessary for you to use remedies for the cautery of the sensitive area.
And the way of the cautery is like boiling water. And it is that the patient should place their head in your good health, and then press their tongue against the tool we have described or the cautery chapter's instructions, and secure it with sharp blades, so that they are not too thick nor too thin. and by using the power of this tool, which is described here:
And let your head bear a hair or where you apply the medicine, like how spoons do it, and place the tool with all the medicine over the wound;
And let the patient stay still on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, but not down to the throat, and rinse;
Then hold your hand with all the medicine and press it on the wound for half an hour, as long as you see it seeping out and the patient's reactions to the medicine are calmed;
And if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, then cover the tool with all the cotton on top of the canvas, until the cotton burns out on the surface.
And do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and remove it after three or five days.
And if you need to repeat the cauterization with the medicinal preparation, do it again, and after the cauterization, rub inside the surface of the wound with cotton stuffed in butter, and clean what is inside from the medicine;
And rinse with cold water, or perform gargling treatments until it heals.
This treatment is safer than incision, just using the cauterization;
If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamus and myrrh and oregano and rue and chamomile and borage and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them into a pot, and place them there, and bring the water to a boil;
and let the pot be well filled with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place the burning instrument according to this manner: And let it be made of silver or lead, and let one of the shoulder blades be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises through the nose by way of the throat, as long as the urethra is necrotic;
After it repeats often, as long as the urethra dries, and remember that you should not do this at the beginning of the formation of pus, for many things happen; And do not use this force when removing an abscess tip.
And if this instrument is not present, take a feather and place an eggshell inside the patient's head, so that the mouth of the diseased area does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not produce a thick steam in the mouth, and this is a good combination for healing together with health.
Many times there is air in the throat bone or spine of fish, or no thing;
Therefore, you should extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
And what does not open and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit this way that the meat be cooked in the stomach; By chance if by vomiting the substance comes out;
or it is when the patient swallows an sponge piece, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or a fragment of dry bread; and attaches to the sponge a thread, and then swallows it; and when it reaches its place, if it inflates, and then draws out force;
and if it does not come out with what we have said, take an instrument of plunge according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved towards the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised to the top; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, that all may go well, nor to push any bone inside;
And it is necessary for the patient to hold onto the tool, because if it moves or if the thing being treated becomes dry; If the tool is placed inside, or it is pulled forcefully to all parts of the instrument equally, as long as it is forceful.
of the windpipe
No treatment heals without fluids, just as I have explained in the division, by medication cure; And when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument I have told you.
And if you see the vein, guide it with all small inch, or with fine forceps that are worth this.
And if that doesn't work, take a thread and apply it in the neck next to the patient's wound, then move or pull on the thread until you feel resistance, and do this frequently. And if you irrigate the patient with water throughout the day.
Then take full sight of cold water, and work the mouth, and pour it into senses to swallow, and move it often with her hand; And if soon the fluids smell the water, she will defecate.
And if it does not behave as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool that I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye.
Do this multiple times, because it will expel without causing harm.
And the method of fumigation is as follows: take a pan with charcoal briquettes, and place it covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and at this opening you place the tool's head.
Then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the tip of the rod in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that no smoke escapes but only goes up to the nose.
And now the nostril will expel (the contents), and if it does not happen, repeat the fumigation multiple times.
And the patient suffers thirst, and eats dirty things and such, and does not drink water;
And then it is necessary for her to come out through this governance.
And the shape of the tool with which we treat the sanguine matter, when it can be seen, resembles curved tongs meant to enter the throat; And it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has the roughness of a file, in such a way that whatever she takes, she cannot leave.
There are no descriptions of discharges until memory brings it forward from one or the other in this book, and they differ in puncturing and shaping;
And this is through two ways; one being in its likeness itself, and concerning the one that holds moisture.
And the second way is for those limbs which are inside the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the base, and the abscesses of the internal organs differ from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in action.
And if it comes to discharges, one should not pierce them until the wound is healed according to its completion;
And for those that must be pierced when they are matured and do not heal according to their completion, such as discharges within joints.
For when abscesses come from joints and they are allowed to continue until they become purulent internally, by chance, if the ligament and nerve of the joint get corrupted, this is a cause for contraction in that limb.
If the discharge is within the main limb, and if you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the main limb;
Or if it's within the foundation, piercing it or so long as it is dead;
And it is not right that you pierce a mature discharge without full digestion completed, except for the one that's within the foundation where it can burn internally and result in an ongoing tunnel; And cannot heal completely.
And you should know the time for draining the abscess which is determined by completion, and this occurs when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction in pain and redness, and during the movement and improvement of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you should keep the draining area or further depending on the location of the abscess, and where it opens will move.
And let the drainage be along the length of the arrow, and if the abscess is on the limbs or in joints and necks and arteries, and everywhere where there is no pleating. In these cases, when they bend, according to that limb.
And when abscesses are in the living tissue, it is better to let the puncturing happen until digestion is fully completed, as we have said.
For if you pierce it in front of that, it will lengthen the arrow with its venom and is full of maggots; And by chance harden the lips and weaken him from within.
And if there are no abscesses pierced straight through the center of the body as per need for each limb.
It is necessary that you remove small pus blisters, small wounds; And in large blisters, large wounds, and many cuts according to the size of the blister;
And if there are such blisters or if it is necessary to cover with lard, and cover; when it has become as soft as leather, and is flattened out, then one should do as is done with infants:
And for those that split into three corners, and those that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like blisters from angles;
And for those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and appearances of cutter.
Those who do not have a head, such as abscesses located superficially, it must be that you pierce them completely;
And when the abscesses are large, and they have accumulated a great amount of pus, you must pierce them, but do not drain all the pus at once in that moment, but drain part of it; Then apply an ointment over the abscess until another day, then do nothing until it heals; Repeat this process several times gradually, until all the pus has drained out.
Similarly, if the patient lacks strength, or is pregnant, or has small children, or elderly and weak individuals. For when someone tries to force it with the expulsion of blood, sometimes causing death of the patient, and you do not realize this.
Therefore, proceed with caution in this chapter. When you have pierced your abscess, if a wound appears, and check to see if the wound from the abscess is small; And if it's a flat iron, you may try using linen or raw cotton thread. And if it's a large abscess and there are many wounds, you need to puncture each one so that they press against each other;
And if you have incised in the abscess and sewed it internally, you should fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture and bind it up to the first joint;
Then proceed with the bone and treat with ointment until it is sound.
And if blood leakage occurs in your operation, then apply cold and ease, and moist with cloths, and place it in the operated area repeatedly.
And if the bleeding persists, you should apply treatment and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book; if it's or ten of a feather, and the patient is suffering greatly from bleeding, then it would be good to place moistened cloths and bandages on them using wine and heated oil.
And if it's in this state, and the limbs are fatty, you should immerse them in wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until three days have passed, as we said.
And then remove and clean the abscess, following the proper procedures, until it is healed.
And one should know universally about treating abscesses:
Or I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
For some small ulcers come from the head, and are in our style as they are on cloths, like a blemish on a rabbit's hide, and there are many that resemble.
There are some that are fatty and others where moisture is also like peas;
And for those that are hard and stony to the knife, there is no doubt that they are arteries and do not oppose.
And the actions of cutting are that you should try with all the instrument which is called "entromissor", from whose form comes this afterward, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, you make the incision over its length.
And when moisture is expelled, one must not leave anything behind the skin containing that moisture, for it immediately returns when nothing is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it's available; if not that, then in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and this will help someone who is affected by night demons.
And continue with the cotton, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you can tell clearly that it doesn't stay affected by night.
Then treat the wound with an ointment suitable for it, until it heals properly.
And if an abscess holds tightly within him, you should remove it according to this form, long; and empty out your ashes, and scorch all around, and apply all your healing strength to the area where it is located;
and if the artery goes against you, then do what I have told you to do afterward.
And similarly, deal with the abscess if it's due to stones, and when cutting and treating, do as I have instructed.
And when it comes to cutting on stone-caused abscesses and dampness, the operation is lighter because there's less blood involved. And if in any of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and for these old-style abscesses that I mentioned or the head of an elderly woman;
and found the abscess to be as hard as a dense stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if any were cut open, we would have made the wound as well as from a stone.
For other abscesses coming near the head, if they come near the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the incision should be made for all days at the earliest possible time, so that the blood may exit.
and the treatment as it should be done.
Many times such abscesses occur at the neck, and in the throat, and near the jaws, and never come to any other part or on a body, they are round, and are bound together.
And each sore is properly within its socket, like the node and the abscess near the head, as we have said; And the appearances of these sores are many.
And the appearances of these sores are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that don't want to comply with health.
In such cases where you see good positioning on the neck, and appears similar to the color of the chest, it is mute from both sides and not mixed under the collarbone nor near the artery or in the channel, and is not deeply seated;
If it is necessary that you handle it from above, and burn each part, and keep the two lips close to their original shape when necessary, just like we have explained with abscesses on the head;
And do it slowly and carefully, be sure not to touch the nerve or vein, nor should there be too much bleeding or cutting, that your hands don't escape, and don't see too far ahead, so you don't treat more than what you should.
And if you treat the vein or artery and it doesn't allow you to open, then apply vitriol or some powders that stop blood, and restrain the wound; And let it be until the abscesses are calmed and the wound becomes soft, then begin to rot it.
And when the patient has recovered from their illness, return to your work, as long as you finish it;
And if there remain any small scabs, if they scratch and clean them out.
And if the root of the pimple is large, it is not suitable to pinch that pimple at its root, but tie a thick double thread around it and let it hang down without causing harm;
Then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then the treatment.
And if you cure all the scrophula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and suture now, because there is no excess to remain due to the size of the scrophula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into it and drain the pus, and then sew up afterwards as we have said.
It is necessary that you understand how to cut into it and drain the pus, and then sew up afterwards as we have said. As for those pimples that grow excessively, pierce where they appear until they break.
And pierce them in the same way as previously described, by holding them, then he applies lint and similar things with the ointment and such, so that it corrupts what is already corrupted; And when the wound is properly cleaned, then the application of ointment to nourish flesh until it heals.
The old ones told and spoke about the surgery of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land perform it, and this is their written word.
For those with strabismus, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "the epiglottis" be made; yet do not underestimate this, because all the veins and the lung of the disease are in those with abscesses either within the mouth or in the throat or between the two lungs.
When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it through three or four small incisions across, between the two circles, or by the size of the incision in relation to its depth, not in the cartilage.
And these joints are amenable to the cutting of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessel extends deep within.
And if their masters are fearful, it is necessary for them to stretch the throat skin all the way up to the jawbone, then cut through the skull until they reach the bone. Avoid the blood vessels, if you see no thing, and then cut at the neck, just as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the channel of the jawbone which forces the fluid to escape through the bone that has been broken, and through the loss of voice;
And leave the wound open for one piece.
And when the time has passed since one begins to doubt strangulation, gather together the two lips of the wound at the skull, and sew them all smoothly without touching the cartilage;
Then administer medicines which promote growth of flesh, as long as they heal.
Albucasim insists that one should not stop this process until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is pronounced dead, and until all deficiencies are met. Therefore treat the epiglottis because the patient cannot eat or drink, and they breathe through the wound, so thus precautions should be taken against death;
And to command the elderly to leave the wound open until the disease's malady passes, and it has passed after three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and clean it, while keeping it clean;
And I will tell you what I saw. I witnessed that a maiden took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, severing some of the windpipe channels.
And I was called to treat her, and I found her as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood coming from it, indeed, she did not have a cut vein or artery leading there but the veins were flowing through the wound.
I hurriedly treated the wound, and as long as it was healed I attended to its cure;
and waited until she could speak again when her voice was restored, and then returned to her duties;
I swear by heaven that in the tailoring of the epiglottis, do not have it done.
Hernias are called "neck hernias", and they are large abscesses in the color of a walnut, and they occur very often in women;
and there are two ways: naturally, and by accidents;
or natural has no disease.
And the accidents occur in two ways, of which one resembles fat within us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from our veins; And there is fear, and it does not require making cuts elsewhere than in the small ones, and proof and examination are made to every intrusion: if you find it as thin as I am not fat, and cannot be placed in any vein, if you operate, just like one operates on a horse, and treat it with all its coat, if there is even a little bit; And search well throughout, and treat it as appropriate until it has been cured perfectly.
Many ways of treating us exist, so I will describe all the similar procedures;
And it's necessary that I explain all the differences between horses and dislocations.
I state that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever until the ebullitions have passed and gangrene has occurred; Therefore, rest the fever and the heat.
With the new there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains the yolk, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and it begins also like a germ, and becomes large;
and follows two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the division.
When you begin the treatment for a new case, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire about all the tools which are called 'jointer', according to their shape or the chapter that follows.
And the method of extracting abscesses from us is that you take or more moist than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the pus, and take care not to rupture it.
If moisture flows continuously, whatever its nature may be, if it cuts as I have said of other abscesses;
And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it diagonally and hold it with forceps, and gently scrape it from each side. Wear a coat where the thing lies to ensure its removal is successful;
And if you cannot remove it successfully, remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if nothing remains, it will repeatedly recur through many times;
And if a little remains and it doesn't bother you, fill the wound with some corrosive powders until it heals, then restrain the wound and apply things that soothe abscesses. Let other treatments continue until it is healed;
And if it is large, cut two sides of the wound, and treat him who has an arrow wound.
And if the vein is thinner than desired or any other reason prompts you to do so quickly and use half of the vitriol solution, let it sit for two days or three, as long as the wound heals, and take a blood bath. Then return to the copper what has been left due to the new.
Here are the forms of the entrails that are mixed up, and they come in three ways: large and medium and small;
and if there are three twists which are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and they come in three ways: Large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of sinus;
And they are also like needles from which one removes the roots, and made of citrine amber, or iron, or silver. They are more effective than yellow ones for surrounding the folds of sinus;
And there are three ways: Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening in the lesion.
The forms of the scalpels resemble sheep shapes, as you see here:
and if scalpels that have two folds in three ways like this;
And if to pentagrams who have three corners, and are also of three ways;
And if to pentagrams who have two corners, and pentagrams of only one corner, and they are of three ways;
All these are necessary in their place.
The head of these is made to be sharp, and there are some who do not cut as much as from one side, which we burn, because they do not reach the vein or nerve;
And these introducers have their handles placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not notice during the incision of abscesses;
And they are of three ways: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
And no one uses force except on a joint, like legs, arms, nipples, and bones, and in those like them.
And no small instrument is ever used otherwise, resembling the limbs of birds, according to this form, where one clamps blood. And it is placed only once at the sound position of veins and arteries, and never following this large form:
No man's nipples ever swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they resemble a woman's nipples.
And they remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be done according to this form along the line .b. up until .g.: Then strip the fat, and apply medicine to heal flesh, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and continue treatment until it heals.
And if it slides down below the belly button, and is squashed by its size especially like in women, if she makes two ribs above, through two apparent fissures; Because one is holding the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller along this form, from this line .b. to this line .g.; Then shave the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, as long as it is safe;
And if it is not safe, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; And let it grow until it feels the removing of the fat, then treat it until it becomes clean.
Abscesses that occur in the armpits are ways of hard scrofula or where there have been nodes, and if any contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line b. up until the line g: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and let it stay until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and continue applying ointment until healed.
And if the abscesses resemble scrophula sores, make incisions as we have said for cuts on scrophula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
When the artery is cut, and the skin is sewn where it was, there are often abscesses, and similarly, it happens with drained veins and abscesses;
and if one knows this thus when it's about the artery, the abscesses are long and perfectly round; and when you feel it with your hands, if you sense the constriction;
and when it's about the vein, there appears a clear outline;
And it's madness to cope with this abscess, and similarly when it is around the glands and muscles and under the collarbone and in other parts of the body, and it's very large. It follows that one should avoid the iron treatment, and likewise for the head patient, and in the case of someone inflamed by artery within the skin for a long time;
Then proceed with the amputation up to the inches, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
Then insert a needle at this spot, and pierce until it reaches the other side of the body, and bind the artery with a double thread for two lengths, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are located in the temples;
Then puncture the area between the two threads with an introducer until blood flows freely and release the abscess;
Then carry out the treatment that the iron requires, until the thread is removed; Then treat with the healing ointment accompanying this, as long as it is salable;
And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it's necessary for you to dip your finger that can touch the contents of the abscess into all the skin, then insert the needle through the hand you hold, and make a puncture, and have two threads, so you pull them from the opposite side; Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or use one part of the thread for both shoulders;
And if you doubt the thread will hold, then insert another needle with all four threads across the entire abscess at the first needle's incision, and tie the threads in four places;
Cut off the abscess until any excess comes out, then remove the excess carefully and leave the one that sticks.
Then place on it a moist cloth in wine and oil, then apply treatments and applications until the wound is healed.
Similarly, just like pus flows in the artery and vein, pus enters the nerves when they are cut, or by too much labor, and similar things.
This happens more often with shoulders and hips and in all places where joints are present, and this is the condition of abscesses, and its color resembles that of flesh, and it shows in various positions without pain.
And when it's squeezed, the patient feels pain in the affected area, and it doesn't quite reach down through the entire body, but only locally.
Move carefully in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither to the side nor above. That which is within joints should not be treated with iron: By chance it would move towards contraction; And that which is the head or forehead makes the skin shiny.
And that which is the head or forehead makes the skin shiny. If the abscesses are small, and you have some forceps, grasp it at its base;
And if it is large, suspend it above the knee and cut off some flesh. Then sew up the wound and treat it until it heals properly.
It often occurs in the belly and nowhere else. It's a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has delicate roots, and the heads are large;
And there are both small ones and larger ones;
And I saw two homes that had bellies which looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them. They were white, had a small root, were slightly split, and were constantly moistened by moisture.
I weighed them and found in one, eighteen ounces, and in the other six. The workpieces after cutting show that if you look at whether the skin is wet or not, and the color of the artery appears white and moist with a subtle root; If you hold them up to the fat part, and may it be in your presence the fire cautery.
If you hold them up to the fat part, and may it be in your presence the fire cautery. For when the surgeon often encounters large bleeding incidents, and if it doesn't stop with you, then quickly with the cautery;
And if you see that the skin is frightened and fearful of the incision from the iron, then take a well-made piece of thread, and bind the artery as we have said, and let it be for two days;
And then restrain it, do not stop holding back the thread of hemp until you feel the knot, and each time without causing strain.
And if the roots are large, if they start to thicken in the process of cooking due to heat, but you can't cook them properly for the stomach, but you should only cook half of it well, then cauterize so that it doesn't rot;
Then clean the wound, and make sure you don't burn off the tissue that is of a reddish color and has little sensation and is sensitive to touch.
For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterwards.
When the buttock burns, it means If the appearance of pus comes from a cauterized wound or cut near the stomach and there are some boils, just like in other cuts, where blood drains from veins or arteries according to what is happening ahead, or due to windiness;
And if it's due to the rupture of the spermatic canal and through the exit of the bladder, the appearance of the abscess seems like the color of the flesh, and is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. And if it is due to the issue from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on its fingers if it returns and then comes back again, and by chance if it is squeezed and expands much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining.
And if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and they occur according to a quantity. And if it's due to wind, it causes swelling at the navel, and the organs are such that you should observe whether their appearance is due to the blood of an artery, or a vein, or wind.
And if it's due to wind, it causes swelling at the navel, and the organs are such that you should observe whether their appearance is due to the blood of an artery, or a vein, or wind. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear when it comes to abscesses, as I have explained in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
And if its appearance is due to an intestine or the bladder, it's necessary that you instruct the patient to bleed their urine, and have it spread all straight outwards, then strike inside throughout the abdomen; Then instruct them to heal carefully in your hands, then go within the area you have indicated over the entire surface of the wound, then let half of the pus be above the whole large hook. Then fasten it in with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let the binding be securely done.
Then lay the half of the pus spread out over the binding, and set your finger on it, then hold the intestine. If you find that it is caught by the binding, remove it and set the intestine at the back of the belly;
And if you find that it is attached to the bone, take it at the hook and cut off the excess.
And if it opposes the artery or the vein, if you insert them deeply inside, then return to your task and take two needles, and I put two lengths of thread, and place the two needles inside where you pierced when you made holes.
Then hold the abscess with four fingers above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it heals, and dispose of the dead flesh by itself. When it becomes subtle and healed, then treat as appropriate, and cut the abscess as we have said.
When it becomes subtle and healed, then treat as appropriate, and cut the abscess as we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat and heal the wound as appropriate, and stitch the wound.
and the sore We have spoken about the signs of the ulcer and how one should open it through medicine, and how to avoid the iron treatment.
Let's talk about the ulcer infecting the breast, and great caution in its treatment. It was said by the ancients that when ulcers are found on or near certain areas like breasts where they can be scratched off, such as ulcers found under nipples and in cooked foods, one should remove them entirely at the beginning of their appearance;
No one has ever been healed of them in my presence.
And regarding cuts, when it's possible to remove them like we have said, this means you should cleanse the patient of black pus;
If it's clear to the surgeon that there is fullness, then have the patient lie down well so he can do his work;
Then cut out your boil or pustule, and shave all around it, and extract the bone from all sides without leaving anything;
And let the blood flow freely, and press well on the wound with your hand or on nothing, and if it starts to bleed in an opposing direction from the arterial or venous incision, then apply heat until the wound becomes blackened; Then continue other treatments as long as it heals.
Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. We have spoken about the symptoms of typhoid, and how an assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron:
and should iron be applied in these two similar cases: This means, it's about peritonitis and sepsis, because it's fatal;
Therefore, when treating the appearance of typhoid which is called "stumps" by medicine, and if the cure doesn't work, then look to see if the patient's condition is weak, or if they have another illness besides typhoid, like stomach water issues and other similar conditions; If no iron is used, because there's doubt;
And if you see the patient's condition is very greenish and they only have typhoid without any other illness, and they're neither too young nor too old, then proceed like this: Let the patient lie straight on your hands, and have the ministers press the belly at the lowest part of the back with hot water, then take the thorny spatula in this form: And let there be two parts of this being divided. A needle, and yet it should not be so deep that it could reach to the intestine when one pierces until there, and one cannot cauterize it;
Then look if the edema is spreading towards the intestines: If it is necessary, you should cut in that place three inches to the right above the elbow; And if the edema is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the elbow three inches;
And if it's due to the kidneys, then on the right side, and it is not allowed for the patient to lie on the incision so that excesses do not flow towards that weak one;
Then pierce all the skin with the tool, and push it through, then lift your hand completely between the skin and the flesh as you would when burning to the size of an or a little more.
Then pierce the flesh until the pus reaches up to the point of eight, and this is the depth of water, then pull the thread outwards, and it removes this tool which I have described here. And it resembles a delicate silver chain, and is like gold or brass in weight, and it's in the area below the small part. and it measures three parts on one side; and two on the other side, and one more on that side;
And it is the shoulder cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer cuts the feather in:
At the top is the artery, so that when the instruments come to the water, now descending on the instrument;
Empty then half or a third of it, for if you empty more than it should in that hour, by chance the patient might die from the release of their spirit to the weapon, or they would faint, or they approach death;
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the indications of virtue in the patient signify, and their pulse;
then pull the instrument and hold back the water, and she is now held due to the spell that numbs the point above the heart, as I have spoken, puncture according to this manner;
Then start using the tool again on another day, if you see that the patient is enduring this, and use a little amount of water.
Do this every day, and avoid overusing it as long as there is no remaining sensation but just a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient and leave a lot of water, if the body burns during burial or sand, or from much sweat or baths and under sunlight, and if it gets stained from drinking. And continue with the treatment of drying medicines until it is done, and apply cautery on the stomach and liver after removing water, as I have explained before.
No child is born without defects in the penis, or if the defects are small, or if it does not remain in its place.
If it suits to pierce him right away until all the pus is released very subtly according to this form:
Then place or bury a thin willow stick, tie it and keep it for three to four days or until he wants to urinate. If so, remove the stick, allow urination, and then reapply.
And by chance it might not happen, for the urine which comes out does not let him close.
These are the parts that can move because of their nature, if they have a medicine like the fumigation of oak, as we said, if it expands.
Those who do not have a foreskin in their body are blind, for none are born with a foreskin at the head of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; And they cannot procreate because the matter cannot reach the tip, and it is a serious illness.
The method of the operation is such that the patient lies on their back, and they are prepared with the head of their penis and the foreskin also as large as a feather, so that the foreskin lies in the middle, just as it should;
And protect against the many times bleeding that occurs, and if it happens, have someone who can stop the bleeding do so, and treat the wound until it heals.
The eruptions of the penis Many times this happens within the penis, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
and some are;
it is necessary that you examine them closely and carefully remove all of them, then apply Egyptian cotton as an ointment. then perform the ointment cure with diafinicon until it is pure.
And if the bath is harmful, causing pus and discharge, then you should apply the cautery to it.
When you have removed it, and if the pus is inside the penis and partly within the skin and partly outside, it is necessary that you remove the pus which is inside first. and when it has healed, then perform the cure for what was outside.
For when you cure them together, there is no assurance that the head of the penis will not be punctured, and blackness and decay come to his penis and anus;
If it is necessary to deal with all that which is black and corrupted, then bind to the plaster of honey and flour made from walnut tree bark and times, then treat other treatments until he is healed.
And when blood drainage occurs, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauteries assist in setting up these arrangements: It means, at the release of blood, and during decay;
And if the member is decayed and removed, it is necessary that you insert a gourd of garlic into the member, and let the patient urinate among them;
And when the hairs meet at the tip of the member which has been found in uncircumcised people, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you burn them with the hair removal tool until the knots are untied, and free the head from all sides of the member;
And if this is something that needs to be decided by you, then it's necessary for you to burn with the instrument of cautery near the root of the penis and the skin.
Then place it evenly between two boards, and use a fine linen towel dipped in cold water that does not soak the head.
Circumcision is not like other injuries or dislocations; Still, whenever we perform this task of our own will, and particularly on infants, it is necessary for us to do the best work, and the lightest one in terms of health outcomes.
I say that the old ones didn't mention circumcision for their children, as they didn't use it in their law, and all we have about it is what we've acquired through experience.
For I want most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in their own lands, and during times of strength, on all newborns;
If it is the knee because there are two ligaments, and by chance if one of these is above and remains under that one. So the person receives the injury of having two pains, and the pain is doubled, and at the dislocation where it is not fully certain the tip of the limb.
And in the dislocation of the nail by chance escapes the tool and runs the operation, and many times grow like they do not need dislocation, and I have seen this happen.
From the shaving done during that time throughout the length of the thread I have found the goodness of experience, for the strength cuts just as well above as below.
For when you squeeze your hand, if cut equally in one line it will press all sides; but make sure the thread is well sewn inside the skin;
and make it so that the way of the first operation is that you make the child think, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread inside the penis just like that, and then have them move in all the ways you can.
Then make them stand between your hands straight, and support the strength between your hands or off your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools;
Then place your hand on the penis and blow or clean, and guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; Then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its natural curve with a doubled thread, and tie it between one stitch and another;
Then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its natural curve with a doubled thread, and tie it between one stitch and another; And hold it at two inches by the second row on the sack and at the navel line, and insert between the two threads, then lift the dirt quickly and pull the head of the penis; Then let the blood drip slowly and steadily because this is the moisture; And apply powder and on top of the powder I place a bandage moistened with a beaten egg yolk cooked in pink water, mixed with oil redolent fresh and good, and leave it for another day, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
The shaping of powers in the world is like this:
Let the two shoulders be held and cut, and let the shoulders also be as large as the elbows equally:
The error in the world's creation lies when the intestines escape at the incision;
Therefore, it is necessary for you to extend up to your finger-tip, so that the intestines can be released;
And treat them equally, and if you cannot hold it by your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then treat it.
And if they penetrate for three days, and the one who is on the verge swells up, you should let it be until the abscesses are soothed, and gently scrape lightly.
If you can move it like that, and keep the part of the penis untouched, this will not harm it at all.
Therefore, cure the wound from sudden injuries with powder, as we have said or treated with powders. And if you cut too roughly and it goes beyond, this will not harm;
Cure him accordingly, as we have said, while he remains sound.
holding back of urine
Retention of urine can be due to a stone obstruction, or frozen blood, or bowel blockage, or internal bleeding, or other such conditions we have discussed in the section;
And if their urine is not being relieved, and you see that it is being retained due to a stone or blockage in the bladder's neck, then it would be proper for the patient to squat with their knees raised; And have them place their feet on the back, and extend their belly from the area above the back, and restrain the patient so they can barely stand. And then the necks of the bladder are constrained towards the expression of the stone above, so that urine is relieved.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which here is its form:
And let it be of fine silver, barely a hair's breadth, like the feathers of a bird; Let it be the length of a palm and a half, and let it be fine at the end.
And the way of the passage of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie it at the end of some wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the needle inside the syringe;
And cut off the excess of the wool and insert it up to the tip of the needle, then smear the needle with oil or butter and beaten egg yolk, and have the patient sit down, and wet the bladder and the penis with oily olive oil and tepid water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the bladder.
Then push the syringe until it reaches just before the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until they are empty, and this is not done according to this order because for him who guides her to where she was twisted;
Then stretch the thread all along with a gentle tug, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out gently, and ensure proper urine flow.
And continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and ensure that the patient urinates properly.
When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see waters and medicines distilling, if make everything for the tool called 'clepsis' (an ancient water measure), and its form is:
It's sealed, and if there are three parts: On one side, and on the other, as you see;
And if you are among those for whom medical care is as such that it makes the member feel well without addition, so long as there's no moisture and expulsion when necessary;
And when you see the medicine being discharged into the bladder, place the patient in moisture, and apply to the one who is in charge;
If you remove the moisture from the penis, then firmly set the one in charge again. And if moisture enters him now and reaches the bladder, then the patient will feel it;
This is the form of subtle colic in which one treats the bladder with colic.
And it is made of silver or iron, and the shoulder blade rises higher;
and reaches up to the spine or the neck of the shoulder blade;
Then take a lamb bladder and fill it with moist heat that you see in the process of preparing the bladder, then tie it between the two shoulders using a good pair of twine, and heat one end of this moist heat on fire;
Then conduct the bladder through the catheter into the vagina, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moist heat has been applied, as long as the patient feels that this moist heat has reached the bladder;
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, then pierce it roundly through; Then bind a strong thread in these bends, then form the circle as you would a hoop, and put inside what you see of dirt, moisture and water, and tie it to the tool;
And do it like you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until moisture accumulates in the bladder.
Of the stone
We have discussed methods of stone extraction and combined treatments;
And we have explained the differences between stones that obstruct the flow of urine and all the symptoms, and when one should open for size; And in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will explain it clearly and briefly to you.
I say that stones that are obstructed in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign that the fever jumps from the bladder similar to fever by its subtlety;
And when you open the wound, and scrape the patient's genitals, and do this many times, and then reassemble. and at the mouth of these jumps there is support;
and there is easy healing of children until they are four years old, and there is much complaint among the elderly, and it is midway, for those who are between childhood and old age;
and healing is easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by fasting, in order to drain out all the bile which is within the intestines. For it clogs up one way or another when seeking the stone.
Then take hold of the patient by their testicles and lift them up, moving downwards so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and does not protrude from anywhere above.
then have the patient sit between your hands with their arms extended outward, so that the bladder is fully descending downwards.
Then touch and probe inside;
If you feel the stone in space, if you hurry now, cut into the stone.
And if it doesn't feel like it's at all under the toucher, moisten your index finger of your left hand, if the patient is young, or your middle finger, if the patient is old. And dig into its foundation, probe the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it at the neck of the bladder.
Then press on your finger, and dig outward from where you see to cut.
And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their arms up with their right hand, and with their left hand hold the skin near the penis in the area where one would make a cut.
Then I remove the swollen spleen, whose form is this: And they make in that which is between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left kidney's area.
And let it be straight on the stone, and may your tool touch or be at the foundation, and make its size through such that it's wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance if your tool that is at the foundation jumps senseless during work;
And know that there's stone or it has edges and margins: If it gets stuck to come out;
And if it's part that is under, resembles a gallbladder, and round, whose output is light.
In the place where there are angles and margins, make the opening larger;
and if it doesn't jump out, you should use forceps that are shaped like a file at the end, for to apply pressure on the stone so that it does not escape; or you press against it with the tip of the subtle curved instrument at its base;
and if you can't use it like that, make it slightly wider but not too much thick, and if the stone is hard, apply it with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, first take the larger one from the neck of the bladder, then move upwards, then use force, and the smaller ones after if there are more.
And if she is very large, then it suits to sever, and create a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine starts coming out immediately when his legs can't be sewn together;
but strive to treat it or use forceps until you remove it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, if you treat the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, compress it, apply it topically, or place a wet cloth on it soaked in oil and wine, or oil and cold water and rose water, to soothe the inflamed area; then straighten the patient's back and do not release the ligament until three days have passed.
And when you untie it, wash the area well with oil and water, then apply the dyafinicon ointment and basilico ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses come into the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and thus retain his urine, which is known to occur like this without jumping with urine: Therefore, you must clean the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and it will rot.
then clean the wound from water and slime and dirt, and assist with all methods you know, until it is healed;
and ensure that every time you treat him, you tie the two legs together, and apply medicine to the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads out, stuck in there, so that the urine cannot come out; if you treat him as I have described, cut him many times, and forgive the loss of length due to this treatment. I already have this experience like this.
Take one iron twig according to this form, and have it with three points stuck into one stake:
then take thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it does not come back into the bladder;
Then bend the twig gently on the penis until it reaches the stone; and twist the twig in your hand at the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from elsewhere;
if urine starts to come out, then press your hand on the one that is stuck from the stone which is inside the penis. If it breaks soon, and jump with urine, and beware of the patient;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a string under the stone and another above, then place the penis between the two strings in the area of the stone, then pull hard, and remove the string, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; And treat until it becomes healthy.
From the stone of women
Sometimes stones get stuck in women, and if it happens once, the treatment is strict, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
One reason is perhaps that the woman is a virgin;
And the second reason is that one cannot find women who know how to hide themselves even when they are chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find women who know this skill of hands;
And the fourth way is that the stone in a woman might be larger than a man's stone, so it requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear about this. And if necessity demands this, you must find an experienced one and with hands, do it where they are found; and if you don't find such a person, you should not hesitate to consult even the subtlest of mirrors.
And there is a small incision in the woman's life, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and she is commanded to do what you command about stone interrogation; and see very well if that woman is a virgin:
and see very well if that woman is a virgin: then she must place her effort or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she compels her with all her might and seeks the stone, and I advise her to apply all her effort or strength in the area of the body, and presses and urges her left hand against the bladder formation.
If she finds it, she must move it vigorously from the entry of the bladder until underneath, as long as she reaches the root of the thigh;
Then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh where it meets the middle of the bone, there where the bones are joined, and feel the bone in that part. and do not move his hands above the stone or nearby; cut him to the first small size.
and do not move his hands above the stone or nearby; cut him to the first small size. Then extend the knife in the cut, if you feel the bone increase the wound as much as the bone can come out forcefully, and know that many types of stones are:
This is what you should know: there are small and large ones, hard and soft, long and round, and those with bends.
If you understand the symptoms to know the outcome.
And if he doesn't faint, then put some vitriol powder on him and keep it for an hour until the sweat is completely gone;
Then return to your work, as long as the stone is strong, and have at hand the instruments I told you about in the extraction of the stone for yourself to help with your task;
And if it doesn't hurt you and the artery is severed, if you put the powder on the wound and apply pressure with bandages and bindings, do not repeat this action. Leave the stone alone and don't try to remove it, in case it might kill the patient; Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood has calmed down and the limbs have returned to normal, then return to your work, while the stone is still hard.
A watery ointment is nothing else but a collection of moisture or white fat, which resides in the belly of the animal that contains eggs;
And it is called "fat," and under no circumstances is it properly in the egg's membrane, if one believes that it might be another egg; And this is the skin of the neck between the white flesh, as we have said;
And there should not be any lack thereof. And the formation of this mucus is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
And whenever there is percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many hues: or it becomes a declining yellow color, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly; because if it is white flesh as we have said, then it indicates pus that has reached its limit, and lasts as long as an egg's figure, and does not open the kidneys, for it contains moisture throughout.
And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, then the pus includes part of an egg, and because of this, one thinks it's another egg;
And if moisture is between the skin of the elbows and the white flesh underneath, you will feel it well;
So, when you see to know the nature of the moisture, if you test thoroughly throughout the recessive square area, from which its form was previously. So according to what comes after the introduction, judge about what is inside it.
And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be treated according to our ability and their body's capacity;
Then place it on its back, on something slightly elevated, and put a layer of blankets underneath it;
Then sit on its left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, spreading the leg between one of the two elbows near the elbows;
Then take the spit rod, and place the skin of the elbows among it along its entire length until behind the wrist, and make a straight cut throughout the skin of the elbows up to the white flesh, and gently scrape off slightly according to our ability;
Then pierce the eye fully with a sharp needle, and extract all the water, then put your clips on, and place the eye upper.
and do not touch the genital area, but only the eye. remove it all or in parts carefully from beneath him, for if you do not remove it carefully, it will cause more injury.
and if the egg jumps to your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished with the eye.
then join the two parts of the genital area with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the veins that are suspensory, in case of doubt about blood loss;
Then cut up to the entire suspension, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wood is joined into two parts together, know that these are two branches; If you handle the other part in the same way as you did the first equally, then let out any blood, and apply wet wool saturated with rose oil to the wound;
If you handle the other part in the same way as you did the first equally, then let out any blood, and apply wet wool saturated with rose oil to the wound; Then place another piece of wet wool soaked in wine and oil over the two genitals, cover it with folded cloths, and fasten it up along the entire strip that follows this form:
Then take two cloths and fold them using torn wool according to this appearance, so that they are joined together by sewing in the neck of the breeches. One part of the shoulder hangs down to the bottom up to the back, and the other at the area below the arm;
And the other involves both shoulders at two angles, and all the assembly is confined within the loop of the pincers;
And when treated with this cautery ramie in the size of a iron tool, and you take the small surgical cautery, and stretch the skin around the muscles, and heat it as we have explained, so that white fluid from the water is revealed;
Take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the whitish fluid like veins, and use it to cauterize with this small, hot tool:
And stretch it in all the ways you can, as long as you have heated it fully;
And make sure that the fire does not touch the egg;
And know that this work is more healing; and protect against the spilling of blood, and be cautious of the operations that involve cutting;
And if anything opposes you or involves pus, bleeding, or other issues, treat what opposes you according to what was previously explained.
And if the patient is afraid and cannot wait for this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture as I told you, and when you are well certain by the explanations we have given that the watery part is there, make the patient lie down on the elevated seat; Pierce through to the part below where all pus is spread outwards, and make the puncture along the length of the body;
Let them be wide at their ends, so that all the sharp points can fit;
Then place cotton on the joint, and tie it, allowing for the removal of the sharp point through the cut. Then treat until the wound heals;
And if the white cloth doesn't allow the point to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary that you insert a feather or an instrument used to extract points from dropsy patients. The form of this procedure was previously described;
And expand the wound until you see that the point returns, and it is assembled after six months or a bit more. And when it's assembled as before, then the disease will pass during those days.
Understand that in this limb part there is fear of more positions, which is why I believe it's better to leave as is;
And I will tell you about the work and the characteristics of the abscess.
So I say that many abscesses come from or around thorns, and likewise on animals; and it's due to various reasons.
This means that it is known through excess of sour matter and fever, which spreads on animals, or from impact;
And the appearance of the abscess depends on the color of the thorns; and you won't find any pain, it is an abscess with discomfort;
and by chance it is an abscess with sharp and hard pain, and of a reddish color, and never from the root of an artery, or inflamed vein.
When it's due to lack of blood flow, it can be identified by the presence of an abscess; when you press it with your fingers; and it is not right for you to touch it.
That which is caused by swelling of the vein can be recognized by its appearance at the point where it is palpated with fingers; one can properly measure this resemblance and others as well. And if you grasp the tip of the cord, then it is at the navel, and the umbilical cord hangs down below, and the white thread runs through it; release the suspension from all sides around the egg.
If the egg is already attached with these cords, then you should pull the egg and it.
And if it is at the stomach or within the vessels, it is necessary that you release all that tension, and round off the wound.
And if the birthplace of the child is behind or in front, then you should remove the entire heart and take out the egg as we have said.
And when your tasks are completed, if you apply the wounded area with wet wool in oil rose and wine, then continue other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a clasp, with the softening of glands, and the patient feels severe pain as it grows;
And the treatment for this disease is as well explained here just like the one before, yet still we will tell you about it, according to what the old did.
It is necessary that you have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull them upwards with the support of the lower ribs using your hands, at all the vessels close to the penis, and guide their masters, and stretch them into shape;
Then cut the artery trenching broadly across the veins until they are revealed, and then sear from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in temples;
Then insert a needle where there is thread, and tie it at the original spot where the thread came from, and tie it right away to the other end. Then cut straight through in the middle, according to the length of the body, and drain out the corrupted fluids;
Then treat the wound as with others or by binding it up, so that no veins bleed through either of the sides;
for nothing ill comes from this, and if all the veins come together, it is necessary to remove the sides for all the veins; If the eyes do not retain their sight due to cutting of the veins, they dry out and cannot help themselves.
The occurrences of this branch are through the section that comes to obstruction or rupture, or extension on the belly in the abdominal area, because the intestines descend from that opening towards one of the kidneys;
And this opening is where the obstruction or rupture occurs, or from the extension of it, and come these two ways of origin of the cause:
or due to percussion, or jumping, or grunting, or lifting of the rib cage, and by similar actions;
and when it is due to the extension of obstruction, if it occurs little by little, over a long period, and does not come suddenly; And the abscesses are even until around their front edge, because the syphilitic presses on the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it's about internal bleeding, she brings on a sudden sharp pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear, near the skin, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and the body outside the site of bleeding.
And the glands often descend with the intestine, and are retained within, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if they're close by.
And in these iron treatments for fear, it's necessary to avoid them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to have the hand of the diseased part rub inside the wound on the intestine, if it can enter; then sew around its neck. With your hands, lift the thighs;
then extend the back above, and remove all the skin of the buttocks to the length; then cut through the belly's layers with uncinate cuts according to what you need to open the wound, and do it such that they can easily come out.
then shave off the syphilis that is under the skin of the buttocks until all the white part of the syphilis is exposed from all sides.
Then bend your index finger towards the head that heats the egg, in the one located between the white yolk which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second yolk, and start from the one behind the egg, between the second yolk.
Then move the right hand inside the abdomen region, and place the white yolk at your left palm in top position, and gently lift the egg towards the waist area with all of the yolks. And instruct the surgeon to extend the egg upwards, and untie the one that is behind the ligament;
And with your fingers check if there is any part of the intestine or hard white yolk wrapped around it, and if you find nothing, pull it out from the abdomen area;
Then take a needle or where there is a thick thread made of many threads, and place the thong at the back part down to the syphuncle, which comes after the skin of the groins; After that, cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the syphuncle, which we have mentioned is underneath the skin of the groins, with a strong ligature of two parts; Then envelop the hairs of the threads, and tie them in two parts so that no vessels that supply them can enter there, preventing pus from entering. Then place the ligature along the first line long two thumbs of that one, and after these two ligatures leave down to the syphuncle which is underneath the skin of the groins, leaving it as wide as a thumb. And after all the rest according to the roundness of what the eye bears;
Then cut in the area under the skin of the buttocks, as long as it is painless and the wound heals properly, just as we have said earlier;
Then apply wet wool in oil and place it on the wounds, and follow the binding method that we have mentioned. And afterwards, cauterize the white fold as we have said after incision, due to concern about blood escape. For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it bleeds for him;
And if the bleeding is delayed, then apply hot water, and place on what we have said, until it bleeds;
Then treat the wound with another cure, until it heals perfectly.
of fatty hernia
In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to do the iron treatment.
And the old ones said that it is done like a bundle of twigs bound together with resin, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting them slightly under;
Then take it over, and clean out the abscess for him who works, while the veins are still intact;
and cleanse it as we have said, while the area is still bleeding.
Never let surgery be performed during anger, as we have said, and when he opens them;
And do not let any of the intestines come out during pregnancy; if they do come out, it is little, and repair them every hour.
And always, if he stays too long at this point, believing the wound or infection to be there, while the intestines are coming out;
And this happens through the extension of the syphilitic ulcer which is in pregnancy, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells his limbs and opens;
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have stated before;
And often times it is treated with iron in this manner: And when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then hold the head of the affected area swollen across the width according to the size of three fingers;
And then extract the fat that is under the skin which follows, take the thread and place it in the visible part of the fat;
And press it towards the front of the belly, then cut the two visible parts of the fat on the surface of the fat under the head of the thread, and cut both.
And then remove the head of the thread, do not cover or extend anything from the fat, nor apply any other thing as I have told you in the treatment of rancid intestines; Then the surgeon through the treatment of wounds.
Then the surgeon through the treatment of wounds. And when you operate on the children, if the world afflicts and treats the wound, until it is healed.
The syphon (a surgical tool) must be constrained and has no visible mark in the incision, and the cautery is heated at this location, closer to the recovery.
from softening of the skin around the anus
Many times the skin of men's thighs becomes soft due to the substances inside becoming softened and one can see this.
And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that one make the disease affect his back, and pinch the soft skin on the natural skin;
Then join the two lips with one stitch, and if you see it, make the first cut at the excess of the soft skin to three stitches or four firmly;
Then pinch between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it heals, and sew with thread.
Of discipline
Know that chastisements and fines are part of our law, and because I prefer not to discuss them in this book;
And requires for only two ways:
And one is that the patient should know how to respond when asked and knows its cure;
And the other is that we often need to deal with the taming of some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep and deer, and others.
So I say that taming is done in two ways: either through attraction, or through weakening.
In the method where we use attraction, we place the beast in warm water until its hooves soften and remain; Then take them with your hand while they recover and you no longer feel them.
In the correction of size: It is necessary that you dye the beast. Press the skin of its udders with your left hand, then tie the tail ligature, and cauterize each teat individually when you have well scorched them;
and I leave no small hole due to scalding and the fine scald that is inside the veins;
And this method of correction is preferable to that done by attraction because with attraction there might remain some part of the udders, which makes the beast lust for more.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Of Hermaphrodites
Hermodendry is according to two ways at home: One way is that between the two udders open just as in the natural figure of a woman, or may have hair, and sometimes through it she urinates.
The other way occurs among women, with something resembling a penis and two sex organs at the opening.
And the treatment of burns and scalds is such that you dress all bandaged areas, treating them as other wounds;
In the second way, for men whose urine jumps through their foreskins, there is no treatment.
A tentigo is a dislocated shoulder in the natural part of the body, until it becomes too ugly to see; And some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is necessary that you dye away the excess of the tentigo on your hand or nails, and handle it lightly;
And do not apply too strongly, so that blood does not spill out, then proceed with another treatment until it is clean;
And there is another condition that emerges from the mouth of the womb, and the thigh, and by chance with a burst of force, and according to its appearance it resembles a cow, and because of this they called it the old 'cow disease'. If it is necessary that you take care of it, as we have said about the pustule, and the treatment until it heals.
Erratic if either the woman's nature is not fully perceived or the wound is small; And occurs naturally by birth, or through accidents due to illness that has come about;
And occurs naturally by birth, or through accidents due to illness that has come about; Or it's due to a shoulder injury, or from subtle or thick fat, and is performed in the womb, or on the chest, or under the arm, wherever it may be.
And to conceive, and during childbirth, and by chance one might obtain flowers for having them.
And the knowledge of these things is by the sight of the body.
When the stabs are closely apparent, prefer striking at your hands or on the thigh.
If it's deep and subtle, and close to the two lungs, hurry up, and do it this way:
Put your two hands together, and have the woman on her back, spread out her legs;
Then form both lungs until the subtle syphilitic sore is resolved, and is covered by the remedies;
Then take wool and the grease in oil, put it on her body, and have the woman lie at home each day, so that she cannot be cured.
And if it is hard and full under the skin, then you must apply a heated spatula resembling a mistletoe leaf.
If the remedies are of earthly nature, then suspend them in vinegar and water;
And have remedies for arresting blood loss, such as these, dragon's blood, incense, concoction of abundant egg mixture;
then administer a wide bandage, so that the wound cannot heal over;
and thus for a longer time, and he should have a tent of dry linen;
then perform other treatments as long as it is bleeding.
And when it's an injury due to a fall, if you need to treat according to this manner, provided that it's not gangrene. For the gangrenous abscess in the groin area, one should not use fire to treat it.
Regarding piles (hemorrhoids). Emorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without proper care; and when emorrhoids become old they turn into thrombosis.
And we have mentioned the appearances of these in the section for them, and their symptoms; I will now speak about those that require treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and pus, when they are ripe in the anus, do not appear to touch, except for the cure by iron.
Those at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
So then, you should put the woman in a cool house, place the altar under the knives, and set her on its roots. Then sprinkle powders made from blood-restraining medicines such as acai, dragon's blood, incense, and similar things.
Then bind his feet to the surface for an hour, then place them in cold water;
And if there is a bleeding, should it occur, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranates and soap and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and anise, and make a poultice for her back.
And if it clots, that is good. If not, have her undergo suction cups on the back and breasts without causing injury;
Then take fleece, mix it with the sap of plantain or the sap of agelnier with old wine, and have it applied to the affected area.
And when the abscess rests, treat the affected area with ointment until it is healed;
And that which is called "Albathir" is red, and it resembles the head of an asp, if you need to cover it as I have said earlier about the Theulus. And continue the treatment until sanity is restored.
Many forms of abscess occur in the marris, such as gangrene and stone-abscesses, herpetic lesions, intestinal ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
So, I must explain in this treatise the pus-filled wound that comes in the belly, which is not among the abscesses that can be tied off;
And if you want to understand the working of iron, observe how these pus-filled wounds are red at the beginning of their appearance and filled with heat and fever, and if they turn red, you will be able to see them. So don't rush to pierce too soon, but wait until the pain is relieved as much as possible;
And then have the sick person sit on the chair, and place two small stools beneath where their knees would bend, supporting them with their back and having their feet touch parts in front of the legs.
And let her hips be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind them well with a good band.
Then direct her to lean towards the right side, and I will prepare the instrument used for working inside the womb, which comes next.
And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being prepared, you make your first cut to assess the depth of the womb. So that what enters inside the instrument does not go too deep and cause injury to the patient. And if the tools are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the tools do not cause discomfort.
And it is necessary for him to place the tool's cup above and to sharpen the tool.
And when the abscesses open and one makes it with a gentle hand, if it suits to cover at the head, at the heart;
And when the bag is emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound bandages soaked in rose oil, or in dry green oil;
And place the bandage of the wound at the bottom of the wound, and place it forward on top of the wound and on clean wool that is moistened in water or cooked vinegar;
Then after two days of ointment treatment, as long as it is bleeding;
and then each time raise and lift the wound by applying a blister of water and honey, and afterwards with water or roots of lily and aristolochia that have been cooked; then proceed with the ointment application.
And if the wound is treated with mustard, you should avoid cooking it with iron, but treat it in the way we've instructed when discussing its application.
During childbirth The first step in childbirth is for her to recognize the natural birth figure, and you'll notice certain signs when you see a woman preparing to give birth and feeling the urge to push, wanting to smell the air.
therefore hasten the child to come forth with strength; know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it emerges through her head, and the second stage follows him;
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the child comes out soon;
for when he descends from his head, then comes the second with him, and in this manner she is freed of her excesses by good childbirth management;
And such other things do not come naturally.
For it comes only on his hands and feet, or under the body or shoulder, or on his belly, or in the groin, and is sometimes transformed by chance around its neck, or through other harmful configurations;
So skill and subtlety are required in these matters for the midwife, and one must be aware of errors and deception, and I will show you all the forms as to how one should assist them.
When the child comes forth from its head through a natural opening, and the woman gives birth in great pain, and her strength is weak, she should be made to rest on a saddle, or women should hold her.
and from its essence, if fennel has been cooked, then place the baby between her fingers in a small spatula as described here. and cut the second tooth, and remove any moisture that is trapped within until it has escaped;
and continue to monitor the woman's stomach until the child descends; if it does not descend, then you should treat the woman with fennel oil and sesame oil enemas;
then have her sniff the condisi, hold her mouth and nose for an hour: If you are now taking care of an infant.
And if both his hands slip out, it is necessary for you to gently and gradually push them back in. And if they cannot enter, make the woman sit up and lift her legs high. Then pull the stool off the ground, then shave the woman, so she does not leak during expulsion.
And if his hands cannot enter and the child has died, cut off his hands with the knife that was placed earlier, extract the baby, and pull equally.
From the birth of the child above its feet When the child comes down through its feet, it is his duty to keep them up; and then gently turn it gradually until it is even;
Then carefully examine each bone and slightly, gradually extend it.
Can't he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and make him emit a sound of discomfort? If he can jump, let God will it.
And if it is not as we have said, if you gently turn it bit by bit, until it is according to the natural figure. And then it should be done lightly.
And if he doesn't jump as we have instructed, say that you are to take a muscilage of height, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything together in the mortar; and place the woman's natural form inside and out with this ointment, then have her sit in hot water up to her ribs;
and when she is thoroughly moistened up to the neck, have her wear a mirror bandage and put it on her, leaving it for an hour; Then make her sit on the stool, then have her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently touch her stomach, for the fetus is jumping now.
from the issue of the child at its knees When the child comes in this form, if you place your hands on it gently and gently; Then support it at its neck, and have the feet hanging down, and let it stand on the bed; And bend its hands gently and gently, then take the hands to her belly, and keeps the knees apart as long as she hangs down. And if the child does not jump, take its feet and bend it firmly, then bend her belly upwards, then put your hands back. And let the child gently and gently; And instructs the woman to remain pregnant until the child is born.
from the birth of the child which comes with one hand wide open It is necessary to devise how to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman up and move her;
If she cannot move, make her lie down on the bed, and force her legs into position;
Then carry out the massage that I have described;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study how to bring back the hand; And turn the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to remain pregnant until the child is born fully.
From the birth of the child on its neck, and it spreads its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's. It is necessary for the healer to clean his hand, then turn it gradually and gradually, and gently stroke it.
And when it is even, place on the natural tension and oil of the muscle, as we have said, then instruct her to move gradually and gradually.
And once you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and instruct her to pray; And make her sneeze. In this same manner for all the second part
In this same manner for all the second part When it comes to this manner of completion for the entire second part, if you have applied the second part up to your nail as long as the moisture is drained;
And if it has spread to her face and neck, make sure you do it from the armpit, so that she is not restrained, and let the child die;
Then remove the child within, as long as you have placed it correctly, and instruct the woman to refrain from any single time:
from the issues of twins Know that teeth often come out, and sometimes they come out three or four times; And this is not an unusual thing, and little happens. Two are unusual things, and do not live at all, if only their names;
Two are unusual things, and do not live at all, if only their names; I know this, that they multiply and are destroyed by the sperm which devises them, which is bound to the womb;
And it is not as natural for them to come out as one under another, as we have said.
And if they feel painfully, with the treatment as we have said, and there are subtle issues, then perform what it does promptly and lightly. Act in such a way that it contributes to healing. of many children
They are not formed in marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the glorious one's wisdom. It is necessary that the doctor knows all this, for such things might happen. Do it according to what is appropriate.
Of the dead child
When you treat the woman who has lost her dead child or whose womb is diseased, as I have explained in the division, and if nothing comes out, and you are forced to operate with your hands; If you need to know whether she has natural health or if she has fear of death;
It is necessary for the woman to be able to stand on her own at the back, and have her shoulders positioned forward, and lift her legs.
And the minister should use two parts of the tincture, or she should be bound to the bed so that she is not moved during childbirth;
Then rub the mouth of a pregnant woman with moist almond oil using a mixture of rosemary and fenugreek seeds, and linseed. Then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures;
Then carry her lightly, then when she moves her hips as it is in the instructions, and be careful that when the baby starts descending towards her head;
If the gallbladder lodges in its throat or around its neck or in its mouth or on its palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if it descends into the belly, then it sticks or gets stuck at the mid-ribs;
And it is necessary for you to cut the gallbladder with your right hand, and place the curvature between his fingers of the left hand, and push it lightly with all his hands, and insert the gallbladder into none of these places that we have mentioned, as long as it does not reach the empty thing;
Then insert against another gallbladder, or the third if you need it, so that all extractions are equal;
And then extend evenly while moving from one side to the other, for the movement to occur, and whether it's the incisors to keep in place due to movement, as is shown here:
And if he leaves out some part of it, if he greases his hands with grease from any of its sides, and rubs them on that part, and pulls the other part.
And if there's nothing left of it, place that tooth or higher up in its socket, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back by squeezing, then you should wrap around its tendon until it comes out completely. Then the knife at the joint of the sole or at the cut, and similarly you should do with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is squeezed at the exit, or if its tip has an acutely assembled point, then you should push the sharp thorn of the skull between your fingers, and move the tip and extract the point. or you will find it in the tool which is called "almidach", from this tool comes its form with the tools or chapters that follow this one;
and similarly, make it so for children with large natural heads;
and then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is restrained by force, even if it's broken, until the moisture or pus comes out;
and if it can't come out, cut it piece by piece as you can manage;
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce him as far as the moisture goes.
And if the child is on its feet, there's a slight pull, and the connection to the mouth of the umbilical cord is also slight.
And if it is swollen in the belly or around the thighs, then you should drain him up to the fold of skin hanging on the hand; And stretch the belly or the thighs as far as the moisture that is there;
And if any other bones are involved and the head remains, then grasp the socket with your hand from behind until you reach the root of the gum, and pull it up to the mouth of the gum; Then remove the socket or the second bone, and pull it out.
And if the mouth of the gum is narrowed by an abscess that has come there, then it should not be cut open, rather it should be treated with moist and fatty substances; And the surgeon applies plasters, and also uses water that is soothing and moistening.
And if the child is under his breast, and you can place it level, then follow what we have said about the live infant;
And if one cannot do so, if you pull it by parts, and leave nothing of the tail.
And when you have done this, follow what we have said about treatments for abscesses that come to the gum;
And if blood flow stops, then place in water and restraining it, and follow other treatments.
And I saw a woman who had borne an offspring that was dead, and then another one on him, and he revived the other. After a long time, an abscess came in his belly, and it swelled so much that he opened up, and began to have severe pain.
I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not accommodate the wound.
I place under a strong attraction, and out comes one bone, and after some days another. I was greatly amazed, for this stomach has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I want the wound, and when handling bones, until the woman was in her best condition; And she tends to keep the woman long enough like this, and it would be a bit of support from the head;
And I remember this chapter only because when the masters find a strange thing, they need to know how to provide help.
Next comes the description of the presser, which is mentioned in the books;
and for the second turning of the two shoulders of each hand. In every case, the horns should be more delicate than those of the retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the pipe be two palm widths wide, and the margin of the trees must be long, up to one and a half palms; and in between the two levers let there be two attachments of this same pipe, which must be firmly attached on both sides, half a palm long or slightly more;
And these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the second horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, might be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the pincers; and has two dislocations, as you see, of the length of a palm, and two sticks of width;
And when you see the mare open to all the instrument, have the woman sit on the bed, her knees hanging and her legs spread apart, then place the two adjustments together in the mare, and hold the tip of the instrument under her armpits; Then work your hand with the whole instrument in the same way as you have done with the pincers equally, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the mare, as long as the reins do what she desires.
This tool is entirely mounted, and multiplied according to these similarities; And when you have equipped the tools, then your work becomes faster and more precise, and you stand taller among people due to their quantity.
Do not hesitate with the instrument until you have arranged it, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage is retained during childbirth, it's necessary that you instruct the mother to hold back her waters, and then make her inhale cold air. Afterward, restrain her hands at her mouth and nose; And if she jumps over it, it's well done.
If not, take a pot and make it spill or cover it. Then place herbs that can open the woman's mouth such as mint, rue, anise, chamomile, clove, and lavender; All these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled on fire;
Then place a stick or a reed in the mouth of the pot, and the other end in the opening of the mortar, and let the steam rise inside the mortar;
Then make them sneeze, as we have said. If it jumps the second knee quickly.
And if she still lacks strength after this treatment and has no force, command her to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk, and then with the ointment, and wish for a second one; And when she has found it, take and extend her gently, so that the mortar does not spill during extraction;
But you must gently move it to the right and to the left, and then cut. If it comes and becomes dislocated again.
And if their nose is blocked by mucus and inflammation, we have said the treatment for sneezing and herb fumigation;
and if it is not relieved by all that we have said, be careful not to cut without hesitation;
But it should be that the person at the nose opening is tied to the woman's thigh, then she is anointed with ointment and given a suppository treatment; if it does not relieve the pain and will come out forcefully;
but if it does emerge, then when there is a foul smell in the stomach and head, and burns the body. Then therefore appropriate fumigations must be prepared:
None of the old ones have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the tool used to fume the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
And it is like seeing the appearance of a cane, and one places the subtle head in nature, and the shoulders wide on the fire;
And have the fumigations over the coals, and let it cook until it is done, then start another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it has been disturbed by some subtle cause: So then at the birth, let it pierce that cause to its proper place, and do not allow it to be pierced by any sharp tool, and guard the placement so it does not touch;
Then place on wet wool in wine and oil, then apply the ointment cure until it is healed.
And if you doubt it will not resurface, then place or insert a tallow stick and leave it in for several days, and remove it when the child wishes to go indoors.
And here comes this treatment of sudden injuries to wounds or abscesses; if one needs to cover that suddenly: whether it is treated or, as we have said about the opium poppy's root.
Fistulas coming from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger those coming from above the foundation or in the space of two parts, if it is one fistula or more;
and when that nodulation is old, if it works and brings moist resulting in white or powdery matter, and often these fistulas are painless;
And they are known by those who experience or have an emaciation or windiness when the body expels, and sometimes jumps from one to another.
And if it's about fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; And they reach up to the joint of the knee, and up to the patella.
And thus one knows whether the fistula is situated at the bottom, and not at all: And when you press on your index finger or bottom, and you insert a delicate needle like that of an arachnid or iron into the fistula without any twisting.
And if it is twisted, then you insert a subtle tentacle like that of an octopus, or the hair of a horse, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your finger;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no change in appetite or wind movement or smell, as we have said: know that she does not pierce through; if you hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or up to where urine is conducted, if it causes urination and cannot be sealed by medicine.
If it has pierced up to the knuckle joint, then there is the temptation coming up to the elbow; if there is no winding and the origin of the pain inside, then it is that it lies within a bone, and it does not benefit from medicine or immediately by salve;
and in these Persian boils there is no treatment for anything other than work and the vanity of those who interfere with them.
In those that are neither Persian nor old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have found out, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
And he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his abdomen; Then bind an araneus tent or a tortoise shell if there is difficulty, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it in the foundation of their body, then you must press your index finger there, and if it is felt that the tent has been pierced;
And when discovered, or if you feel something between your index finger and the side or the heart, then know that it is deep. If there's no trouble with it, one cannot heal it.
Nevertheless, one can still often manage to cure some things, but this happens rarely;
And when assistance is provided, one heats the delicate cautery according to the size of the fistula, as was explained earlier; and applies it hot into the fistula until it reaches the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that the burned outchar remnants resemble a bird's feather, which indicates they are fully burnt;
and then treats the wet areas with butter until the burnt outchar comes out, then applies ointment to cover and join the area.
If he is so healthy, that's good.
That way, it cannot be healed any other way;
and if the tent sticks inside and doesn't penetrate to the root or base, then you place an thick covering of burned outchar or syfac between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering meets the skin; If one begins by applying to the start of the fistula, and holds steady before the tent, then afterwards applies heat after, as long as it reaches the tip of the tent; And the tent will be released, and there will be no harm.
Then remove those veins that seem like a bird's feather, and do not leave any behind.
And if the wound doesn't heal, and cuts you instead of flesh, then apply a fire or an ointment to it.
For the fire cauteries combine two good things: That is to say, the burning of these veins in conjunction, and the removal of blood and the drying out of moisture;
Then the treatment of wet tents with butter or ground-up herbs, until the limbs are bathed in water, and out comes the burned veins in the water;
Then treat the wound with the application of hot compresses made of durable flesh, and apply dried medicines.
For when it is restored, if it heals properly and does not recur.
And if a fistula comes just up to the full depth of the wound bed, and is far from the body, you should fill it with your own finger or its depth, and check this.
If you feel the tentacles, and within II there is silk or yarn or thread, or it is ready to pierce, assuming there is only a path of hope and no other way out, by administering one of these three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have explained, or you cut until the bottom, or if you can find tentacles and apply treatment as first;
and don't cut too close to the foundation, that you might cut through the layer that supports the base, causing forced expulsion of contents by the body; then treat it, as we have explained;
then treat it, as we have explained; By chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it has been peeled from the bottom, through trial or with another tool directed. Then purify that pus-filled wound as much as you can; Then study to heal the wound, and to prevent the formation of a in the lower part near the base:
Then study to heal the wound, and to prevent the formation of a in the lower part near the base: If you can do it more lightly for the patient.
And never let ulcers form in this manner: And when you puncture the ulcer from within, and it is located under the skin near the base, if you take a puncturing tool in this manner: And attach one and a half twined threads, and insert the tent into the entire length of the thread in the duct until it reaches the head.
If it is deep in the margin near the base inside, then extract that thread of the diseased part, so that when you puncture your tool or the base;
And stretch the head by pulling the thread, and join together the two ends, binding one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
And hold steady once or twice, until the thread covers these marks that are between the two ends, and they stick together;
Then treat the wound until it is healed and has recovered.
If the fistula does not burst, make it burst in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too far apart. For it is not suitable to sew it up when the wound is too deep and then treat it as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the spinous spur that one creates for the fistula is quite small and from both sides, it cuts; And on the other hand not, because there's one that should not be cut and one that should not be avoided, as you see here:
Worms can occur in two ways: They can be within the foundation, like pieces of resin, and there are small and large ones, bleeding in the center, and there is one or more of them, they lie outside the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
But those which are deep if they have little moisture, and even still or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh;
And for the treatment of those inside the foundation, you must instruct the patient to secrete through chambers until the foundations release, and it becomes evident that the fibers are present; If you hurry, or use pincers to grasp it, or hold it with your nail, then pull it from its roots;
And if the root cannot hold it due to moisture, take it with its fur, or cloth, or a piece of camel leather; And extract them with your hands, then pull, and dust them with some hot powders that are like fire cauterization; For you should cauterize them as was said or instructed in the chapter on cautery; then treat other remedies until there is no fever.
And if the roots cannot emerge, then cauterize the patient using a cauterizing agent that is sharp and rough to wash out what is or has the root, so that it can come out smoothly; If the patients do not improve and if their hair is thick at the root, then the treatment should be gentle;
If the patients do not improve and if their hair is thick at the root, then the treatment should be gentle; And if you take them with your fingernail or tweezers and pluck them out, then treat them as we have said, until there is no fever and they fear the iron cut. It is necessary that you suture according to this manner:
It is necessary that you suture according to this manner: Take a piece of thread, and bind it into a needle. Then stretch the thread upwards and pierce another end of the needle elsewhere. Loop both ends of the thread over the needle and make sure they are wide.
And tighten the thread in a knot, then cut off the thread, and pull out the needle. Do this process for all others and leave some thread to drain excess blood;
Then place on the wound a moistened bandage in oil or plaster and put it on the wound. Command the patient to rest;
And then let it be until the patient has rested. When they are down, apply ointment treatment and other treatments as long as they recover.
this means "by drying out or the ground" in modern English. The sentence seems to be part of instructions on how to dry something or set it on a foundation. Many times, there was the drying effect of earth in the intestines, and by the body's natural condition, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works. It's necessary that you sharpen to the tip of a spatula or on your nail the skin above, which should not be moist. Then apply the cure as long as it is firm, just as is necessary;
And if it cannot become firm, then resume the shave more forcefully than before, until some healing occurs, and may be scorched; Then apply the cure until it heals.
When the fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold steady until they fully grow. A worm is a small rash before the body, and goes throughout;
And when the artery is blocked, it feels cold, and one also feels it like a pulse that has died due to tremors, spreading throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment involves taking a cane with a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and placing that stick over the tremors, until the purple circles encompass the entire tremor. Then turn your hand to all of the hair until you grasp it completely by its trembling, and place it downward, and remove the trembling from its roots.
And if you see this, do as with an arrow or iron in the shape shown, and make it both slender from beneath and piercing above: Do not neglect, for you must hold with both hands, and gently press.
And if you see it, apply the cautery to the trembling, as is shown or detailed in the section on fire cautery.
Never use silver, or copper filings, or melted iron or brass;
And never make these small and large instruments according to their users. Therefore, when it comes to treating infants and those who are weak and in pain, they need small ones.
Therefore, when it comes to treating infants and those who are weak and in pain, they need small ones. The shape of the small and large needles is made as follows, or when binding the abdomen according to this manner:
And if there is an opening or the belly is pierced, as you see, and if the head is inside.
And has on one of the sides two missing parts, and on the other one.
And let it be in the belly or where we place the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and make all around tiny holes, and have between each hole an inch of space. Then insert into these holes one strong thread of twisted raw silk at either end, and sew the belly up like a goat would; And when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the tool with a strong thread in front of it, then proceed with enemas;
And this is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and smear the area around the anus with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then gently apply it. Then they guide the eye with both of their hands together until it is fully open, then remove the cataract, and lift the patient's legs to the face, and if the medicine desires to come out, then apply it as much as you can. And if he sleeps through an entire night, that is more assistance.
And if you administer it during a condition of belly obstruction, and the medicine begins to come out quickly, then continue until it's relieved.
And if there's bleeding or at the base or within an abscess, also if there's a cataract so delicate as for an infant;
and it is the form of the delicate cataract on which the skin is constrained:
We have spoken about treating wounds in the section on treatment;
Or we will tell you about treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are various depending on how they were made, and where they were made on the body, and for what reason they were made.
The things that lead to wounds are by dint of stone, and the size of a sword or knife, or spear or staff or axe, or similar items;
or according to the body's bones, such as wounds that occur on the neck, or on the head, or in the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar parts;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with wounds on the head that are simple, since the recall will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or on the head, and if the bone is not broken, take care whether it was caused by stone or similar items, and even though the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess developing. If it is done immediately with the surgeon's knife right away if there is a little blood from the wound and the patient has been treated differently than the excised part;
And make the patient drink wine and eat heavy meats.
And if they do not wish to be treated with surgery, then reduce their food intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And place on the wound, if we find pus there, wet cotton in oil rose water only, or in wine that is astringent;
And if there is no pus present, place on the wound, if it has fresh blood everywhere, and isn't moved by air, powder, that I will mention a little later;
And if the arm has moved, place some ointments on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar injuries, and the edges cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together by suture, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, through sewing.
If the wound exposes the bone, it will swell and may only remain for a short while, if treatment is delayed; Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace the hard tissue instead of skin. Instruct the patient to consume fatty meats such as chickens, cooked wheat, like boiled potatoes, and similar items.
And if you find orrotting skin and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut away the rot completely, drain out pus, and then treat.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without clotting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then clip the artery, and if you find it has come loose, tie it with a thread. And if this does not benefit you, then apply cautery to it.
And if the wounds are small and simple, their treatment is straightforward: and then apply this powder which joins together in such a way that when the heat of the fire touches it, it binds firmly.
And here is how to use the powder: take one part of incense; add two parts of dragon's blood resin; add three parts of fine chalk, and finely ground powder, then fill the wound with it, pressing it firmly until it dries well and binds with all its blood;
and mix it thoroughly, leaving it undisturbed until it doesn't swell; For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And always this is done with the charcoal alone, when one does not have the incense nor the blood of dragon, but when the art has healed the wound.
And if the wound has healed within him, even in that state, certainly do not put this powder on it.
but apply some digested poultices, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, until the wound weeps. Then continue other treatments until it is healed.
And if bone fracture comes with the wound and it's small, then use delicate forceps;
and I will tell you about bone fractures in the head later on.
from the wound around the neck.
This injury occurs in or around the neck; if it is simple, there should be no distinction between this and that around the head, but if a nerve in the neck or an artery has been cut.
If it's the neck, without any other obstruction, leave the treatment and do not apply anything restrictive, because it harms the neck and causes it to shrink; And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and they are in continuous connection with the brain, which is the highest member.
but be it under medicine, as with soap washed in mild water and mixed with rose oil, and lace washed also in mild water, and other earths of the mine in this manner, and wet ointments.
And if the wound is large, then sew it with bends, until it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and the patient is covered with blood, if they puncture or deeper into the body;
And if an artery is severed, and blood flows out continually, then to open it, and stabilize, and cautery as needed;
And if the spinal cord of the throat is severed, or the ears, and guide the passage where the meat goes, so cut the ear above the throat canal, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape; And then it tightens the addition, allowing for several days, then treats with dry dressings until it is healed;
And if there is an indication of infection in the bone, then one should intervene; And if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all with force, and those that cannot be removed, leave until the wound becomes infected and heals naturally, allowing for its discharge;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned on it. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as described in my chapter.
If it's from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, examine if there is suction in the wound as long as the patient does not faint: Then you will know that the wound is fatal;
And if it is not deep, and the wound bleeds freely throughout its length, if one does not apply powder immediately at first hour or bind it up where blood runs freely from the wound and invigorates the heart, leaving the patient in peace. but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or longer; if there is no spasm, and the heart does not experience harmful tremors or contractions; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is healed. Treat with remedies and other treatments as long as it is clean;
and if it cannot heal and work, know that there is an abscess;
if the treatment should be as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple or worse, or on the back, then apply the treatment as presented; if it's large, with stitches;
and if it's small, with powder; and if it is bruised into the bone, or if there are fragments of bone in it, remove the wound and the external treatments if they have been removed. and if they haven't been removed, leave the wound to heal by itself, or facilitate the extractions;
And for other wounds on other members is the judgement so as we have said.
From the protrusion of the belly
The hernias of the belly are large, medium, and small;
From a major wound it can leap out once the intestine or the nerves of the intestines, through which their intrusion occurs;
And the stitches are more troublesome, and from no wound is it worse than the small one when compared to the large ones; because in this case we cannot set the intestines back into place, unless they are sewn stitch by stitch;
Because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold; if they cannot be set back into place, then it is better to leave the smaller wound alone, because we must move the intestine back to its original position for others.
And know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four ways:
The two common incisions happen in the belly seam, and the incision of other wounds on the body has two other seams that are shared with other injuries;
Yet they are more precise with the belly seam, and I will say each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and no part of the intestine is exposed, and if there's something to be sewn back in place, this is done through one of the two methods: Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it's cold, warm him in this manner: Moisten an sponge or add a pinch of salt to boiling water only, or cook in boiling water containing cinnamon and pepper and cloves, and stir the intestines until the innards are well cooked.
And once this wine has been strained, and made ready for reducing, it is hot to relieve swelling.
And when you see the swelling leave, season the intestines with water or broth and ensure they are fully cooked, because through this method, the entry allows passage for little else;
And if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the instrument from which one extracts the worms;
The first treatment is to cook until it reaches the size of the cut, which we should not extend unnecessarily or without significant need;
And these are the tools to open them:
if you cut only within the bend and not outward, and see this shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the internal organs are displaced, if you can set it back according to its natural form in its proper place, because this counts for movement.
When the wound is wide, and it's in the belly area, you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; And if it's in the belly area, place their head and bottom higher than other parts. And similarly, if the abdominal rupture is in one of two parts, put yourself such that the injured part is higher than the other;
And thus, it's necessary to follow what I say in large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what you're equipped with; then have at your hands the sacred minister that sears all the injury to its hand and joins the lips.
And this is the common method of stitching, and you take one needle or more depending on the width of the wound's size, then leave about half an inch from the edge of the wound, and you put in a needle where there will be enough strong thread; And pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thorn, which is inside the leather, as long as you make it pierce that part, and join the two ends of the thorn together in four assemblies;
Then put two strands of doubled thread through the needle from both sides, then join the two ends of the wound together gradually, and then leave about half an inch, and put in another needle;
Then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need, until all of the wound is restrained;
And use needles of medium size, between subtle and bulky ones, because subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too bulky ones cannot enter well at all. because it is fitting for them to be of medium size;
and it is not fitting to have the needles sticking too far out of the flesh and skin, so that they cut and open the wound before stitching;
and when cutting the ends of the needles, ensure they do not irritate the patient while sleeping, and place cloths or bandages around the needle sites to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound has healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient.
The second stitch is common, it involves joining two shoulder bones and two symphysis bones together on one needle with a strong thread in the middle;
And when you have pierced all four bones together, remove the needle from where you started, in the manner one sews with thread;
and leave space between each stitch equivalent to the thickness of a small two fingers;
These stitches cover the wound, and I sewed a belly cut that someone had made, which was due to a knife cut, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and there were intestines about two palms long, and it was a wound in the middle of the belly.
I returned his intestine to him once it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was stitched up until fifteen days later. I treated it, and he recovered, and became healthy.
And the priest had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
And I did not treat it with ointment, because I was at sea where none could be found, nor any medicine; And I changed the old cotton on it twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
I will tell you two proper methods for suturing:
Take the needle, and make an incision from outside to inside;
when it has pierced the center straight in and out, if it touches the scrotum or has caused a wound, then you have made an incision, and make another incision from inside to outside.
And the principle behind this suture is that you sew as the rabbit does with its fur, and you leave one side of the scrotum alone, then take it up again on the other side, until all the suture is completed.
The second method of stitching, which Galen described correctly, is such that none do it like this, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the major joints to the other joint in this manner:
Prick an awl or join the major joint to the near one, and only puncture that higher area, leaving the two joints of the same side; Then turn the awl and make it pierce from the lower part right up to inside there, of both sides' joints;
Then pierce both from the lower part right up to inside there, with two more joints of the opposite side that are on the other side;
And this is the way of stitching and it is the most common one.
The surgeon states this sentence, and no one verifies it, thus the abdomen should be sewn with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroies;
Know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the stitches are more painful than those of their other wounds.
The judgment of the wound is as follows: just like the judgments for other wounds, it goes like this:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound filled with all its blood, just as the animal has moved it, then put back the intestine and the cut;
Then sprinkle on the powder that stimulates healing, and once it has been applied to the wound, apply no other ointment as long as the wound is open. and stitch the thread, and let the stitches hold, and let the wound heal; then treat the wound as others would, until it is clean.
and if you don't have medicines, apply it until the pus starts to drain out. Use old cotton and shake it twice a day until it is clean.
For you don't need any other medicines in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
and if you suspect that the wound might cause complications in major body parts, it is necessary for you to soak thin wool in oil of moderate warmth or rosemary oil, and place it between the joints, and over the armpits;
And if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly, then use black wine enemas, and similarly if the gangrene reaches up to the intestine;
And pierce internally, and know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the smaller ones.
The intestine that is referred to as 'young' cannot heal when it's injured, and this is due to the layout of the veins around it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its alignment with nerve nature.
And if pus jumps out of the wound, reset it as soon as possible like an intestine when it's fresh;
And if it's old and turned to pus or black, you should tie the black part of the wound, so that no blood flows out anymore, for there are veins and arteries;
Then cut the part between the tie and place the two heads hanging from the lower part of the wound until after it is released when pus jumps out, and let the wound heal.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestines are intact, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen that a man was pained or had an abdomen from a lance.
And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became stenotic and developed into a fistula, and there was the expulsion and the flatulence.
I applied the cure according to what I could, and did not cease refining until it was healed, and the wounds joined.
And when I saw it heal, I wondered if the patient might be in pain in their stomach; And there was no illness, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
And it was said by any experimenter that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner: Take large needles, then bring together the edges of the wound. And when one of the needles has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips if she forces her mouth onto them;
Then press the needle into it, and this stays in place if it can't be pulled out, then put another slight movement after that manner as before, until the wound is entirely filled; And seal the wound.
For these are so intertwined in the intestines, and do no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestines with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine, like this:
Take the tip of this intestine thread that is quite matted, and then tie it to a thin linen thread you've twisted. Sew it onto the intestine thread with the needle, stitch the intestine, and reset it in the cavity;
And this method of stitching together ribs is solely based on the path of faith and hope;
And if the wound is big and wide, especially when it's located in one of the abdominal organs, even if there's no pregnancy or health issue, due to its delicacy.
regarding a fistula, or if it exists Know that any wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula", and even when hair grows there and the swelling recedes.
Fistula is according to the hard and white nodule, where no pain can be felt, and it's also feathered like the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes it is clear water, and other times it is thick; Sometimes little, and other times quite enough;
And I have spoken about the classification of wounds in which any wound that is not healed, and there's no flesh, it can only be due to one of the eight causes: This means, you need to know about the small amount of blood or pus; for its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within it, and above the lips, that does not allow new flesh to form; or because there is too much wax; or the blood is thickened, and the substance is of bad quality; or the medicine isn't good in the treatment; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or due to the property in the area being late for digestion, and slow recovery, escaping naturally; or because there are veins or bones;
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicines in this section.
So, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of an abscess which is performed by manual work.
Know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the chest, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if it affects the property of the main body part, and shows its signs.
And all fistulas that occur in this manner are painful to heal, and there is nothing else but treatment, and lack of knowledge;
And if there is no fistula that does not extend to what I have mentioned, and you undertake the treatment, and understand it well. If you take a spider web or iron wire, if the fistula is straight, then use it.
And if the fistula is twisted, seek out with a subtle attempt of a thread, for the threads fold and move along the twist.
And if the fistula has useless ends and you cannot properly search for it with threads, plug it by one of the useless ends, because moisture will spread from one end to another, then cleanse it.
Then feel it carefully with your power, so you know if there is bone or nerve, and feels it completely around, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and find out where he feels it;
And when you truly know its location, and if it's far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the locations I've told you about, do as I have instructed. Remove the bone and the decayed tissues that are inside;
And then the treatment until it is healed, and if there's a sinus well located in the right place, you should fill it completely with clean pus, as much as possible. Then put wet bandages in medicine for leeches, and leave them up to the tip of the sinus, so that the medicine eats away at the excess that has remained at the bottom;
And then I apply clean bandages until it heals.
And if it does not heal through this method, then apply the cautery as we have said, and if the bone is decayed by the sinus, then remove it.
And if the vein or major limbs are involved, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then remove it until all decay is removed, then treat with clean flesh until it heals;
And if it is not healed, and returns as before, know that you are not quite done until further notice.
If it opens and spreads as long as you're at the bottom, remove all the decay, then return to its proper place;
And if it is well healed, that's fine. If not, know that the decay has penetrated too deeply, you cannot reverse it; Only due to natural aging if there's no other reason;
And if there is just a small decayed bone, and you can remove it with tweezers, if you have the appropriate tool for this, and if there are many bones, then remove them one by one, don't leave any behind;
And if moisture makes it against you, and there's no mistake or fear, mix and moisture with flesh, and free the bones.
And if you can't remove them within an hour, put something that prevents putrefaction on the wound, and leave it until the flesh has completely rotted inside the bone, and then they will come out more easily;
And if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, you should only wait for complete decomposition until all the marrow is gone, then heal the wound;
And if there's a large part of it still corrupted, and comes to the very bone dust; If it's necessary to stay with it and cover it until complete decomposition occurs, then treat it until it is healed;
And I will tell you of a case which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help in your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, as far as the materials reached the leg, and then there appeared a large abscess, and no external cause existed for opening it.
But the doctors through their folly opened too much, as far as the abscesses burst open, and they ate away at a large amount of tissue, it became a fistula, and brought a great loss that all complained of sickness and bodily moisture;
And many doctors treated it for over two years, and no wise man knew the art of medicine, until I was called to see him, and saw his leg and the treatments used to cure him, and what ate away through the losses with great bodily damage; And the bodies of the young turned red, and had a yellowish hue.
I set up a tent at one of these hollows, and then searched all the hollows, finding that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
So I hurriedly proceeded, and probed through one of the ulcers until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it decayed and punctured, and the infection reached up to within the bone;
It was me who appeared to be the decayed part of the bone, and I believed there wasn't any other infection, since only that which I exposed;
I began to heal the wound with long-term medicine treatments, but was unable to stitch it up;
Then I restarted, and uncovered the bone as before, found the infection continuing inside the bone, exposed it, then removed it, and bent on stitching up the wound; But I do not stop until I copied half of the bone with my palm, then I applied it to its entire surface, and afterwards returned it with medicines; And it healed and was stitched quickly; no further surgery was required except due to the weakness of the patient, who couldn't bear it, and out of fear of death that I had for him. For during blood evacuation, it often happens, but it was completely healed. In the place of the bone came hard flesh, and it had good consistency with no harm or opposition throughout, neither outside nor inside.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: Take hold of it, and pull at the tip of the bone that is exposed, and instruct him to extend it upwards; and put another thread of thicker wool than the first thread, and tie it over the flesh that is inside the bone, and pull such that you draw the decayed flesh away from under it, and expose the flesh on the place where you want to see it, so that it does not hurt the flesh.
And place a coal or an iron plate over the bone to melt off the putrid flesh;
It is necessary to do it just enough as one can see and feel the decay, and also to do it again if needed.
And if the bone is decayed and does not open up, and decay is in the middle or a part of it, then expose all the flesh;
Then place the coal over it, and then apply heat from one part to another of the decay, and ensure the heating lasts as long as needed for the decay, just like we have said;
And if the decay is in the joint, then cut out the decayed joint, and heat the bone where it contains flesh from the other side;
And if the corruption is within the continuous connection of two joints, if there's no other angle that would cause the copernic.
And if the corruption is at the base of the hand, or at the ankle of the foot, it's quite intense but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it manifests. And cleanse using all methods you can, but in such a way that the vein or nerve does not oppose you;
And know that the incisors and suture lines for bone are numerous according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their bulk and smallness, and their hardness; And for that reason, one must tailor each tool to the appearance of every task's form;
And know that the work will show you the instrument with which you must do your task, according to the knowledge of this craft, and provide evidence for how diseases manifest. if you think about the instrument you need according to what is suitable.
The thighs swell either from within or from outside;
And when you have treated that decay through the remedies, and if it does not improve, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to its origin, so that the illness escapes either through death or through malice, which is greater than the defect of the limb;
And the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they have been burned by fire, and after this blackness, because it is the decay spreading from limb to limb, and takes over the entire body;
If you have a copper, and if it's through the impact with certain venomous animal beasts, like sea scorpions and snakes etc., if the corrosion is on both sides of the head, then take it off, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if she comes up to the hand, if the copper is at the joint, or if the corrosion doesn't reach up to the elbow;
and if it comes up to the arm, if the copper is on the knife;
and when it passes the knife, that's the end, and it's not worth seeking remedies beyond its potency;
and do so entirely until the corrosion reaches or slightly past: if it comes to the first joint, if the copper after another joint;
And if she comes or a step, adjust all the step; And if she goes up in the leg, regulate at the knee joint;
And if it ascends over the knee, there is no other reason than to let the patient die;
And the method of adjusting or sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, stretching one of the ligaments on the lower side with one pair of forceps, and another ligament on the upper side with the other forceps, and you cut through the flesh that is between the two ligaments to a depth where bone becomes visible;
Then adjust or sew it, and place one piece of linen on each side, so that the skin does not touch the healthy part, avoiding further injury and discharges elsewhere.
And when blood escape as you operate, if you see this happening, quickly apply the cautery to it, or place some restraining powders there.
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it becomes healthy;
and I will tell you what happened at my house with the pie:
He was given a blackness that seemed to be fire poisoning, and this corrosion affected his left thigh first, spreading throughout the entire thigh;
And when the wound saw the corrosion, it covered its thigh to heal, and became healthy;
And long afterwards, the corrosion spread to both arms, and it came to me, and after my body's purification rituals, I applied counteracting things against it, but could not stop the corrosion;
And it says that I should apply my hand to him, but I refuse, because I have hope of being able to reverse the substance; And I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the strength of my knowledge was weak;
And he became very despaired, and returned to his home, and started trying to mend his hand, and eventually recovered;
And I am only including this because one might need to do something else, if required.
There is no pus formation in his inner flesh, and it stays for so long that it causes a large gathering of worms; And they then tunnel and pierce, and the worms enter his body, and remain in the patient's eyes, just like in a vase; The skin above is as delicate as silk fabric and does not extend up to the bone or nerve, and such illnesses are called 'simple' and are not referred to as 'fistula'.
but if it is so extended that it reaches up to the bone without stopping, then it is called 'fistula';
and the skin should be treated as if you sew that skin entirely together, and even when it is delicate, like a piece of silk. and does not tear due to its decay.
And if you think that the skin should thicken and the decay is not in full, with skin filled with flesh, then treat it like a urinary condition thus:
Look to see if his breasts are large, and the womb that is within it has a foul smell, then administer an Egyptian laxative medicine which is prepared thus: take asail, and oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in a single vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and thicken it similarly to honey;
and then take from this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and as an enema for the womb, and hold back the urine. leave the medicine in place for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this number of times, until the breasts have shrunk and the womb has been expelled;
And in every case it is washed with water from ashes when this medicine isn't available, and you should take ash from vine wood, pour water over it, then drain it off, and use that for washing, until you know the wound is well cleaned.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it, or if neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes can be used, then wash with water and honey, or include a little borax. or you can wash with honey and wine mixed, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash away, and the wine helps to heal.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is thoroughly cleansed, wash with what causes things to grow in it, and take plaster of Paris, and apply it mixed with rose oil and wine.
You will apply various medicines and ointments to it, of which I have described their properties or written about the ointments;
And if the passage in the chest is small and the tube from the clister cannot enter, then widen it with a bit of iron, and place an Egyptian balm or basilic ointment in such way that it remains widened;
And if the wound is too wide, so that even when it's left just as is or with a paste, only then can the clister enter, and if the exit hole from which the pus flows is above, then cut higher or lower than where it is.
And if you cannot cover the breast area as you see it, equip yourself in such a manner that the bow comes to its lowest point possible which it is at. For when the bow is perfect, do not let anything stick out and if you cannot cover the breast area as you see it, equip yourself in such a manner: that the bow goes smoothly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow;
that the bow goes smoothly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to place over the healthy area, and they are on an old linen cloth that covers all the healthy parts; then cover the area around the edge of the breast pocket that is somewhat wider than the first one, apply grease with the other piece of cloth according to the size of the edge, and place it on the edge of the healthy part to ease the bow, but remove only the large cloth after several days once.
And the one who is within the narrow part of the chest bone often removes the heart, know what comes from the heart if it's venom or pus or sufficient, or digested, or undigested;
And be vigilant if the patient feels pain or not, and check if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has partially spread and you see its nature leap on the narrow part of the healthy side, then know that the disease is already present, and brings health closer.
And then release the tension in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound, if there is a different layer present, replace it with new dressing.
And if delicate veins start to cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for the health approaches.
For there are people who take too long to heal their wounds from blood, and those who do the opposite;
And if a person does not digest food after many days passing through the stomach, know that the stomach is not working properly;
And if the stomach takes too long to break down and is distant, adjust medications that are dry in form but moist in essence, such as an extract of oil, because they contain a large portion of sulfur, and this is the last remedy;
Take oil of diaphanity, mix it with rose oil, and season it with old wine in the same essence;
Then cook it and apply it;
And similarly make a cooked thick honey, when oil of diaphanity is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them together, and add the powder to heated honey;
And then in the use of glue, I spread it out, and it extends to the breast, and every time an assistant or surgeon longs for it, and he administers celestial roots, which is also like flour of cloves and cinnamon; And in the use of simples or compounds: Grind them, and make powder, and place it on the honey I mentioned, and use it;
And if the treatment lasts long and is not cured by this method, then know that corruption has spread inwardly, and appears in bone or in hard parts of the body or in ligaments; If the treatment for the abscess is according to what we have said previously.
Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand's pouch or foot, or by chance forms in other toes;
And when it becomes old, and if one does not take care, then the abscess may appear, and run and spread as far as the root of the nail, and by chance it might even reach all the way.
And when corrosion reaches up to the bone, as long as there is piercing pain, and the patient experiences double swelling, and the color changes.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and if the treatment doesn't help, then you should proceed to clip all the excess that has remained from the nail. After that, cauterize the wound. The cautery is very effective when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
And if the nail gets infected with pus and begins to swell, causing pain, it is necessary that you place a hot rod near the nail so that the pus points outwards, then lift it upwards, and remove this thin and gently the pus. And place on top of the pus medicine that is hot and corrosive to remove everything; Then the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must remove it and dig deeply, for as much of the bone that is corrupted cannot heal;
And if you see the knee corrupted, remove it from us as was said before, then treat it until it is healed;
And if it's hardened and pained, with great pain being felt, it is necessary to heal it first;
Then trim the nail under the spatumil at an angle from above, and be careful that the cut does not extend to the flesh beneath the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
And if this happens, put something on it that soothes.
I must adjust what is born in the hands of some men by chance and are very muscular, and by chance there may be bones here or there where they have bones, and none of them has a nail, and no one of these are born at the root of the joint, or where birth occurs in any way.
Those born in no new note do not move, and those born at the joint of the old bone, by chance do move;
The size of the one who is muscular is so light, in such manner: Cut it at its root as wide as a thumb.
Those that are born at the root of the joint require cure: if you hold it with copper.
In the one who is born or should have at the end of the bone, it's necessary that you first cut up to the soft tissue until the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool for this. Then treat it as long as it remains sound.
The fusions that occur at the joints are due to birth, or by the welding of wounds, or by the action of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you work that weld, so that it should be repaired according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not fuse; Or you put between two delicate pieces of leather, until their welding is done, as it should be.
Welding occurs at none of his joints with the palm, if you take care of this welding just like it should be.
The veins are thick, rolled-up, full of excess melancholic substances, which come from the head of many members.
And more occurs in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than in others.
It follows therefore that you must administer one time a bloodletting procedure, and then heal it using basilica.
The iron treatment is according to two methods: One method is that you apply them, and drain the black blood; And the other method is that you open the vein, and drain it all forcefully.
The cut is according to this method: First, immerse the leg in hot water for a while until the large veins are thin. Then stretch the leg from below the knee up to the part above the knee.
Then open in my left or right side, from one large area, then lift and pull strongly for the black blood with your hand, from one side to another, as long as you are able to extract much blood that the virtues of the diseased body can bear;
and then rub it, and instruct to dye with black meat juice.
And repeat the evacuation and cleaning when veins are full, causing harm to the diseased person.
The method of treatment is as follows: Lift the diseased leg, if there is much hair, then dip it in hot water, and lift the leg in hot water until it turns red and veins swell.
And if you do not have a cautery tool, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein along its entire length from the neck down to the knee, or in the part below to the ankle.
Then cut the skin with an awl, and scorch the vein from each side, until it appears when one feels it;
And you see it red and black, and when it enters or appears as if a white string under the skin;
Then pull the vein outwards until it is raised from the skin, and then cut with an awl gently, then apply it to another area above three fingers;
Then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then gently pull with the thumb, just as you did, and cut with another awl, just as you did first.
Then take another size or more if needed, then lift it, and hold at the knee of the foot, then guide and lift until the second size.
Then strain from one size to another, until all the strength has come out, then take it.
And if you cannot strain and lift it, use a needle with all the strong thread doubled, tie it and guide it, then cut on both sides, and turn your hand from side to side, until it passes through. And make sure it doesn't stick, for if it sticks, one cannot strain or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
And when you have strained it completely, place wet wool in the wound soaked with wine and rose oil. And the treatment as long as it remains clean.
And if the limb is twisted and turned all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it in a twisting manner, but do not sever it; And guide it as we have explained before.
The shape of the iron with which you twist the screw is curved, and does not cut, so it does not sever the vein;
And it has large curves; for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein runs through legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that lacks moisture;
And by chance it is born in another place than the legs, and this happens due to disease that comes from under the skin, as when it occurs inside the body like snakes and worms, squirming between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning occur such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the veins change, and the vein starts to emerge outside, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is separated, it is necessary that you wrap around it with a piece of oak about one and a half times up to two times., and tie it, and leave the oak on the leg, and every time there's need for more, if you wrap around the oak again, and tie.
And if it's too long, if you cut off a part and wrap the remaining back around, and don't overlap in its root, until all is out. because if you overlap it, if it enters the flesh, and brings abscesses and disease or injury to its place, and causes bad illness;
Because of this matter it is necessary that she be treated slowly and gradually until completion, and does not leave any remainder or excess;
And in each case when she is treated for so many palms or X, and a short period of time has passed since she was X palms long, and only recently did she reach that length, after it was treated. If you take her pulse now, if there are one or two beats left over or missing, and you puncture until the bottom, ensuring everything comes out;
And empty the substance that is inside, and administer to the limb remedies for pus every day, then treat it like abscesses.
And always for this vein in the hand, and similarly when it opens at the ankle or knee joint, and there is much missing pulse, and where it remains;
Cure it then as we have said before.
worms that come to life between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "cow disease," because it happens to cows many times, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body, going up and down. It makes one feel ill from member to member, until it leaves the skin where it was heading, and jumps out forceably;
and it is filled with corruption of some bodily fluids, such as oozing, serpents, worms and roundworms in the stomach;
And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and goes up to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it returns, destroys the eye; This happens many times.
When you see it being treated and bled, if one cannot remove it until it is about to:
So then, you must bind the leg above and below with a strong, tightly-wound rope, then cut upwards and bleed it, and if it is located in the flesh, and you don't find it, then burn it with fire while bleeding until it dies;
And the greatest harms that it causes, if run to the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming close to the eye, then bind closely around it, then cut upwards and bleed it;
And it is necessary to use the remedy of purification for body ailments caused by bad humours, and to be wary of meat causing putrefaction.
The pain comes from winds or windiness. This disease is called in our land " vakirir ", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and then spreads from one limb to another;
and I see what I am telling you. I was summoned to attend a diseased woman, and she showed me her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein under the arm;
and after that, I saw it rise as if it were a worm on the shoulder, quicker than anything else, like quick silver when cut from one place to another;
the pain left that side and stuck into the shoulder, and soon afterwards spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that it was tearing through her entire body, just as I saw it.
I marveled greatly how she moved from limb to limb in this manner, for I had never seen such an illness conducted like this before. In every way, I wanted many to want to move the pain of another, but I never did want it, just as I see in women;
And I thought that was because women had smooth skin, and their veins exposed, and that shows the constriction of wind;
And they do not see this according to that reason among those who have smooth skin and their veins covered.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels pain, if it opens up like we said, open it quickly from top to bottom, and then proceed as long as that constriction of wind within the body subsides; And apply the cautery to the area;
And if you do not see it at your eyes, when curing the one who dislocates winds, such as foul pills and serpent pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and the locations where they pierce the body.
The variety of these things is that there are those with large spikes, and small ones, and those that are pointed, and those that are glued; And of those that have two points, and of those that have tongues, and of those that have fragments;
And there's the one that leaks from no body part but leaks in two ways: or from the main body parts where it leaks internally, such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When then it leaks not from any part of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you later becomes evident: If it is necessary for you to take out this arrow, because death comes after in various arrangements. And when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully out, you should extract it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow passes through and pierces the bone, and blood spurts out where it touches the brain, is when paralysis and numbness and vertigo occur, and a red tongue, inflammation and redness on the skin, and muscle spasms, confusion in thinking, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps it affects the strength of the nostrils, or of the ears; And sometimes it affects speech and voice; And from the moist wound, white pus resembling hair appears, and also in that jump like charcoal ash;
And when you notice this sign, take care of the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is there.
The sign of the arrow when it bleeds or stings, is that it's close to the left mammary gland, and also feels as if it's stuck in something hard, not empty; And by chance the arrow also stops bleeding like hair, and black blood comes out, and coldness or cold sweat appears, and fainting: So, without doubt, know that the person will die.
And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its wound is that without any foam spilling from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face turns a different color, and they sigh loudly with cold chills.
And if the arrow bleeds in the undercoat near the buttocks, it is deep within the smaller ribs; And causes great pain and great suffering and sighing; And it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
And if the arrow stops in the stomach or intestine, by chance if it breaks out of the wound, there's no undigested flesh.
And if the arrow stops in the belly or abdomen, and it jumps out of the wound not through the intestines, there's no hope for treatment, nor is there any hope for extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine escapes in jumps and leaks out, and the patient feels intense pain: Know that the wound is fatal.
The other body parts, such as the limbs and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder blade and back spine and ribs and arms and legs, and similar seeming limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerves or arteries and it's not poisonous, like what I will tell you, this happened to me because of what you were doing.
It happened to a man that an arrow hit him near the neck at its base: I tried it and pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear's fat, and was perfectly fine afterwards.
And pulled out an arrow that had hit into the fat near one eye beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was found to be completely inside, only its tip could be seen towards the shaft, and it was an arrow as large as a Turkish bowstring, but without harming any nerves.
The body was healthy, and no harmful accidents befell it.
And he removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was from Arabia to the ears:
I tended to the wounds, pricked them as finely as possible while I was extracting the arrow, and made all Christians well.
And he removed an arrow from someone's house, that it was stuck in the chest or stomach, and thought he would die;
and then having passed 30 days, if it did not change its condition; I cut at the arrow, pulled it out, and forced it, and there was no bad incident.
And if you find an arrow has fallen or stuck to the back of someone's house, and made the wound heal from there;
And the arrow stays within, not finding any harm in any of its natural works, nor adapting to its natural dispositions.
And see another man who was hit in the face by an arrow, and theyed up his wound; and he endured this without suffering great pain;
and no other symptoms.
And one day he was hit by an arrow in the home of the princes' king, who had been shot in his neck, and he was leaning slightly to the right; and the arrow was fully inserted.
I was called for treatment after it had been three days since they were hit. I found the wound to be very tight.
I tried to get close to everything with a subtle attempt, yet I felt nothing. And he complained of pain and discomfort in his right ear.
I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow. I placed a therapeutic adhesive plaster on his head because his ears were not inflamed; And my suspicion about the ear was confirmed by it.
And my suspicion about the ear was confirmed by it. I had the plaster on for several days and quickly resolved the wound. The patient endured this long enough until he felt the arrow inside his nose;
And he told me so. I applied corrosive anti-fever medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened, I tried it and felt the tip of the arrow that was buried in his head;
Then adjust by using that medical remedy for the opening of the wound, until I clearly see the head of the arrow.
and puncture well the ends for about three months, and then widen it as much as I can with my forceps, from both sides, and it couldn't come out;
then I didn't stop refining and engineering tools for the creation of instruments, until I obtained one day with well-made forceps, according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I used it, and kept the wound open.
And the judges determine that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: So I kept it open, and healed the wound completely, and fully recovered the patient.
You were told about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your treatment where I do not specify, because the books cannot take everything into account;
but the wise masters compare well to little more than a few things, and on what is current and lacking, find nine works, and nine tools, in the removal of foreign objects that occur in this art.
I say that arrows are stuck into limbs according to two ways: either through the entry point or from another side;
And when it enters by the wound or where it enters, the arrow penetrates into the flesh, and this has happened no other times now.
And if it doesn't spring up now, let it grow until the flesh is well rotted internally, and becomes free from disease.
And also if it's embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let her stay like that for several days, and remove a little each day.
And then it will spring up, and if it doesn't, pierce internally with all the delicate force until the veins are widened inside, and then remove it.
And if an arrow has been inserted inside the body and we can't see it, then look everywhere for it; And if you feel it, then try to guide it with any suitable tool;
And if you cannot follow it due to the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut as much as necessary for the wound to be open;
And pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it rests in the arrow, remove the flesh that is stuck from both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out.
And handle it carefully so you do not break the arrow, but pull it out more firmly.
And if you cannot do it in one go, till your arm is numb from the effort, then move on, because the extraction requires endurance. And if bleeding causes you difficulty, then apply what we have said about treatment in our chapter concerning this.
and beware of cutting near the nerve and vein, and do it carefully so that you can remove the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
and guide the patient according to how they were before the arrow fell, because that is the greatest help for them, and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show you.
The arrow that came from another side, or if there appears to be no injury at all, or if the skin is swollen in the place where you see it or feel it differently:
Therefore raise up high, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then proceed: if it jumps now.
And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
And if it cannot come out, let her stay in place, and then start the extraction again until she jumps out;
and if it is an arrow that has been shot, if it hits the whole body;
and if it is in the lung, and you see that it is necessary to force it out, if you use the correct tool, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the handle of the instrument;
and then force it, and if the arrow is buried, you force the instrument with its pointed end inside, to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touching, it is necessary that you remove all the flesh around where I come in, if possible, then treat the wound as is fit.
And if the arrow is lodged or pierced in the chest or in the abdomen or in the bladder or in the rib area, and it's close to vital organs, you should only press up there, if you press down.
and protect against pressing the artery and nerve, then you extract it, and then suture the wound; this is a task for expertise. And treat until it is healed.
The shape of the tongs used for extracting arrows resemble a bird's beak, and here is the form:
And there are many ways in this: Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead resembles the feathers of a bird, for it is pointed like the tip of an arrow; thus it looks like this:
There are 31 veins through which we bleed, of which there are or from which there is a head of 16, that is to say: Two smaller ones located behind the ears, which are called "two grasses"; and the two arteries which are in the two visible temples; and the two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "apparitors"; and the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that's at the nose bridge on the head; and the two jugulars which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augueherich"; and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins by which we commonly cleanse are five in each arm:
One is the Cephalic type, and it's situated on the left side of the chest, and they call this 'the man of the head'. And the middle one is called 'the fast', and it's made up of the cephalic type and the basilic type, and they call this 'a vein for the heart'. And the basilic is either on the right or left side of the chest, and they call this 'a vein for the belly', and it's located near the axilla, and it's the one that's bled from, which opens clearly in the armpit.
And the basilic is the vein that's located between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two courses;
and in the leg there are three veins: One is below the curve of the left chest pocket, and the other is in the ankle of the right side of the body. and the vein that's called "nasse", which is located in the ankle of the other side of the body;
And in the other leg, there are three veins beneath those.
The cleanliness of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old plagues and migraines;
And the qualities of a surgeon, like what I've told you, and when you laugh at the head of an illness and touch the body or areas with veins with a rough cloth; Then squeeze the patient's neck like winding a thread, until you see the two veins behind the ears in two loops under the head: Guide your hand there, and where you feel the pulse at your neck, noble sir of the wound;
Then take the lancet, and press it down along the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand all the way up to the vein above, cut through both skin and vein carefully as they should pass each other, and let blood flow out until you see it.
Then squeeze and tie, until the wound is clean;
And I have explained the incisions and the cautery in this first book.
The cure for the two arteries that are in the two temples, requires ancient grain intake and rest, and systematic eye exercises, and treatment of cold tears from the eyes;
And the qualities of a surgeon are thus as I say: and when the patient stretches his neck, so that both veins can be seen clearly; and feels for the pulse all over your body, and then speaks of examination;
then gently raises the hand over the vein at your second finger's tip, and holds the scalpel nearby, then raises the vein at that point, and starts the incision, just as you did in other veins earlier, and perform the bleeding according to your need;
then frees the patient, place your second finger on the vein for an hour, then put it on cotton; and then forms the cut, leaving it open until it heals;
And we have spoken of them regarding their development and extraction, or at the beginning of this book.
The treatment for the vein in the forehead is just as important as that of the temporal vein when dealing with diseases affecting the scalp, and it includes migraine, and fever.
And its quality is such that the patient twists her neck, until the vein appears; Then take the tool called "drill", as shown below:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and let blood flow according to how much you see. Then relieve the patient's neck and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and without any cuts, where the work of the surgeon should be with a wide flame.
Otherwise, it is not right that the flames become too fierce; and the wound goes across, for the bone is close by, and by chance the flames might break the bone when it is thin.
The treatment of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes, at the nose, and on the cheeks, and in the ear canal when it comes to the ear, and for diseases of the face;
and the quality of its treatment is that the patient tightens their throat by twisting some string, as previously.
Then apply the treatment, and let the application go across, somewhat in line with the length of the flame, somewhat wide, for there is no flesh. And if their flames are subtle, by chance they might break;
Then drain the blood as much as you need to, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well.
The treatment of the vein near the nose is valued for fever and colds, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old;
And the quality of this treatment is that the patient constricts their throat, then pinches their nose with their left hand, and take hold of the subtle flame long, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well like that, and the bleeding will now start to drain;
And don't go too long without food, and adjust to your need the flow of blood, then leave for a night, as she is very quickly restored.
The health of the lungs helps in tightening the alvine, and in the beginning of syphilis, and for many diseases, and in pneumonia, and corrosion, and in herpes, and tuberculosis;
And the quality of health is such that patients restrain their throat from one side to the other, as we have said;
And may the masters be on the edge of the patient's throat, and the patients sit at the edge, then heal the vein for a long slightly wider part, then guide the blood moderately, or as much is needed;
Then redo another part in the other vein, then untie this knot, and hold back moderately the veins, so as not to strangle the patient. and let it be until morning, that the wound may heal.
In the art of healing wounds The treatment of veins above the lips helps in closing them in the mouth, and it deals with gum decay, cracks in the lips, nosebleeds, and tooth pain.
And the quality of healing is to have the patient stand in front of you, and hold his neck as I said; Then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by what they are black, and by what in their vicinity there are small black veins:
So pinch both, and if you don't know them and are in doubt, then pinch the largest of each part, and do similarly with the two veins above and below, for it is the same manner.
In the healing of wounds under the tongue The healing of veins that are below the tongue requires help after the healing of the cephalic region, and this is in constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the sclera, and in diseases of the mouth;
And the quality of the surgeon is such that when you squeeze the wounds between your hands in front of the sun and lift the tongue, and look under each side, you find a black vein:
Therefore heal both of them and do not overdo it, because there lies the arteries under them.
The veins of the chest that we commonly heal are treated according to two methods:
either by piercing with any large incandescent flame, or with an olive-smooth one like the blade of a trencher, and it is called "anevil"; And they are broad and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The shape of the fire brand Mirtin is greatly renowned, and it is quite wide as you can see:
And it takes skill to open thick knotted veins full of visible large blood, and those containing large blood and disturbance; and it is the shape of olive oil flame:
And it's more subtle and pointed, and it's for purifying the delicate veins, or having subtle yellow blood.
The blood from the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that occur in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to heal correctly, and he must be aware of the artery that is nearby. And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, it is necessary to stop the bleeding, just as I have said; And must never grasp the flame, but cut it as before.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it is necessary for you to extract it, and use another one; or if you want no blood from it, or you open the vein instead of it with your arm: it opens clearly; and the cut is done with the flame as we have said.
And if you know where to cut, it is necessary for you to pull the arm so that you touch the place as long as you can feel the pulse; then mark where to cut, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the flame as we have said; And remember not to cut into the artery when you see the limb swelling up, for it is from the artery: Therefore, here it is.
And if you see it bulging up high like the urine of a child, and the veins are red and delicate, know that this is blood from the artery: Hasten then, and place your hand for a while, then press firmly until the vein stops bleeding, which has happened many times; Hold his arm, and leave it like this, and do not move your patient;
And lie on their back, and do not move them until they have cooled down.
And if the vein has not stopped bleeding and it takes too long, and you lack medication, if you cannot close the artery when it opens, for its head is withdrawn; And stop bleeding the wound.
And take an elm bark, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the other joint.
When the wound stops bleeding, that is enough; If not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
And the stopping of the bleeding is not done with many preparations for the small size of the wound and the strength of the connection of the arm.
The healing of the vein in the middle helps treat bleeding from above and below the elbow, because it is made up of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And it befits the surgeon that they should beware of the nerve which is nearby, and if he does not go too far forward, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and harms the health, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, it befits you to have the instrument sterilized before use; And listen to the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two hands, cut it long.
The surgeon in the treatment of the cranial region helps, relieving blood flow to the head, and aids with eyes;
And it befits the surgeon to intervene in the olive oil vein or in the arm vein, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has neither nearby nerve nor artery. Always, strive for the lightest touch, and do not fret if you have to try it first time, and then repeat if necessary; And by chance, the limb might swell in some people when done for the first time, but there's no harm if you do it again.
The quality of health is according to your thought.
The first thing you should know about surgery is that it's not performed merely for health preservation and to avoid future diseases;
and so, if the surgery is done in one of the three veins, namely: That's to say, frontal, facial, and basilar; And one should perform surgery at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
And one must cleanse on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The treatment for diseases does not have a set time period, but rather depends on the need of the day or the body, at all hours and in every situation;
And it is not proper to cleanse children up until they are twelve years old, nor pregnant women for only a quarter of their term up until seven months. Neither should they heal the elderly who have passed sixty years.
And when one desires to be cleansed, in whatever manner, it is necessary for them to perform mild bowel irrigation, if they have retained feces, so that the veins do not attract excesses from the intestines that harm the main limbs;
Nor is one cleansed by those who are overly bloated with meats, or drunk to the point of being incapacitated, whether due to excess strength or those with dehydration;
And if warned by the physician after colic pain, and vomiting, and abdominal distress, and frequent need to relieve oneself in women, and labor pains, of staying awake and working, and whatever saps the strength, or from something due to weapons or injuries;
Then refine the humors within you, if they are too abundant due to meats and beverages and medications; use your judgement for their intake.
Then take a bath or plunge, if nothing is lost in the process; this will help refine the blood and cleanse your veins of the belly's waste products, as we have said.
And keep this day free from work, pain, and excess, and any similar activities;
And be mindful of your diet and exercise moderation. Ensure the physician stays higher than the part being treated, and rub the arms twice or three times. Gently massage the bandage afterwards; if it is too tight or loose, it cannot properly contain the blood flow.
And then rub the area with hands, until the veins swell, and when felt.
Then moisten the wick of a small piece of old oil flame, then place his left hand's finger on that vein right under the area being treated for just a moment where he intends to apply heat, so that the vein doesn't burn and break upon contact with the metal.
For there are veins that behave like strings when heated, and some are filled with air currents, in such a way that when placed over the flame, they pull away from the flame and fail to open up, and thus belong to those types. And if it causes the vein to constrict, then the wound is too narrow for this; so that the flame must be aware of such things.
And if the body endures this first time, it is good; And if not, try again slightly around that area or at an acceleration, as long as the limb isn't swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the body starts to anticipate pain, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: By chance, there may come pus-filled blisters;
Don't take baths, then start cleaning it if it suits her;
And if the wound is small or the vein is too thin and you doubt whether it's leaking as much blood as you see, pierce that very spot directly into the entire flame;
And the work proceeds somewhat hastily, so that the arms are swollen; For this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see that the arm is inflamed, do not start anew with healing, and place a bit of oil on it instead, for oil lightens the body from blood, and heals there where oil is applied.
And administer the oil to every healing you do on veins, so as to stop the flow of blood;
And in the same way vinegar and wine help when applied to the arm; If it is too large, refine the veins and spread them out.
And if it comes about that there's an abscess large in size, which happens many times, especially when the wound is not fully healed even once or twice at the time of opening the vein, then hurry up, and place a damp sponge on top with some hot water and a little oil, then hold it for an hour;
And you should do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him; And if you see any sign of it, place something made from aloes or myrrh in a concoction of chamomile, mint, or similar.
And often there would be pus and appearance at the healing of the basilica:
Place your hand there, and if you find the elbow soft under pressure from your hand, this is an appearance of malady. So listen, do not apply anything from what we have spoken of, for perhaps in this there is no connection to the artery;
but make it slightly damp to harden the elbow, then treat with another cure, until it heals properly.
And treat each person with blood according to the amount of their virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let pus flow out as long as it remains red; and if you see it swollen, let it drain until it becomes thin. and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And it's necessary for the full and healthy individual who needs blood extraction to make a wider incision and let the flames be wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him well to clean often and gently, and you must clean him by cutting across, not straight.
And this method of cleaning saves from the spreading of blood and constriction of nerves, and is better than long cleaning over width.
And for the one whose body needs cleansing, it's suitable to give him moist bread made from juice of pomegranates; If he is flushed, let him drink three or four times of blood. If he has a cold complexion, have him eat something before the cleansing that's moist bread in syrup, or syrup with aromatic honey and spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, and the syrup should smell very good.
And if it fails in surgery, after the issue of a little blood, it should inhale soup of flesh, and pleasant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on collapse, for the evacuation of veins.
And if they wish to bleed their arm, and then rest again, should this be necessary, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be bled little by little, according to the strength of its power continuously.
And if someone wishes to bleed their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong health, they should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And if someone wishes to undergo bleeding on another part of their body, they should be bled on the second day or the third day at the latest.
For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, causing fever; If so, it requires large quantities to be drained, and widen the incision until it pierces the heart; Then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his heart when it is healing, so that death does not come from the heart rather than the lung, this happens many times, when the surgeons are careless;
And it is not good when you see the arm being released and blood being expelled a second time, and the incision is closed, so you press firmly on it; Nor if he has curved it, to extend the arm quickly, for that would be badly done;
But let it grow until it heals for the second time; but when you apply it at the tip of the flame, until the frozen skin starts to melt from the heat, and place on a damp cloth in hot water, then gently press.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and don't squeeze it, until the abscess is relieved.
And if needing to bleed again for blood, if the health is in that place itself, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein exists in the arm just like the one by the head because it is made up similarly.
And the method of healing is such that the injured person holds their hand in hot water until the pulse turns red;
then bind it moderately, so that the vein can be seen clearly, then heal now through it, neither too wide nor too long;
and if the cut is too wide, heal well near the wrist joint, and if blood cannot flow out, then place the hand in hot water, let the blood drain into the water, as long as you have enough.
And if it's in this state, do not reset the hand into hot water, as you would put it more at risk of frostbite than in heat;
And the healing of this vein is more certain than for all other veins, as it contains neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of regaining the right hand is worth more than any illness of the liver, and this is how:
Stretch the hand, and reset it in hot water until the vein is visible, if you can see it; And if the healing is across, and if you press all over it without causing any pain;
And do not press too hard, for the nerve is completely bare of flesh everywhere, and then put the hand in hot water, if it's frozen in the wound and can't escape.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is required of you, place on the vein where and with a needle to solder quickly, and thus do for each rain.
The health of the left hand is to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right.
The healing of the sinew affects all diseases that are within the body, such as diseases of the liver, and blockage of fluids, and diseases of kidneys, and of old hands and feet, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes their feet in hot water, and rubs on the wound until it heals, and applies this to the joint at the ankle. And when the wound is on the ankle, then above their foot many drops of rain occur;
So heal it properly or even more extensively, whether it's on the ankle, as long as you can move it freely.
And if you heal it on the foot, be aware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal across in the same way as when peeling.
and may the flames extinguish quickly.
And if it cannot come out without causing harm, then put the bone in water and ensure that the vein is well emptied.
And if it needs to be healed once, then try the second time starting slightly above, because the skin is salty;
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and similarly perform surgery on the other side equally.
The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle joint on the side, and its health corresponds to hip pain, when it's due to internal bleeding.
And the quality of its health is such that it allows the patient to bathe in water and exercise on the ankle, turning four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not be accessible;
And if it opens, heal her in all possible ways and when crossing over; And it is better if you hold her down because the leg muscles are strong and she responds well to human hands.
And it is better if you hold her down because the leg muscles are strong and she responds well to human hands. And if you don't find it, heal no part of what opens or at the back of the foot, and toward the small toe, and guard against nerves.
And make such correction of the blood as you see fit, and then untie the knot, and place a cotton bandage and tighten it. The treatment has now healed.
Pessaries are made from horns, or spiders, or worms;
and cupping is performed in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this cupping that involves piercing can be done in two ways: either it is with instantaneous heat, or without heat.
And cupping that involves piercing and the extraction of blood is done in four quarters of a man's body, where one is completely solid. and the other is around the neck; and the other two in each side of the neck; And the suction cup under the chin; And the suction cup on both shoulders; And the suction cup over the pimple; And the suction cups on both arms; And the suction cups on both legs; And the suction cups on both ankles;
And suction therapy does not address large blood vessels that are scattered throughout the body, for it would weaken one if done so, just as we perform bloodletting; And it should not be administered, nor at any hot or without heat, in any disease caused by excess, until all the bodies are emptied.
And if suction is necessary due to diseases, or by habit, we should administer it every hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and throughout and in each phase;
for there are some who, when they need to suction, if they do not rest often;
and for those who experience swelling and heat in their face, and head, and neck, and the eyes appear dark to them;
and those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an extended tongue, and cough up blood; and if there are those who think, see through the nose blood and ashes and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially during the first month, we instruct people to take some air after three hours of fasting each day.
The health of the nose helps with inflammation of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all over the body;
And this process of drawing out evil spirits, if it is to be done in the health treatment for the head, should not be used by those with cold constitution or who have fever, because it causes much harm to them.
And for this reason, one should not use it if they have health issues related to cold conditions or cold nature.
And the one who often seeks cleanliness, becomes forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup a bit further down due to the element of forgetfulness.
The process of ventosation in the neck is part of head health care and basilica treatment. For this reason, it is valued for its impact on the foot and for cutting the channel of the heart lung, as well as generally, and for refilling;
And it should be applied gently, as if it is held too tightly, it may cause paralysis or stomach and heart issues.
The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for head pains, eye problems and toothaches, and for strangulation, as well as pain in the root of teeth, being part of basilica healthcare.
And it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to prepare his hand for surgery, not to cut the artery and avoid any spurts of blood.
The breaths under the chin if they lead to mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is related to the health of the inner lining of the lips.
The breathing around the shoulders leads to illness caused by heat and congestion.
The breaths around the elbows are as significant as the three major veins of the arms, for they carry blood from these large veins;
And instruct the surgeon not to cut too close, for the muscles are bare of flesh and touch near nerves and arteries.
The suction cup placed on the back is related to kidney disorders and illnesses nearby; it must be large and made of skin so that it can properly treat. And by chance, if she were subtle, she would break; and I cause great wounds.
The leg cups are applied firmly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective against old abdominal pains, menstruation pains, and bladder issues, and relieve swellings;
and are located on the two shins and the two ankles, and moreover they weaken the body after long use, and cause pallor in various conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you apply it first in a vacuum state, and maintain continuous suction, applying it quickly, moving evenly, and continuously doing this until you see the area turning red and swelling, noticing the heat from the blood.
Afterwards, and replace the suction cups, and be cautious in the placement of the horns, for there are those who have thick flesh, and clear pores: It is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a bit deep. And suck gently.
And if the animal is large, it may be necessary to cut twice: The first time to subtilize the blood path that is thick.
And if the animal is very fatty, it may be necessary to cut a third time;
And when we wish to milk slowly and gradually from the blood vessel, we only apply it once. And if we want much blood, then we often renew the application;
And if the wound is deep, so severe and piercing that it immediately pierces the veins, this technique is suitable for those with thick skin and hardness, who have endured much pain. You should grease their wounds with suckers that open and dissolve when applied. If it's in purple fat or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
And if it's in fat (of an animal), use mustard oil, or rosemary oil, or chamomile oil, or any similar kind.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of arnica, or balsam, or juniper oil, and similar things.
And if the skin is in need of strengthening and has large swellings, no oil should be applied; it's better to wash after suction with pink water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any similar.
And whoever has much moisture, if they rise from rest, or from water of myrtle, and from sumac, and similar things.
And for those who have large excesses, they rise from old wine or vinegar, or from the distillation of juniper or chamomile, or other similar substances;
And they should not be treated with suction cups before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
And do not sleep after suction, it is necessary that he take care, when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
And watch over him who is being treated and is hot-tempered, and if he is too active and inflamed; It is necessary for him to eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endives and lettuces in broth, and similar items; And eat fowl, and beef stew, and moist meat.
And eat fowl, and beef stew, and moist meat. And for those with a cold constitution, they should eat honey syrup and fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old and new, and eat small portions, and fowl stew, and small birds such as pigeons;
And on the day he gets suctioned, he must drink more than eat;
And it should be given to some people no garlic or muskmelon before suction, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; And you should sieve the water, but it is not good for those who are cold to drink them.
The suction cups that are placed to hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and in gout, and on the stomach and intestines and kidneys, and buttocks. For this member does not suffer being hurt with needles, and it is only done forcefully to draw blood from limb to limb, as when we place them on the nipples when the child cannot suck;
to thin out the viscosity in the limb, as when we place suction cups on the stomach and intestines to reduce the limbs;
And for pain when there is an obstruction or stone, so by its attractive power it may adhere to the obstruction, or evacuate the stone from its place;
And thus she acts when you place her above the heart and under the belly in cases of retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty to remove such wind only; And sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in illnesses causing colic, and in such manner one fills the suction cup with boiling hot water, or with water that has cooked suitable herbs for this purpose.
The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And it should have half a palm wide and deep halfway down, with its edges at the midpoint one small notch, as to pierce like a needle, made of brass so that it doesn't cause the patient pain when placed on the limb;
And in the middle there is a rod crossing like an arachnid or iron, for to hold a candle, and it should be large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who use them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and the thin ones are different from the fat ones.
And one should place this suction cup like this on the limb:
take the wax candle or the cotton thread, and place it inside the suction cup through the rod that is in the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup to not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and you should do this at the part as we have said, so that when one wants to, if there is vapor going up, remove the suction cup;
And take the thread path as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup then, which is administered in the disease of pleuresin, for all colds, there is no pus nor discharge, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and placed solely on the limb;
and this is its form:
Without utensils, they are administered only in limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in their naked flesh, like buttocks or cheeks, and other similar areas;
and as for the quality of applying suction, if you find without utensils that are in mild water without pus, take them;
And place them in sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then bleed and use suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place it on stones;
and when they're full and start to bleed, if it's possible to place suction cups, do so, because this is not much after.
If not, raise the limb from the bed and then water, very well, and then incise;
and if the limb bleeds too much after the use of cups, moisten it with a linen cloth in cold water and place it there, until the cups are cool.
and if there are multiple cups, place them on powdered vitriol or garlic and similar things, until they cool.
You place half of peeled hazelnuts inside the limb, and let them dry there until they are now sealed off.
And if you need more, take other walnuts instead.
And if walnuts cannot be quickly obtained, rub the limb with fresh blood, or stick an awl there until blood flows out, then place them on top. Soon after they sense the blood, they will dry;
And when you see that they are excreting, sprinkle a little aloes and ground grain or ash powder on them, and they will start healing now.
Here begins the book on fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration and healing of fractures.
Know this, you young man who looks at this chapter, that they have never seen any of the old books or read a letter about it;
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been extracted from our land, for I have never found any good;
And I know nothing of it, for through the knowledge of old books, which I studied so much that I dealt with this knowledge, and through experimentation, and through the habit of my life;
And in this chapter, I have described what is contained here and summarized it at the end, clearly showing the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in those two chapters before.
Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline the essence of this book in its introduction and prologue, and highlight the chapters where wise minds apply their intellect. We should adhere to truth, so that those who have been taught can understand and learn this noble art, and teach it to others as well.
I state that when any fracture or dislocation or twists or bruises occur in no part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly cleanse the patient on both sides, if nothing weighs them down, such as weakness, children, or elderly people; If the tightening is too tight, or too cold;
and cook with cold broth, which means chilled soups, and onions and parsley, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and make sure the dish is not too full of foods that fill the veins with blood until you have no doubt of an abscess or the spreading of material in the body;
if the patient's condition improves as per their initial regimen, as they have used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy digestion or are viscous, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and leeks, and peas, and cow liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and heavy wine, and similar items. For at any time of loosening they are moved more quickly and quicker is the breakage.
And know that broken bones of the elderly and those in decline cannot be healed or joined well according to their nature due to the drying out of the limbs, nor can such bones which are too tender, like those of young children;
But if there is no cure, reset it at the broken bone on the large tendon that stretches out and joins the limb together, until you force it as it was before. And do not finish his work entirely, and for this it is necessary to nourish with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
For the breakage of the head is different from the breakage of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you all manners of breaking in this chapter. For there are breaks that go to the elbow, and others through prodding, such as the size of a feather for writing.
For there are breaks that go to the elbow, and others through prodding, such as the size of a feather for writing. And if it's a broken bone with an injury, or a break resulting in a small crack.
And each has his own means and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to his mind;
And it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs when his ear is twisted, and opens well below, and is squeezed by the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no twist and the ear is not pierced, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no breaking;
But it can well have twisting, or cracking, or a small break. If it doesn't suit you to move it with your hand, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently strain it now.
And know that the break which happened at the shoulder, and it has two parts separated, they now need to be put in equal alignment, so as to have abscesses lie straight or run.
And if the pus-filled abscess is drained, if he leaves no day, until the abscesses become calm;
Then apply it evenly as you can lightly and wisely, know that the restoration of this is easier than restoring those with pieces;
Then compress it, as it should be done as described hereafter.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and it is divided into two parts, whether they are bones or wood, or under your hand if it's a small member, or divided by two strings, or with one string and your hand;
And place the limb according to its natural shape, so when the parts of the injured member are healed, you can realign it through every effort by moving them as much as possible, and make sure that in your actions no injury or pain befalls the patient.
And adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well in your hand if you think it is not properly done:
If it's done beautifully, and you don't pull it too much, not pressing as those who make the abscess swell and cause muscle tension do in their own way, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is ready, carefully guard over the patient so they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, when turning or in any other manner; And make sure the limb is so securely placed that no pain is felt. And when there is no pain being felt, it means that it isn't in the right position, and one must place it in such an arrangement that no pain is felt.
And make sure the limb is so securely placed that no pain is felt. And when there is no pain being felt, it means that it isn't in the right position, and one must place it in such an arrangement that no pain is felt. and see to it that it is placed correctly, so that there is no distortion when restored;
And the quality of the broken limb matches what I'm telling you.
Know that limbs broken vary in size and extent, and in shape.
For there are smaller limbs such as arms and legs, etc.: and it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen; and those that are larger, such as the thigh and leg:
If it is necessary to encase with a wide and hard band, for wide bands embrace the whole large limb, and restrain equally from all sides, so that there is no difference;
Then bind around with light straps, three times or four according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on every band, then go above the breakage and restrain less there, so that the breakage may be moved a little upwards.
And soften the band gradually and gradually, until you reach a large part of his healthy limb, then take another band and return around him towards the broken limb;
Then return to the part below the breakage and restrain moderately, neither too hard nor too gently, as we have said in the first instruction above;
Place between the linen loops or pieces of cloth, as long as they are all even, then tie everything over with a bow, and then place your well-made stars on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, letting it stay like this for a few days;
Then tighten over your stars, and they should be half the width of a tightly wound rope or bamboo stalks, or from what is used to make darts, and they should look like this:
However, it's necessary that the star placed on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
And let it be as long as is necessary for the size or largeness of the limb; Then hold onto the pins just like you did in the first instance, then add a strip of fabric above it, similarly to what was done in the first instance on the burn wound; The constriction becomes tighter over time, gradually reducing.
And it is necessary for the thread to be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
For if the thread is thick, like those that farmers use to tie their linen ropes in their work, and this is a great mistake, because the tying cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it does not suit for there to be less than two fingers' width between each pin.
And if the patients are sore from the nails of the stakes after the tightening at their healthy parts, then put patches of linen or shoddy wool on them, so they do not blister.
When the wound is inflamed and the joints are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not right to constrain all limbs broken on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it does not suit to use pins straightaway, but rather after five or seven days, or more depending on the severity of each successive abscess.
And here is the way of old plastering methods to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting:
And take flour that remains in the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of eggs, and prepare this concoction, neither too thin nor too thick. Use it, and this is the common method of plaster restoration for various types of damage, as well as women and small children, because it does not cause harm whether it's too hot or too cold.
Another method for restoring plaster to fractures, dislocations, and twisting: Take ginger, onion, garlic, and asafetida, and gum Arabic, mix them with water equal to three parts of the total weight of these ingredients; And myrrh and aloes, mix them with five parts of water; The number seven; And make it into powder, and mix it with the yolk of an egg; If the condition of the patient is hot, then use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and heals broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another way of using the plaster that is beneficial for dislocations: Take milk and vinegar, use in proportion of ten to one; Mix myrrh and aloes, use the ratio nine to three; Use six parts of sugar; Take ten parts of Armenian balm, grind it well, and mix with water or the yolk of an egg, then administer it.
Another way to treat joints and fractures is by setting them back into their places, and alleviating the pain that follows, and they cut down the bone, and apply pressure. Take a new one, and mix it with honey and oil that has been cooked, then place it on the wound.
Plastering does not heal completely, but it is better for soothing abscesses and properly treats bone pains.
Another way to set bones which breaks bones back into place: Take dried fig leaves and leaves of terrestrial mulberry, grind them together, then make a plaster.
Another method of plastering for the restoration of bone breakage and to soothe the removal of pus. Take root of balm, chamomile, flowers of violets, meal from cloves, one part of each;
And grind it with wine, and apply the mixture to heated limbs, or mix it with moist parsley water, or water alone, and use it.
Another method of plastering more firmly than the first when an abscess is returning to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of valerian, and seed of flax, rush, marigold, and wormwood, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from each take a portion; and grind it with the strength of salt water, or sweet cold water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
In his book, Hippocrates states that to restore strength in a fractured limb one should apply a salve made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else more. He says it should be between two layers neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, things slightly moistened but somewhat warm, such as mirr (mastic), aloe, incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Another method for plastering that is useful in injuries and pain: Take the gall and kidneys of disemboweled men, or bird feathers, valerian, and an equal part of saffron, and grind them together, make a plaster from it and apply it.
And then remove the plaster slightly later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is there movement of the bone in its place; If not by hand for days. And if pain comes to the limb, or itchiness, without rest or swelling, should you feel urgency, and dislocate it, and set the plaster now;
and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and cool the limb, until the itch stops, and pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of removing heat.
and let the inflammation settle in the limb, and sooth the pain, then resume gentle movement, and a little plaster, do not strain it as much as before. And precisely when it is healthy.
And if you notice that pus and redness, pain and swelling are subsiding, indicating the injury has healed throughout, then you need plaster and bandaging; start again as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, or if it is not released until after three, four, five, or seven days; And leave it for twenty days, as we see fit, until the fracture heals and brings about an adjustment of the flesh;
Then increase the restriction beyond the first stage, allowing for growth of its flesh, as I have said before;
And if you see the limb drying more than it should, know that there will be no improvement; Bathe it with hot water afterwards, every time you release it, and let this happen each third day, and scrape a little of the joint;
Through this work then cut into the flesh of the limb, and quickly follow what the foolish surgeon does, that leaves the member deformed:
This is bad, and if it's full of pus-filled boils, I only see one way to do it: leave the cuts straight and open them properly.
There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and their causes are specific;
because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the elbow bone hits all the way to the joint that is below the bone, similar to how a mallet or staff might cause damage; And because of this, this kind of fracture is called 'mallet injury'.
Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called 'absolute'.
And these are the injuries from these two fractures, large or small.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the bone, or injury from stone, or impact on stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a break that approaches until it reaches the tissue beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
And if the wound is healed in the bone as finely as a hair, and the crack is small, because of this it is called this "hairline" fracture;
And if the wound is made either by piercing through stone or falling or from something similar, and the piece of bone enters below, so that it is split in the middle like a candle when it has burned through the candles. And if within the stone.
And this happens more in those with moist bones below, such as children's bones;
And occurs through all these ways of fracture that result in small fragments like splinters. And I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all the ways of breakages through the diminishment above them, and the examination at stakes, and by the corrupt flesh which is upon.
The appearance of hair can be recognized when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inside, revealing the black breakage.
In treating breakage, beware of adverse effects due to malaise, and if you do not encounter any bad side effects such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, pallor, fever ague, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, it cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you do not see an alarming mishap, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when winter comes first to you, and if it is winter, then it's necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is spring, then you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, in such a way that the pus around the bone is rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
And if the breakage of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to cut the broken part in this way:
and when you touch the unripe head of the patient, and expose through the bone in every way that you can, and on the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if blood leakage occurs during exposure of the bone or pus appears, then use what is necessary, and when you fill the cavity with moistened cloths in olive oil; and let the wound rest until the pus subsides and there is assurance of blood flow; then begin digging into the bone, and this is done according to two ways of operation:
One method is to cut closely at the front, and this is its shape:
And then make another cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron indelibly;
And work lightly, so as not to cut the head.
And if the bone is firm and hard, it must be pierced internally, so as to apply cuts with needles instead of directly, not piercing through the bone beyond the testicle, and there should be a margin or circle above the tip that does not allow the tip to pass beyond the bone;
And it must have several (needles), so that each grows into its place of the thickness of the bone, and you will have needles for all testicles;
And this is the form of the three ways of cuts:
The quality of piercing inside the broken bone is that you place the cut on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced;
Then place another cut somewhere slightly later on, and thus do this all around. Then scrape in the space of the bone that is between the teeth, and do this more subtly than you can, gently, as we said, until you pull the bone to your hand, or to none of the instruments you have such as forceps;
And make sure not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it is necessary that you finish off the edge of the bone left from the os to all other instruments like a tooth, but it must be more robust and more delicate than the other tooth;
And if it remains with no small bones, nor any scales, if the bones are lightly struck with instruments; Then treat the wound with bandages and applications that we have discussed.
And another way of treatment is what Galen said, which is safer; and the oath very strong, and it's his word. It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the fracture opens and moves. So when you have uncovered that part, place underneath the tip of this ophthalmic incisor, as described here:
And don't cut from one side only, and the injury is divided into two sides, so that cutting faces towards bone;
Then strike with a small mallet there, so that you gently hit the bone all around, and be well aware of the thread that is nearby;
If it is close to the bone, then gently hit the bone because hitting the bone causes no harm and no fear.
And if the bone break does not pierce until the cloth and only cuts through from above, with small pieces remaining, then after that roughness, use a fine razor to remove the scales. You must have various quantities of this tool in order to administer the most suitable treatment for each location according to the manual and the appearance of the break.
If you stand before great razors, and after finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair trimming cuts and delicate breakages, you must apply your skill according to its direction;
And this matter is not answered by the one who has dedicated their studies in this craft.
And if it is revealed to be pus, then you must apply linen bandages according to the size of the wound, and mix with a little rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another bandage doubled in two or three layers, and soak it with wine and rose oil, then place it on the first bandage; And do this as lightly as possible so you don't burden the pus, then administer another layer of bandage above it, but do not apply too much force until only the wound is dampened;
And let it be so for one or two days until the abscesses are somewhat calmed, then displace it and give medications like root extracts of this, cornmeal, incense powder, and sage, as well as similar things;
And make a powder from these and put it on the wound, then give appropriate medications without causing irritation.
And see that the wound is clean, do not leave any ointment on it and do not allow the scabs to stick together. For when scabs stick together on the brain tissue's mesh, they can move about and cause great harm to the patient;
And when you place something corrosive over it, it eats through from above. Take care then, so that no harmful events occur to the patient as we have said, in case there is doubt without doubt.
And if fear does not leave you only because of the medicine we have placed on it, and this virtue exists, then you should take part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one drachm of glue, and place this mixture under your tongue; Then apply the appropriate curing methods until they are cured, when it is healthy.
Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are ever broken, or just one by itself, for these are two bones;
And that below is cartilaginous and does not break, neither can it be twisted or bent, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must pinch your little finger or under the nose, and make the break equal in the tip of your ring finger, then by rubbing through the middle, as long as the nose regains its natural shape. And do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is above the nose part and cannot reach to its place at the head, then it is necessary that you make it equal to the tip of a stick somewhat thick.
And if the break is two parts, redo another piece, and strive to restore the first day, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the abscess is subdued, then apply to the head under the nose with strips of linen bandage, and if the break is in one part.
Or you hammer on another side, if the break is there; And let them be large enough to fill out the hollows under the nose.
And they say no healer should grease the nipples with butter, and change each day. I don't think this is quite right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture with egg and powder. Then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage has hardened.
And no later than once or twice use goose feathers instead of tents, and if the bird's body swells inward, and there is a stinging sensation, then let the wind blow through them; just do whatever you see.
And if abscesses come to the nose in the same way as you are doing it, then put a poultice or wet cotton in oil mixed with it, or in one corner of a spoonful of snail juice.
And if pus forms and doesn't go away, apply a poultice outside, made of ground myrrh and powdered frankincense, mixed with yolk from an egg. Then place it on light bandages, but don't tie the goose's neck;
And if the cuts on the nose are small and the bones have broken into small pieces, use tools suitable for this task, then clean out through the incisions with things that cause purging, and then seal it back up, using poultices or ointments that are suitable for this purpose;
And if there is no wound within the nose, treat it with a poultice, and place a wick in it, as long as it heals.
When the jawbone is broken externally, and there's no wound outwardly, only the fracture is external. It isn't broken into two halves completely; rather it breaks internally as well, which can be discerned lightly.
It is necessary, if the breakage is in the right side, that you bend your ring finger towards the mouth of the wound; And if the breakage is in the left jawbone, then bend your ring finger of the right hand, and gently place the break inside, and work it out on the other side by the exterior, and apply evenly.
And if there is a break in both parts of the jawbone, it must be treated with extension of half parts, until they are equal.
And if tooth movements or rupture occur, then stretch it with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place on the broken jaw plaster, and set upon the two cloths; And place on the cloth a well-made wide board, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it at as many points as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you notice that the shape changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then set it back to the position where it changed. And place plaster on it, mixing the powder from the mill with enough egg or flour of almond meal after you have removed the wax.
And place on the plaster a soft wool, and if the plaster hardens and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until they are well; Many times, one is well in three weeks.
And if pus-filled ulcers come about, then apply what we have repeatedly instructed.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, remove any piece of bone that has broken out. If the extraction requires delicate tools suitable for this task.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one plaster over it suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals.
The forces break multiple times before reaching the shoulder, towards it, and the breaking happens according to three ways:
Or she is broken and drained in two parts, with fragments, and it's the more lightweight one to restore;
Or there is breaking with wound.
And the operations occur when breaking is felt through the wound, when you have two helpers, so that one marks the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends down along the neck to the affected part;
Then place the break evenly on your thumbs, so that the shape is as it should be, and there's no appearance or strain.
And if you need to extend more, place a round sponge under the shoulder for the patient, of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; And they make it slightly weak, hold the spear to your hand so that you can apply an even break, as is proper.
And if you cannot draw the head from the strength's force behind it, because it comes forward, then the patient must lie with their head resting on their pillow, and place one of the shoulder's cushions under both shoulders. Have the attendants press the shoulder downwards until the bone of the strength rises.
And address the break to your fingers, and if you find weak spots, it is right that you split through there;
And pull the parts gently, and if the bone cannot join despite any exertion, it is to be cut at one of the incisions you have made; but make sure you have a firm grip on that instrument, to withstand that tension:
and make it resemble a spoon, not too thick, and be as wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the strength of the task;
and have two heads, as you see, and make one wide, and the other thin, as is the wound you made when treating the bones;
And when you are sure of the location of the abscess, if you cut the wound, and if its rupture is small, or if you doubt about the location of the abscess, if you treat the wound with bandages and tents, according to their quantity.
And when the abscesses are drained, if it is moist, soak bandages in oil rose and in sweat and wine, and place them on top.
The grinding of the bone, when it is concerning wounds and surgery, consists in applying a plaster made from the powder from a mill and some butter of an egg onto the bone. Place light pincers on top, and put a sponge underneath if needed; Then take a very large band about the size of a palm wide, then place two layers of bandages on top of the pincers and plaster; Then take an elastic strip about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the tip of the bone is hanging down. And place the iron above the wound, and turn the bendstick towards the neck, and across the healthy elbow, and across the diseased elbow; And reset each part individually. When you see that the heat keeps the wound steady near the break, and you clearly see that the iron doesn't move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when you remove the ligaments, then you hold it in place;
And let the malady discharge on its back, and place him when he sleeps with a small pillow under his elbow, to raise the shoulder up; If it reduces the strain of the muscles by adjusting the position of the shoulder, or you tie his arm to the neck, and do not release him from this injury until no bad accidents occur for 20 days;
Then reapply the plaster if you see it is needed, and hold it in place without moving it until it has healed.
And it usually takes up to 28 days, or sometimes less time for recovery.
From the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or is injured at its end or in the middle, and it's damaged only due to impact;
If you align it according to the break's shape, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
Then apply flour ground in the mill with plenty of eggs, and gently rub it in, then place a double layer of cloth on top; Then place a broad and slender bolster under it, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and ensure there are no movements anywhere on the shoulder; if there is hair or linen strands, position them so that the bolster sits evenly.
And then he restrains it tightly for quite some time, so that the limb does not move from its place, and he checks the connection each day;
And each time he pulls it back, if he restrains, and puts the limb on par with where it was originally, should it be at its place, and lies the patient on their side;
And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25 days.
And when this number is completed, if it dislocates again, be sure, for it's not an os that will put itself back lightly.
And if a bone fragment is ahead and not at the corner, then do it above, and the wound will open again. Then, follow what we have said about treating bleeding abscesses.
of the breaking of the foot
The bone is broken once in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken at the middle, if the arm is lowered and there is great pain felt by the patient, and lack of circulation, all over the body, and sometimes vomiting blood occurs, and cuts open in the broken bone, and one can feel this well.
And in the restoration stage if the body lies with its back and hips on the ground, then place I under his shoulders, press the shoulders down, and assemble the ribs of the second ribcage with your hands. Carefully adjust them to be equal across all manners that you can perform, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then place them on the plaster and wrap them with the subtle pile of salt, or another light substance, and cover it with a cloak. Fasten it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and twist the banding round on the back, and tighten it in correspondence, and reward each hour the ligature, and if it relaxes, then tighten it;
and if it seems to be untying due to corrosion or itching that comes to the body, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, remove the plaster, and treat in ways of treatment for what has come upon them.
Then remove the plaster, and hold it until it is sound.
from the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs after a large hit on the back and within it, and they bend only because they are brittle; And one feels this well during examination at the testicles.
And for the repair, you should make the break equal, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with one strap if necessary.
And if the breaking of ribs occurs within, one feels great pain and sharp pain, as well as crying out, like in childbirth, because the bone pierces the skin; And it causes pain points, all over and vomiting large amounts of blood, and this is a sick health, and the old ones had to endure great suffering.
And if there are those who say it is necessary to consume meat that inflates the belly, in order to expel wind from within.
We do not follow this, that pus and sulfur should be introduced if it has not already been there. And if it has already been there, then heal it.
And it was said that one should put suction cups on the body to drain fluid, for this is in line with reason; Nevertheless, there is doubt as to whether the suction cup attracts excesses towards the head due to the condition of weakness.
And it is said that when one must cover the body with wet wool in heated oil, and to place cloths between the ribs to make the wound equal inside, then follow the treatment of bleeding, of meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing through the skin, there is doubt for the patient, whether it's necessary to cut towards his head from the place of the broken rib, and it's advisable to use tools under the pectoral muscle to prevent further collapse;
And then one must cut the bone, treat it lightly, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it's large, and dress it with plasters until it heals.
And if pus comes out, put wet cloths in oil and place them on the wound;
And treat while the wound is as it should be for pus, and always place remedies on the ribs where it needs to be, until it heals.
And similarly in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to any person, and you wish to determine if they will heal or not, watch carefully whether their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot be moved or extended, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it.
Know that death can occur in various circumstances, and if they do not move well when held back and forward, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease has been cured, if care is applied to it.
And if such a thing happens in the spine of the back, you should know whether it is healthy or not. Take heed if his joints are softened and if he experiences accidents involving his limbs, and above the back, a gust of wind and involuntary emission;
And when it occurs on his belly, an involuntary emission happens. And when it is observed on its back and it wants to rise, if it cannot. Know that these are fatal: if no care is taken in its treatment.
And if this misfortune does not happen to him, then it is a matter of less concern.
And the treatment consists in giving care if there is an abscess to drain, if you apply oil on the spine or on the spot of blood or of the yolk of egg, until it soothes;
Then place on one of the soothing plaster, drying ones, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
And if any bone dislocates, you should cover the socket with it; And set the bone, then join together the two edges of the wound if it's large, with stitches. Then treat with ointment until healed;
And if the bone head is broken, which they call "the bone of the knee", then squeeze your pouch from your left hand, and place it evenly against the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the poultice on top, if you need to.
Then it is held, and if there are broken bones, they are lifted up, and the bone is set, and the wound is treated until it heals.
Of the breaking of the hip bone
It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, if there's a bit of discomfort in the head; And stretches for a long time, and descends into the pubis, and comes with pain in the head, and bruising, and inflames what is broken.
And for the treatment, you extend your hand up as long as you are over the breakage; Know which is the break and its alignment;
And if the break is only in the head, set it evenly to that break, as long as it's in its natural alignment.
And if the break extends along or declines towards inside, have the patient lie on their stomach, until you achieve the restoration of that break. And when you have placed it evenly, set it on the plaster, then place it on a stick or reed stand, and hold the joint still so that it does not move;
and guide his head towards the ribs, until the shoulder joint is evenly aligned. Instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
And if the abscesses are close together and come out, do not touch them until the abscesses have subsided, then place what we have just said in front. and then return to the healing process, hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident;
Regarding the breaking of the shoulder.
The shoulders are those that lie between the blade and the top of the shoulder, and if they are broken, you should restore them according to one of two methods:
Do this: take a rod of medium thickness, according to this shape:
And bind them with two straps, and place them on top, and seat the patient on the position;
Then let his broken arms rest on the rod, until it reaches under the armpit, and has made a bend equal to the length of the rod, then place him on anything heavy or have them lower him down;
Then place the broken part evenly under both hands until the break returns as it should.
The other method is that you fix the skin on his neck, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants that one of them shaves the one above the wound with their hands, and the other cuts down to all half an inch, and extend each in their respective parts.
And if you see that the extraction is more severe, then hold tight to the thread around the bruising, and above the bruising, and extend each of the ministers to their share.
And if the broken part is close to the shoulder joint, you should place one strap under the armpit and the other towards the elbow, under the break.
And similarly if the breakage occurs towards the blade, then it is necessary to place the thread lightly, without effort, until the breakage is even on the surface and on the blade;
Then equalize the breakage, as necessary, and apply pressure, if pus does not come out.
And if pus does come out, then do not apply pressure until the seventh day, and place on wet wool and oil rose for as long as the pus is relieved;
Then apply pressure. The method of applying pressure involves placing the plaster over the breakage and then aligning the arm with the shoulder, and putting your hand on the shoulder or near the breast;
and apply the bandage, and hold it with the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, if no object impedes or if the bone is not broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use these methods, and place one bale on the fracture larger and stronger than others, with two inches between each bale, and ensure that every bale is large enough to pass three inches from both sides;
Then apply pressure to the bales as I instructed at the start of this chapter on fractures, forcefully but not too much when spreading them apart.
And if you see the setting of the bales and the compression, as we have explained, when you are restoring the broken limb, and if there's any doubt about the abscess, leave it to be bound until seven days, as we have said.
Then look at each three days the bandage, so that no itching appears or spreads to the area, or there won't be pus formation coming into the limb because it's too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if no such events occur, should the dislocation not be corrected until three days or more have passed, and let the patient rest on their back, having their hands on their stomach;
and place underneath the shoulder a cushion evenly filled with hair, and observe every hour of the day or night, whether the shape of the broken limb does not move or if the joints are softened;
if it is treated with the aid of medicine, and give them the meat that we have prepared in front, in such a way that the meat becomes first refined; and when it begins to increase, if it becomes large.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be replaced within forty days of everything; And then one must release it and apply baths and remedies of ointments for the ease of the limb.
And if the constriction is ugly and tangled, it should be left for loosening for one or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is made of two bones, which are called the pair "foscile", from which one is smaller, and it is this that supports the pit.
And the other is large, and this one is underneath, towards the small two;
By chance only the large "foscile" breaks, or the small one, and by chance they come together.
When the small "foscile" breaks, the restoration is light, and the healing;
And when the large ones break, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they break together.
If only the small bone breaks off, it should be gently extended and made equal.
And if it's large swelling, then you must restrain it more forcefully;
and extend it toward the chest, and mark the hand bag higher than the others, and place the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and make sure the wounds are crossed over themselves, and the chest in front of him higher, so that the wounds do not experience any pain;
then extend the servants' arms to the part under their hand, or at the elbow, and another servant on the other side above.
And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
And if during the breaking into pieces, you place each back in its original position, and if none of them is broken to be grasped by the hand, and you cannot restore it to its original position, then you do work on and the bone, as we said before.
And if regarding the burning of wounds, I have spoken about it in the single chapter; then take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration there appear pus-filled ulcers, then apply a bandage made of oil-soaked rags and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; And let me handle the task carefully, so that when the abscesses are lanced, they are relieved.
And shape the paste, and apply the plaster made from powder mixed with egg abundantly. Then place the needles in, ensure that the needle for piercing is slightly larger, and make it a bit wider than the others.
And know that there should be six needles or sticks in several arrangements: So if the pain is in one of the bones, or in two;
And hold it more above the pain than anywhere else, and all days reduce its distance less, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; And let the bandages that cover the pain be soft and damp, not hard or rough;
And let the bandages that cover the pain be soft and damp, not hard or rough; And let the child, which is pulled by thread, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the connection after some days. And if any bad incidents occur to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary for you to immerse the limb in hot water, until that itchiness is relieved;
and let the limb not be forced to rest.
And then continue the reduction, and if the ligaments have been torn and the bones exposed, and resembling a thing, perform it.
And if precaution is taken so that no distresses cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted, it should be that you soften it with pox (a kind of compress or poultice), and leave it in this manner for a few days, until the distresses have passed, and then you should tighten.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, or the release does not happen until after twenty days.
otherwise, during the night, then place your hands on his neck, and if his necks are equal, and be cautious of movement and excitement, and sleeps on his back;
know that this cure will take place in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, depending on the combinations and qualities of the remedies.
Of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and around our thumbs there are few breaks, and only bending happens many times.
And when the hand is broken or bent at its joints, it should be treated with a warm application, and held straightly in front of them equally;
Then place his hand on the extended table and extend the attendant's broken bones, and set them equally straight, until they are properly joined together;
And place the dressing and splints, if no abscess forms, then he applies an ointment according to the size of the wound; And let it be wrapped in a single linen sheet.
And if the injury is at the elbow under the belly of the hand, make an ellipse of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken hand; And then the stretching of a long strip, and if the earlobe is well formed as large as the width of the hand, and it stretches, just like it should.
And if the breakage is at the front, it is necessary to place an electrode above and another under in the sole of the foot, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
And if the disconnector comes to break any of our toes, it's like it's twisted, so put them equal, just as it should be; And stretch with the sole, and if you see that placing a small upright earlobe helps to lift the disconnection, and don't let it move;
And if the disconnection is at other toes, like in the index or one of the others, put them equal, and hold it with the healthy toe that follows; Or tie them all together in an 'I' shape, if it moves, or place them on an earlobe, as one would wrap.
And take care in the restoration and arrangement of each abscess, and aid those who come with it, as I have said.
The bones of the elbow are often broken, and well can be seen when it turns both forward and backward;
And for the restoration is one who binds above the breakage, and the other below. And the patients lie on their face, then extend each minister's bandage evenly to its counterpart;
This is when the break has reached the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the arm, then one end should be tied towards the hand, and the other end away from the break.
And also if it is near to the knee joint, and then let the knee bandages be loose, and let the stretching go down;
Then place the eyes of the bone even with its two hands, as long as it follows its natural form, and then apply the plaster, and secure the bandage, should abscesses not come about.
And if there is an abscess causing pain, let it subside then return to your task and your treatment; The labor is performed in a proper manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the wound two strips of cloth sewn together in two or three layers, and leave the excess. Then turn the leg so that the heels reach the root of the thigh, and thread one piece of yarn long between the crotch and the leg, under and past the knee, and pull the string over the head;
Then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh again, then place the candles on the wound. Place a candle on the bone of the leg;
Then use eight loops of cloth strips on the thigh and hip to ensure even tension, then begin tying in forms of three or four turns around the wound; And when you go further beyond the cautery, and let it relax less;
Then direct your attention to the two knees where you have tied a thread between the leg and thigh, and secure three pins above them. Then return beneath the thread near its head until you see it pass under the foot;
And hold it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave him like this. Then wait until no abscess forms or there's any other sign. And if it happens, set him free and address whatever comes, as we have said many times;
And if there are bone fragments that penetrate, it should be removed if possible; And if one cannot remove them, then it is necessary to cut open the wound and drain the pus. And the treatment as we have said, until it becomes clean.
And each time the egg is broken in such a way that it takes these remedies, as in the shoulder and the arm;
Therefore, when restoration is made in this manner, there is no pain for the patient.
Know that the skin is restored in about one day, or somewhat more or less depending on individual differences.
Know that near the knee joint there is little cracking sound, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it's only a crack or maybe it just bends out of place. This affects every wound and can be felt during the wound, and one can sense this well.
Therefore, this restoration involves placing what is round at its due place until it can be moved assembled;
Then apply the plaster, and if needed place a round candle, and hold it as necessary, then adjust all positions as we have said in other breaks, such as abscesses or similar conditions; So apply what is suitable for each incident until it becomes clean.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg are two bones, of which one is named correctly as 'tibia', and the other is named 'fibula'.
And every injury or breakage occurs just as it does in the arm, and for this reason its restoration is comparable to that of the arm, uniformly throughout. And all procedures are thus one. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and twists inward.
So then apply extension, and place it evenly, and secure the joints evenly;
However, if the breakage is ugly and there are several fragments, then the extension should be less and more gentle; And it grows according to your power.
And when you have completed all your tasks, take two pricked sticks that burn the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as from the leg to just below the knee.
Then wrap them around the legs above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and at this time prevent the leg from bending to the right or left, and thus it is done correctly.
And no one administers to the leg from the length of the leg, and it's done with wood, and you place the leg to guard against movement, and this is properly done in the fracture where there was an injury.
And each day move the leg to see if there is pus or any other incident; If the treatment continues until it is finished.
From the breaking of bones at the knee
At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but with bones at the knee breaking occurs and in the legs, there is only force that acts in various positions.
And if it happens to a bone in the foot fracture, and you see these bones rising over each other, then put some hot ashes on the earth next to them, as if they were trying to move, and then place your foot on their own, where the bones are lifted, press it so much that it revives in their heels;
Then place the plaster and wrap it up, and put a small table with two full foot sections under the foot's belly, then press it into the foot's fitment, and once you have covered it with blankets and other things you need.
And once three or four days have passed, you'll find that the ligaments are equal; whether they were broken or dislocated.
And if any of the fingers are broken, fix them again, just like we explained for the fingers of the hand; Then place at the elbow one pillar according to the length of the two, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot that board I said, and press it firmly into position;
And if there are two or three, or more, break them; then place one pillar under each according to their quantity, wrapped in a linen sheet, and hold the board firmly under the foot; And stay on the top of the board above the stomach under the foot, so that you can press it well.
And you must not forget the other things I've said about other fractures, once we have discussed them. And attend to each incident as it should be.
of the breaking of the hand bone
When the bone of nature in the woman is broken, if she becomes swollen, then incline her towards the back part, and hold her from behind;
Then fill the cavity with the nature of the material of cloth, and also place it as large as needed.
Then lift the woman, and gently lower her back bit by bit, then make the cotton jump until it reaches the entrance of nature, and let the bone return with that.
And when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put her back, and do this for 7 days or more. If the break will be restored, and if you see it, take a goat bladder, and attach a stick to its base, and fill the entire bladder into the natural opening. Then blow through the stick until the bladder inflates internally: The nature will return to him the rupture;
Then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it heals.
And when the bone of the hand or leg of the person is broken, or in a woman if it's left like that as we have said about the hipbone;
And these nearby breaks should not be hidden from the person who devotes their study and usage to it, and heed my book.
For breaking signifies in many positions the right path of restoration: So understand it then.
In the penis, if broken, take an oxtail and put it over the penis; Then wrap it with bandages tightly, and let it for three days or until dryness sets in, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it's large, like in the case of a rib or shoulder blade or similar, that it be treated surgically now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned can attest to this.
And if the wound is healing well, one may use vinegar to do so, should you have nothing else; then proceed to heal the fracture in that same hour or day. If abscesses form and remain there, however, then start again on the treatment of the fracture at that point.
And should abscesses continue to form and remain there, let the healing process continue for a new day, until the abscesses are subdued. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, as you would cause unwanted complications.
And if the bone is broken and visible under the uncovered part of your body, you should place it lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
And if it extends beyond what you can adjust to your hands, then use this iron instrument that has seven or eight points of length, and the width should match the size of the wound; And for that, the surgeon needs to insert three or four times, depending on what is needed in each case of fracture treatment;
And make them round and somewhat thick, so they do not bend under compression on the limb during your operation, and have them smooth in front, and bulge outwards at the middle forward, like this:
And call it "palanch", because it is necessary that the curved heads be placed on the head of the visible bone; And apply heat until it heals, so long as it grows even on both sides. And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot take hold of the bone well, it must be that you catch the tip of the bone as long as the instruments have power.
And if you cannot return the bone as we said, using an appropriate tool suitable for this, like an incision knife or a scalpel, to your ability;
Then scrape out the bone that is lodged in the hard and scaly portion of the bone.
And when the bone is returned, and after the patients feel great pain, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Continue until it's back in place, then cover the wound with black, thick wine, and properly if it's in muscle; And do not put tallow or anything else on the wound that could cause gangrene and decay;
Then administer the doses when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover everything else thoroughly according to the size of the wound, and make sure that the wound is not restricted by splintering;
And many times this has been done to the foolish patient, and caused either death or corrosion on multiple occasions. and let the healing of this be softer and more enduring than that of other injuries.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that improper occurrences have taken place, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it should not be applied to the wounds; but wrap around internally, instead of applying ointment, use hard bandages and bind them.
And when you see after one day or two days that the wound begins to heal, remove what you have placed with all kinds of vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrarmofarm and similar.
And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is joined and healed.
And it should be that the limb is placed so that the bone goes back up slightly gently.
And if this continues for several days, and it can't join at all back to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you should treat the wound with a plaster bandage, and remove all these pieces that cause pain.
And if there is a fistula at the wound or some other form of infection, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he explained in his previous chapter.
And when bone is broken and exposed in the body, such as the bones of the ankle or shoulder, or other large bones, do not attempt to set them since many die from this; but let it heal until it has rotted.
By chance, wait for up to 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if possible;
And if you cannot, leave it as it is.
We often experience many times the relief from the cold, especially when it's close to the joint, and it is a difficult thing to observe the limb's shape; And by chance cannot perform his natural tasks with the limb.
Therefore, take care that if it feels fresh: If it is administered restrictive medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, sarsaparilla, carob extract, etc., like any of these things, or all together, mix them with a stoptive wine, or with enough egg whites or with anise; And place them on the node with points, and hold it firmly, ensuring not to release the joint with your hands during the process.
And place them on the node with points, and hold it firmly, ensuring not to release the joint with your hands during the process. And then reset it, and start another one until all dislocations have been relieved;
or you apply force with a well-made piece of wood; for the property of wood is such that it relieves all swellings on the limbs;
and if the dislocation has become hard like a stone, and needs to be relieved, if there is a lump above it, make the excess visible; or you take it to no surgeon as long as it is relieved, and the treatment until it heals.
Of the member which becomes weak after garrisoning
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs remain weak and delicate, it happens through various reasons: Of which one is due to the fact that it was tied too tightly, and wasn't allowed to be tied as it should have been; Or because there was too much binding, and the body couldn't return to its natural position in the limb; Or due to an excess of swelling; Or because of too large movements, not done in their proper time; Or because they lack blood in their body, making them weak.
And the treatment is that you must eat the disease and make the body tender, until there are multiple infections within him; And he administers baths, and then brings joy and comfort;
Then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts to the large artery, and frequently washes it with tepid water, until the pulsation matches the limb. and restores its natural shape.
If the member is bent after illness When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if a bone is broken open, even though the form of the limb may be ugly, it still retains its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say that we should break the limb completely anew, and many people have done this in our land;
such practices are criticized, causing great harm, and even death in some cases;
Nevertheless, if the blisters and pains are fresh, it is good to immerse them in hot water, or to cook soothing herbs, such as leaves of savory, roots, and borage, and similar things;
and make them apply a soothing paste, such as well-made yarrow, and you take the savory muscle extract, and cook it with fat of geese or oil of saffron, and make an application with;
or you take dried figs and mix them with hog's tallow, and similar medications that reduce the burning.
And never is removed the operation of rubbing constantly and for a long time with wet hands. And let there be a movement to the member every hour.
And if the stiffness has aged and hardened like bone, and requires roasting with iron, then it's appropriate to cut until you reach the bone, making a subtle incision lightly. And apply diligence and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation affects any part, if the situation requires it now, you should attempt to reduce or reset it without delay.
For if one delays, the limbs will swell, and by chance they might be put back into joint pain in the limb;
By heavens, it should not be moved when it is swollen at that hour: Many times it brings on pain and other sufferings;
Nonetheless, when this happens, have the surgeon care for the patient, then leave him alone until all abscesses are at peace;
Then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as their treatment comes to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up until this point.
It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both shoulders follow two ways: They are somewhat hardened at their ends, and slightly softened. They are completely dislocated and hanging towards the buttocks, and can't hold their saliva in, nor can they close their mouth; instead, their tongue is enveloped by speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
And if it's whole and complete, you must reset it quickly without hesitation;
And in such a way that the ministers cut on the head with the aid of someone else, and push one of their thumbs into the socket of the malaide at the root of the mandible's dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is from two parts. And the other should have their hands forward for making it even.
And instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them in all directions. And keep the fingers steady until they return to their place.
And if it returns with pain, even if the two jaws are together, if they are immersed in hot water and oil, as long as you gently manipulate them;
Do not be afraid to return it, as we have said.
And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well upon softening, then place them on wet cloths in a poultice made of oil roset and beeswax, then bind them gently with moist linen;
And let the patient rest on his back, and the head stays between two cushions, so that he does not move nor to the right nor to the left, nor forces himself to twist, but should only eat light meat until the pains subside, and tie the jaws.
And then, gently taste it, and doesn't cause any trouble in opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well set and healed.
And if the two lower jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not turned back to their original position, fever and chronic fatigue will result, and in some cases, abdominal pain or vomiting will occur.
And when you see that, then know it's destruction; And often, the one who has this will die within nine days.
The forces cannot displace from within along the middle of the chest and the back; it is displaced only outward, and one feels this clearly.
And for its restoration, let the wounds lie supine on their back and extend their arms; And then press it with your palm in its original shape, and it will return to normal;
Then place it on the plaster and cover it with a bandage, and secure it;
And the shoulder opposite the knife cannot dislocate; If it doesn't move, and if it dislocates once, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
Then place it on the plaster and the bandage, bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are sound.
And in this way, the shoulder blade is brought back when it has been displaced from its place.
On the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder only dislocates in three ways:
The first way is when it dislocates from the part of the scapula to downward; And the second is at the bottom part; And by chance dislocates from the top part, and this happens rarely;
And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate within for the nerves;
And many times dislocates away towards the elbow, even in those with little flesh, for in these cases it moves quickly;
In those who have enough flesh, it jumps to the bone and returns to the bone.
By chance, it happens to some men from a blow or dislocation, and the shoulder swells with an abscess filled with heat, and they think that she is dislocated because of this.
So you must verify it, as long as you are certain; And then begin the treatment.
And you will recognize dislocations when it moves towards the elbow, and you can make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find the obvious diversity between them; And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and along the elbow to the neck, as if it were an empty space; And the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
And also, if it is dislocated high up, if it's not hidden, because you clearly find it at the temple;
This way of dislocation can only be corrected when new, or when the child is still small.
And the method is for the doctors to lift the hand from the child's head at first, then place their palms under the armpit, and lift the joint up forcefully towards the shoulder. And the doctors lift the hand and extend it upwards before placing it under. If it comes quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we have said in the following days, then you should immerse the patient in hot water; And the healer gently relaxes and soothes it, as with an infusion of rosemary, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be prepared.
Then sew the wounds on his back, and place a piece of soft, even wool under his armpit, not too soft nor too hard. Then position one's heel on top of the wool, and lift the shoulder blade with a strong yet gentle movement, and pull the hand towards the discomfort.
And assist in lifting the back of the affected limb, so that it does not move downwards; This shoulder is returning now, and if you see whether to reset it according to this manner:
And be sure that what you prepare at home is larger than the discomfort; And keep it straight towards the chest, and support the shoulder under the ribcage of the patient, lift the ribcage upwards, so that the patient hangs down. And have another assistant guide your hand from behind towards the abdomen. And if the body is too light, it can carry nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And you can also perform this reset in other ways:
and place it like a long spike in the ground, so that the shoulder is also held upright like a pistol, and not too large or too loose; then place it under the patient, but make sure there is soil underneath, and the patient stays upright for the length of the staff;
then extend her hand downwards on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
And if she does not wish to return due to all these things we have said, then perform this treatment: Take two large sticks from the shoulders and four broad ones, which have their heads rounded so they can enter smoothly into the socket, following this shape:
Then fasten at the head of the pole covered with cloth so it doesn't irritate the skin, then place it next to the socket according to the patient's skin;
Stretch your arms on the pole from the top and fasten the aid to the pole, and put your arm at the head of the hand. Then place the arm onto one of a long stick about broad, making sure both hands are facing down. Leave the body hanging on the other side: The joint now begins to return.
And when she is in this condition, no matter how it may be, if you need to place a piece of equal thread over the joint, then apply plaster mixed with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk oil over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the thread when done applying, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and wrap your hand around her neck, and keep your hands in this position.
And it is necessary for him to move slightly, as long as the limb is stabilized, because he will heal more quickly;
and then move more after five or seven days, and start exercising; and if it is hard and not softened, you will find it healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for some other reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauterizations to it, as was mentioned in the section on cauterization.
And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and can't lift their arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened; and you will know that the joint will never settle in its place again.
The dislocation near the buttocks and breasts, or behind, if it is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, is administered elsewhere;
And treat until it becomes clean.
And if after healing there are still pains in the member and late movements, then one should bathe their body many times, until those pains ease away, and it returns to its original condition.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its tips, and comes back to them;
And it is dislocated in all directions, as well as in front and behind. The dislocation is not corrected because one can see it clearly and feel it distinctly; And dislocates according to each form. And when you unite the knife with your hand, if you can see it clearly open. For the joint is sore, and cannot bend the arm or reach his shoulder at all.
And you should reset it this way that abscesses are both placed and move away, for if they were placed and came in, it would be a complaint to bring them back;
And by chance cannot be reset completely all at once, even when it's behind; It is worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and by chance death comes to it.
And this restoration is, when it's like this that one can bring back, you extend his hand to your two hands; And his arms are spread out, and the hands direct towards the center of the elbow both inside and outside, forwards and backwards. Force the joint back to its position either at the top of his shoulder or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And when the dislocation is forward, it returns whenever it doubles its hand with its own and pushes from the base of the palm using the lever that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to place, administer strong stretching;
And when you have administered the extension, both hands hold the arm and apply it firmly, so that it does not move during stretching;
Then turn the arm from every side, then that you have enveloped a double flag long and wide;
And when the eye touches the joint with its hand, if it rubs with any oil to soften the joint, then shape the joint properly, until it heals;
And when it's in place, she places a dry plaster with egg white on it and holds it steady. Shape the area, and allow the arm to be bent at the neck of the patient, then leave it for some days. Afterwards, release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, remove the bandage and leave it;
And if you notice that the joint is not healing properly, redo the plaster and the bandage, then leave it like this for a few days until it's firmly in place; Then remove the bandage.
And if they feel pain after returning the joint, and it moves again, then wash and scrub beautifully, press until the discomfort is relieved; or you place a thick layer of fatty lamb fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then apply heat, and let him take a bath; and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on, and then take a bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healed;
and if you see that, put moist cow dung heated with butter on it, and apply heat;
if it returns to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The wrist dislocates and its return is light, more than other joints. In all cases, it is advisable to return it to its normal position as soon as possible, while it is dislocated, so that the arm swells or an abscess forms.
And during the return process, you should place the painful hand on a board and extend the other hand's hand, then align it so that its palm is placed in line with the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it heals.
In all cases, you should check if it is properly in place; Then have the patient place the back of their hand on a board during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of his hand on the table and you place your hand on the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it's indeed so. If not, if the pressure of plaster salves on the abscesses and then lets it be without further recurrence.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back after some days, if the joint remains twisted;
and does not harm him as long as his hands are swollen, and cannot constrain anything at all: therefore know that the nerve is cut, or the artery;
if there is no other means except to apply the cautery in the case, and by chance it is not worth any other thing.
And when the arms are in place, put on the plaster that we have described, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then release and leave him like this.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, with hot water, and rub it until it becomes clean.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Never let the shoulder joint of the hand be dislocated to each side, never on the back of the palm or belly;
Therefore lift the head, and hold the dislocated shoulder in your hands until it heals, then support the neck of the head, and guide it towards the part where it was separated.
and let it be for two days, and then place him evenly on that day;
and bind him as we have said, and do the release of the day, and let him move, and rebind him at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and do so similarly, if it is dislocated in the chest of the hand, and do it like you have done before, until he heals;
and similarly do so when it is dislocated on the other side.
Careful repositioning of the ankle, care of the back
When it's dislocated in the back or neck, or there are multiple dislocated (shoulders), if there is no treatment, for death comes to the patient quickly.
And the signs are that the digestive actions jump without volition, nor can they be held, and many times soften any member, or both legs or both arms or one.
And many times the cheekbones move to four parts;
That which moves at the back is called 'Gilbositez':
The treatment is that you should reward when Gilbositez comes from childhood: If there is no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from childbirth or impacts or similar matters, the old methods of treatment through great words say, they have no benefit in all great ways;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention and formed tools in various ways.
I say that when Gilbositez comes down towards the groin, neither harm nor healing occurs;
And also know that what comes directly to the two ribs, and one cannot cure outside of this precisely which goes to the back, as I say;
And know that the body's tissues extend above its surface to one side in such a way that there is tension on it, so it does not get bruised;
Then stick the first thorn into the head in the earth forms, and the other at points, and tie a band around them under the armpits of the body tissue, and the other at hips, and knees, and ankles;
And two attendants know the bands, one at the head and the others at points, among the two thorns;
And be well closed, the thorn as we have said, and the patient puts her palms on the prick forms, until she regains consciousness.
And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board of three arms long, and place it over the wound. If the patient is on their side with the diseased limb towards the front, have someone hold onto one end of the board near the wound. Then put the middle part of the board under the spine; and place his elbows on the other end of the board, and press well, until he returns to his senses at his original position;
and if you see that it turns around the elbow that bends towards the hand. And if you put two fire sticks at the elbow of the sick person's arm, one hand-length away from each other and towards his elbows. Leave an inch between each stick, directly above and below them.
And place in each ember twigs or the turning bone, and make sure the embers are firmly in the ground, so they do not move.
And in each pair of embers place one turning ember, so they cause the bone to turn, and include two small twigs about the length of a palm for turning the bone.
And then tie the ligament that's among the muscles at the elbow towards the head, and the other ligament at the feet on the other elbow, and each of the assistants turns their elbow all along the ligament, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it's even, then place on plaster with abundant egg whites, and then the oil, and then the incense from a tablet of three inches long, which purges the inflamed area and the healthy part of the spine, then tie with a ligament as we have said, and treat the patient with subtle irritation until it's healthy.
And if no healing comes at the end of health, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the aid that we have mentioned earlier. And each time administer a piece of flax, and each time the appearance comes in the lower spine at the back, take care that it is a dislocation; And it's the bone that opens, so we must not presume anything about it: By chance it would bring death.
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder come only from dislocations, not like other joints.
And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: Beneath and removed, and forward and backward;
And more beneath elsewhere, and somewhat dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of his dislocation beneath is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it's longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend back; And it is the limbs that are swollen above with pus because the shoulder of the roast comes there.
And the sign of him who comes to the death, is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
And the signs of him who experiences forward, is that his leg fits well according to its completion; Nevertheless, it does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him move, he cannot before, and holds his urine, and swells the groin, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs for him who approaches from behind, are that he cannot spread his foot out, nor double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and there's swelling in the calf up to the knee over the ribs.
The restoration of this illusion of dislocation is that you return it when the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, if there is no treatment; and there should be no assumption about it having healed.
And for those in which the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, and extend it both inside and out, and move it to the right and left; By chance if it returns, and there is no need for any other treatment.
And if it doesn't return in this way, you should apply strong force and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or with one band where it is tied above the knee; And another attendant extends their hand over in such a way that they pinch his hands near his elbows, then drives them away with a single breath against the belly; and some others grasp the nape of his neck;
And extend up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains hanging.
This way of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is indeed well.
If not so, then it must take care according to its appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should remember to lift him up on his healthy side, then tie the bandage around the root of his elbow, and the part that's over the armpit. Then stretch the bandage towards the armpit, against resistance;
Then request another attendant to hold his arms, and grasp the broad part of the patient's armpit, and extend it towards the front. it will return to its place now;
and this way of dislocation is less severe than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way as we have said, then you should tie the two legs of the patient together tightly with a strong bandage around the two heels and the two knees, and so that the bad leg is extended by about two feet more than the other;
then hang it from the top of a pole, and above ground by two long lengths.
Then instruct the attendant to hold the top of the armpit area, and have another attendant with the patient, who holds the armpit in place, because the joint is now returning quickly.
And when the dislocation is in front, if you lie the sick person down, just as we have said for someone with glibosity, and pull on the leg at the bad part of it precisely, and also on the knee.
Then place two prongs, one on the head and another at the knee, then insert the prong between the thighs at the sick person's dislocation in the shape; And place wet cloths around to prevent the patient from blistering, then extend each limb towards him, and have them set in an even position according to their hand at the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, place it on 'ie' table and press it like we have said in the distension exercise, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, you must extend the bad leg quickly, and according to what I have said; And place their palms so that they press against the painful part of the bad leg, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not require extending the patient downwards or lifting them from the ground. Instead, they should be positioned as if their buttocks were in the same place after being reset backwards, as we have explained regarding lying on the two buttocks; And if it is on their face, and the neck stretched as we said before, they must apply pressure to the joint at the table; And it will be right when the patient stretches their legs, and they will be equal in length; Therefore adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the buttocks do not move; And let them rest for three or four days, then release, and apply the plaster again;
And if you see that they are equal, hold them as before, and let them be for three days;
Then release the dislocation, and treat him gently, until the limb is strengthened.
Of the shoulder joint dislocation
The knees are dislocated in three ways: This means, namely, internally and externally, and behind;
And do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his knee. And if it does not adhere at his knee, know that it is dislocated;
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his buttocks, and place his foot on your feet;
Then take his shinbone between your palms, and pull it between your thumbs. Then bend both sides of the shinbone that form it. And stretch out his leg with others assisting, until the knee returns to its place. And the signs are that he has correctly aligned his leg gently with his thigh;
And place the plaster on, and have him lie with his leg straight at the knee, binding them together tightly for three or four days, then release.
And do not perform any surgery involving the joints until the limbs have been strengthened.
And if the limb is not present, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it returns to its normal state.
Of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never completely dislocated and neither fully out of place, both inwards and outwards.
And you will know this by signs: that the ankle is swollen and tends forward to the part where it was dislocated:
The repositioning is gentle, and you should gently extend it to his hands when he is only slightly out of place.
And when it is free from all pain completely, then you must make the patient lie straight and hold them up with the helpers by their leg, above the ankle;
Then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and then twice to your left, then stretch it upwards, and firmly position the leg upwards;
And do this two times, as we have said, by holding and pulling the leg;
If it returns, that is well;
If not, start the process again, because it will return.
And if it cannot return like this, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and plant the post firmly in the earth between their buttocks, and wrap cloths around them, so that they do not bruise the patient.
Then the surgeons clean the wound, and other surgeons stretch out his legs or waist so they can be bound to the neck of the animal; Then extend each surgeon equally, and place the bundle so that it rests between the legs of the patient to hold the patient when they are extended.
Then set the joints equal on his hands, and other surgeons cut the healthy leg at the knee, and the dislocated joint will return quickly.
And when it is to the point, place the plaster and bind it up, and apply pressure firmly, and then tie the leg to the animal, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so the rope does not become too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if you apply pressure;
Then release it on the third day or the fourth, and continue to guide the patient for three more days; And if it goes beyond that time, it's not safe to say it won't dislocate again.
And if pus comes out at the incision site, it is necessary that you soothe it, just as we have said in other places, while it remains clean.
Of the cautery made with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When the shoulders are dislocated, if they can be properly stretched like in manual work, it's a simple task.
And if the dislocation is in no corner of the back or foot, it's necessary that you make the patient lie on his full length or flat on a table completely straight, and place your foot where the joint opens. Then press with your foot firmly until he wakes up;
And when he is straight, and there's nothing open, place a two-shouldered footrest under the sole of his foot, then press firmly, and let him rest three days, then release him. And make them rest until they regain their senses.
regarding injuries and dislocations together
When injury accompanies dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times it has happened that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in your treatment, and if you lack wisdom in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not be hasty;
And at the beginning of treatments aim to alleviate pain and pus, and let the patient be in God's hands, if you do not see hope for improvement; And when you see hope, now reset the limb in its place, so that pus and life follow;
And when the limb is in place, administer things that alleviate pus formation, and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments;
And if there is fracture with the dislocation, and small bones are broken, so treat them as we have instructed in simple diseases.
And protect yourself from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is according to your creator that you should live, and through knowledge arm yourself and protect your body.
