After I completed for you, oh sons, this book, which is the last of the science in medicine with its complement, and I reached the end of it, from its explanations and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since the operation with the hand has been neglected in our region and in our time it has been entirely abandoned; until perhaps its science has perished and its track has been cut off; and there have not remained of it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which hands have altered; and error and hesitation occurred to them, until its intentions were closed and its use was prolonged. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise concerning it, according to the method of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and that I should come with the forms of iron instruments of cauterization, and the rest of the instruments of the work; made from the addition of declarations and from the preparation of what is necessary.
The reason for which a good artisan of it with his hand is not found in our time, is: that the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen described, until he knows the instruments of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction, and separation, and has cognition of the bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their origin, and the pulsations of the veins, and the quiet ones, and the places of their exits.
And because of that, Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken about that in the introduction to this book.
Since he who is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy, does not understand, and already falls into error, by which men are harmed: just as I have seen many of them, who pretend to be knowledgeable about this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
What happened was that the surgeon cut a stubborn tumor of the aposteme scrofula on the neck of a woman and cut some arteries on the neck so the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead at his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who presumed to extract a stone from a man which had grown during his lifetime and the stone was large. He therefore cut to it, and extracted it with a piece of the bladder. So the man died on the third day.
And I indeed had already been called to extract it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the weakness of the man that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving a stipend from a certain Duke of our land because of medicine, and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him that he got a fracture in his leg near the heel, and the doctor hastened with his ignorance and pressed the fracture above the wound with poultices and tight bandages and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he treated him according to his desires. Afterwards he left him for some days and ordered him not to undo the bandage, and it remained so until his leg became an aposteme and his foot, and it led to destruction.
I was therefore called to him, and I hastened to undo the bandage, and quietness followed, and he was relieved from his pains.
However the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not restrain it.
Then the corruption ceased to spread through the limb until he died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous aposteme and it became an ulcer after some days, until the evil of it became great with its master.
What is, that when it is a pure cancer from melancholic humor, then it is not suitable to be pierced with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it can be cut off.
And for that reason, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation to which health is associated, and an operation in which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already stirred up in every place of this book, where the operation comes, in which there is terror and fear.
For it is necessary for you to beware of that and dismiss it, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and to dishonor.
Receive therefore the measure with solicitude and protection, and your weak ones with facility and firmness, and use the better way leading by the grace of God to salvation and laudable succession: and dismiss terrible anxieties of difficult healing: and lift your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation enters into your faith and your commodity.
For it is more remaining to your glory, and elevated in this world, and afterwards to your quantities.
For Galen has already said in certain of his admonitions. Do not call the bad sickness medicine, nor name it evil doctor.
Now however I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
The first chapter.
Of cauterization with fire and of cauterization with sharp medicine, the chapter, and ordered from head to feet, and forms of instruments, and iron tools of cauterization: and all that is necessary in the operation.
The second chapter.
Of cutting and piercing, bloodletting and puncture, and of wounds: and the removal of arrows, and similar things to that: and the entire chapter, arranged in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter.
Of restoration, and dislocation, and the cure of twisting, and similar things to that: the chapter, arranged from head to foot, and in the forms of instruments.
But before I mention the operation with it, it is necessary that I say the quality of its cauterizations, and of its ulcers: and in what complexion they are exhibited.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of cauterization and ulcer, is a discourse subtle and profound, of science and of hidden secret.
And many wise men have spoken on it, and have disagreed about it: and to me it is sufficient to take a little from their discourses, fearing prolixity.
I say therefore, that cauterization is suitable universally for every complexion, which is with matter, and without matter: excepting two complexions, which are the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
In the hot and dry complexions with matter they disagree. For some have said that cauterization is suitable for it. And others have said the opposite of that, namely that cauterization is not suitable for the disease which is from heat and dryness: since the nature of fire is heat: and it is unsuitable, that a hot and dry disease should be treated with something hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite of that says: that what is done by cauterization is a remedy for every hot and dry ailment that occurs in the bodies of men, because when you examine the body of a man and its humidities in relation to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
And I indeed say through his speech: that the experiment has already revealed that to me many times.
But truly it is not fitting that he come upon that, unless he who has already been tested and practiced in the chapter of cauterization's last exercise, and knows the diversity of the complexions of men, and the disposition of ailments within themselves, and their causes and accidents, and the space of time of them.
From the remaining complexions, however, there is not above use fear: and especially in cold and moist ailments. For all physicians have already agreed on these, and they do not disagree regarding treatment with cauterization in them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and its goodness over cauterization with burning medicine is: because fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized, and it does not harm another member joined to it, except with little harm.
The action of burning medicine, however, penetrates to that which extends from the members, and perhaps it causes an ailment difficult to cure to occur in a member, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, on account of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it overflows.
Now indeed that has become known to us through experiment, on account of the length of service and study with art, and standing upon the truth of things: and because of that I will excuse the length of speech.
And if it were not, I would not be allowed to reveal to you in this my book a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies through its expulsion, which expels diseases, demonstrated by philosophical speech, which will be sharpened in your minds.
And know, my sons, that they themselves disagree about the time in which it is suitable to perform a cauterization, and they put forth a better time in spring.
And I say that a cauterization is suitable at any time, because the harm that occurs on account of the time is outweighed by the benefit that is attracted with the cauterization. And especially if the cauterization is on account of pains from necessary pains, strong, urgent ones, which do not tolerate delay: because it is feared that a greater evil will occur from them, than the small harm that occurs on account of the time.
And let it not fall into your minds, O my sons, that which they do not consider, except the common and foolish physicians, namely that those diseases which are healed by a cauterization, do not always relapse: and they propose that consequence, and the thing is not as they think: because a cauterization is not, unless in place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and evacuates the humidities which are the causes, why pains occur.
However, the cauterization surpasses medicine by the speed of its health, and the virtue of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion: and it is possible, that the disease may return at some hour of time according to the complexion of the infirm, and the location of its disease, and its virtue: and what is prepared in its body from an aggregation of superfluities in it: and what pervades into it in acquiring them from foods, and similar things from those causes, unless a disease is made, in which a cauterization is administered.
A subtle inflammation in a member causes little excess and moisture, such as a cauterization of the tooth, because of pain, and similar things to it, it is possible that the pain does not return to it. But that happens in few cases.
And I speak to the common people again, that cauterization is the last of medicine, is a straightforward speech: not according to what they themselves intend in it: since they believe that there is no cure which is conferred with medicine, nor with anything else after the application of the cauterization.
The thing is contrary to that, and the intention, that cauterization is the last of medicine, is not, except that when we administer modes of cure in some disease, and those medicines do not confer: then we administer at the end of the thing a cauterization, and it confers: then it falls, that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say that except because of the equality of gold, and the subtlety of its substance: and they said that it does not produce pus in the place of the cauterization. But it is not absolutely true: since I have already proven that and found that it does not do that in certain bodies without others.
And cauterization with gold is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you make cauterization fire from gold, it is not declared to you, when it is ignited according to the quantity that you use, because of the redness of gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire, and turns into sheets.
Wherefore the craftsman falls from that in work: and because of that cauterization with iron is done by us more quickly and nearer to the rightness of operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization, following the chapters, and I have arranged them from head to feet, so that they provide to the inquirer what he wants from it.
Head II.
This cauterization is useful for dominating humidity and chill on the brain: which two are causes of swelling, and an abundance of flowing humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and pain in the teeth, and pain in the throat: and universally all sickness that occurs from chill, such as palsy, and swelling, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar to those sicknesses.
The method of cauterization is that you should first prepare the weak person: so that they are evacuated in the beginning with a cleansing medicine for three nights, or four, according to what the strength of the weak person demands, and their age, and their habit.
Then order them to shave their head with a razor. Then have them sit between your hands in a square shape, so that they now place their hands on their chest.
Then put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with an incision.
Then prepare the olive cautery for ignition, whose shape is this.
Then put it on the marked place with an incision, lowering it, as your hand is tightened little by little, and you rotate it. Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the place.
If you see that it has already taken from the bone a quantity of head alkali, or a quantity of zeherb, then lift your hand. And if not, then move your hand with the iron itself or with something else by means of it, if it becomes cold: until the bones which I mentioned to you are visible.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the cotton in it, and put it on the place: and leave it for three days.
Then put on it cotton soaked in butter, and leave it on the place, until the eschar is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with the ointment tetrapharmacon, until it is healed.
Now they have said that the more a wound remains open, the more it emits pus, therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and that the cautery should be applied until something adheres to the thickness of the bone.
Then scrape after that which has been burned from the bone, then treat it.
And others say that it is necessary to penetrate with the cautery to the extreme, until it impresses on the bone an impression of a mold, so that the bone falls, which is made like the form of a crate: or the instrument that women put on by means of the alphabet infusion: and they extract, what they breathe out from this place vapors of the head, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then treat it, until it becomes consolidated.
To me, however, these two types of cautery do not seem suitable except in certain men according to the path of fear.
And to leave it alone is better for me with its own health.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity: as we have been shown in the other members: and especially when the head is weak and feeble by nature: and a certain type of cautery is more salutary and better for me, and I approve it: therefore operate with it for health.
Chapter 3.
When there is a chronic pain in the whole head: and it is prolonged to the weak, and it is treated with henna, and quinine, and head purges, and oils, and plasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and none of those things help it: then consider. For if the head of the weak person is of strong natural creation, and it is not weak, and it has found intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery under that a little. Then cauterize it itself over every horn of its head with a cautery, so that the skin is not pierced, and a quantity is discovered from the bone, which we have described. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of its head, in the place which is called "uas": and it is a place where the ventose is put: and raise your target in this, and do not uncover the bone. For the weak person finds it due to that vehement pain, and different from the pain of the other cauterizations of the whole head.
And I will say that this Cautery in its own place: and it is necessary that it be a cautery, with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and its back is more subtly cauterized than the middle of the head.
Chapter 4.
When there is pain and swelling in one part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and the rest of the treatment is administered, which I mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and none of that helps: then cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with sharp burning medicine: or with iron.
Cauterization with acute burning medicine is such that you take one tooth of a badger, and scrape it, and cut off its extremities on both sides. Then cut the place of pain at the time with a broad lancet, until a place is made under the skin, in which the dens is captured.
Insert it then under the skin, until it is hidden: then bind over it with a poultice of decent constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours; then undo it, and extract the badger, and leave the wound two days, or three: afterwards put on it a plaster submerged in butter, until the place makes pus: then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to make it with certain burning medicines, which I wrote in the twelfth treatise, on medicines for burning.
But cauterization of it with iron is according to this method. Fire cauterization, whose form is this.
And it is called a Clavulus: because the form of its head is like the form of a nail, in which there is something curved, and in the middle of it is a certain small prominence.
Then put it on the place, and hold your hand: and you withdraw the iron little by little with speed: and let the quantity that is burned be from the thickness of the skin, as its middle. And raise your hand, so that the artery which is beneath is not burned, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then soak the plaster in salt water, and put it on the place, and leave it for three days: then put a plaster with butter: afterwards cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this half of the skull with the edge of a second cauterizing knife. And beware of cutting the arterial vein in this half of the skull, not being old is a particular property.
On the method of cauterizing in the old half skull.
When you treat the half skull, with what we said in the preceding treatment, and what we said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment is not effective: and you see from the disease that what we said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire is not sufficient for it, then you must use a sharp cauterizing iron, until it becomes white after you make a sign above the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or something like that: and put your hand in its place, and press it until you cut the artery, and penetrate to the bone.
Truly it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which moves during mastication, lest the side or nerve that moves it be scorched, whence spasms occur.
And this is above caution and warning about the flow of arterial blood which has been severed. For in cutting it off there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he does, and is neither careful nor experienced: and he gives up the operation at the start.
And I come with a reminder of the treatment of the flow of blood that occurs from an artery, according to its own method, and in the proper place of this book.
What if you see from the disease that this cauterization is not sufficient for it, and you see the weak body tolerating a cauterization on the middle of the head, as we have narrated, treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization that we spoke of in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cauterizing iron having two knives. For cauterization is better than this and more beneficial.
On the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold and is treated with solutiuis and the rest of the treatment that we mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then cauterization by fire: and it is that which is called a punctum, whose shape is this.
Then prick it with that after its ignition all around the entire ear, as it revolves: or around both, if pain is in both. And extend yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear for a little while, after you have marked the place with ink: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten punctures on all the ear, or about that.
Then treat the places until they heal.
On the method of cauterizing for twisting.
Chapter Seven.
Twisting that is treated with cauterization is not except for the types which occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And it lacks cauterization of the type that occurs from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of twisting with hiers and purging of the head and gargling and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the weak place with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below its temple, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And put your cauterization on the opposite side of the weak part. For softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the shape of the cauterization is that you should cauterize it with a cauterity on the direct extremity of the upper ear under the horn of the head a little, and another in the temple: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And put your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the Cautery, and it is a type from a knife, whose shape has been described above: nevertheless it is not thinner than that little, as you see: and it is necessary that the knife be a little above superfluous grossness.
Then treat the place with what has gone before until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in old Apoplexy.
When the Apoplexy becomes old and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication is not effective, and the weak person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cauterization on the back of the head, according to what has gone before: and the method of the cauterization should be according to what has gone before.
And he is also cauterized with a Cautery on the bone of the stomach: and it is even more extreme.
Then let him be treated with what has gone before.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that the weak person be given first a drink of great hiera, and purging pills to cleanse the brain.
Then shave the entire head of the weak person, and put on his back of the head a plaster made from mustard as described in the treatise on plasters: and apply it to him several times.
This indeed is the method of Cautery: and do that according to the same order which I mentioned there.
If therefore he is healed by it, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back of his head, which extend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and put between each cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cauterization, with what has preceded.
If however you need to add and he is weak for bearing it: then perform the cauterization in the middle. What if you need to add: then cauterize it above the two horns.
Then treat it, until it is healed: and let the cauterization be applied according to the form which has been described.
On the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with caution, and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the weak person: afterwards cauterize it with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and with a cauterization above each horn of the head, and with a cauterization above its back, and with three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you immerse in the disease of softening of the body more than those, and he is weak for bearing it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and lastly with a cauterization, until much of its skin is burned, and lift your hand. Then treat it, until it is healed: and thus the cauterization will be successful.
On the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, unless it is he whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary therefore that you cleanse his brain first with caution, and with the rest of the treatment which we have spoken of in the division: when he is greatly weak, or is bearing the reception of medicines.
If however he is a boy, who does not bear medicines, then let him be given a gargle and purging mastics which cleanse the brain, for many days before with improvement of foods.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle of the head, according to what has preceded in manner: and cauterize another on his occiput, and all over each horn of his head with a cauterization. What if he is weak and strong, and will be tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauterizations that I mentioned in one having paralysis, and mollification of the body over the spondiles of the neck, and the spondiles of the back: and let the Cauterium be olive oil according to the method which has preceded.
If however he is a weak child, then put a subtle cauterization, according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauterizations that we mentioned in one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluity inclined to melancholy, and the body of the weak person is humid, then give him in a drink what will cleanse his brain, according to what has preceded in division: afterwards shave the head of the weak person, and make then a tortella made from linen, as a circle.
Then put it on the middle of the head: and the weak person sitting squarely should be held from every side.
Then present an ointment. And it is worthy made from old butter of eggs. And warm it over a fire with a tempered measure of heat, which the finger can tolerate, when it is inserted into it. Then apply it on the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it becomes cool.
Do that to the weak person once a week, with the rest of his good regime, until he is cured.
Or use a cautery making many small points on it, besides which burn the hand with the cautery: apply it while smelling.
This type of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then put on it a cotton cloth soaked in butter or hen's fat.
Of the method of cauterizing with water descending to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the origin of the water in the eye is declared to you by signs, which I mentioned in the division, then begin and apply a poultice to the weak part, with that which will cleanse its head.
And keep it away from all moistures, and make it sit in a bath, in fasting for some days.
Then order it to shave its head, and to cauterize itself in the middle of its head. Then cauterize it on the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a simultaneous flow of water in both eyes: or on one side, if there is a flow of water in one eye: and cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width across the temples: and cauterize to stop the flow of blood.
What if you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them, and caution against the flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized on the neck, under the two bones, with two cauteries ultimately brought forth.
Of the method of cauterizing for old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent: and they are above the veins and arteries which are on the manifest outer head, it is verified that this is from cold and phlegmatic superfluities: then cauterize with the same cautery that I narrated in the descent of water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries on the neck under the two bones. And if you apply an addition, then cauterize it on every part with a cautious eye, above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in the nasal polyp.
When you treat it with what we said in the division and the treatment is not effective then hasten and give a drink of weak cichorias for three nights then shave its head and cauterize it with a moderate cautery with an olive cautery. Then cauterize it with a cautery of the nape of the neck with two cauteries, above two eyebrows under the hair a little.
And beware of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery of the nape of the neck.
On the method of cauterizing for softening the Eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by sickness or moisture then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every side and they will stretch out from both temples and let the length of each cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow and do not extend your hand with the cautery except according to the quantity that the third eyelid is burned.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when inverted eyelashes prick the eye.
The cautery in this is according to two methods: either a cautery with fire or a cautery with burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, instruct the weak one beforehand so that he let his eyelashes drop if he is one of those who clean them until they are prolonged and equal. If they sting him near his eyes: then constrict his eyes with a cloth, so that they do not move, until they heal.
When therefore the wounds heal and become equal, then put the head of the sick person in your lap: afterwards apply a mark above the eyelid of his eyes with a caustic, a mark which is according to the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then put a cloth soaked in egg white on the eye, or a dressing of psyllium over the eye.
Then apply cautery with fire, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the figure that you marked little by little on many places, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, entirely appearing properly.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contract, and the hairs rise up at the puncture of the eye.
Raise your hand therefore then: and leave it for three days.
Then put on it a cloth with butter, until the scar is eradicated. Then treat it with ointment, until it heals.
If any of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization over that place, as you did at first.
If the hairs are on the underside: then cauterize it, until they rise up to their natural place: and become equal so that the hairs do not sting the eye.
It is to warn the sick person, that he let the hairs be, until they grow out and become even. Make from a paper of cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from unimbibed lime a weight of one ounce or nearly that; then rub them together with good friction, and make that with speed, so that it does not become cold. Then take from the same a piece and place it on a paper which you made like a shape of myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyelid of one eye or two. And place under the eye a cotton imbued with egg white: and let the head of the weak person be in your lap.
And put your index finger on the medicine, and press it for a short while. And you move it as often as the weak person feels the biting of the medicine: since its biting is found like fire.
While therefore it continues to find the biting, then dismiss the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting has quieted, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid raised, as it is raised with contraction by fire, or with incision, it is good: and if not, then apply again on it from the medicine on the place, where the medicine does not imprint and does not denigrate, until your operation equals and the eye contracts.
Then put on it a cotton with butter, until the skin is eradicated of burning. Then treat it with ointment called diaphenicum, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation, to guard with utmost care, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
What if the eyelid becomes soft after some days, and something from the hair pushes into the eye, then apply again medicine on that place which becomes soft from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then treat it, until it heals.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness. Therefore your consideration should be according to that, and the path of rectitude will not be hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in the tear duct.
When you treat the fistula, with what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Order the weak person to place their head on your lap, and let your assistant hold their head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or stir with their head.
Then put a small pad under the conjunctiva of the eye, or in the mucus of the eyelid above their eye: then apply the cauterization instrument, whose shape is this.
Let it be hollow, in the shape of a feather quill from one end, with which cauterization is made: and if you want it to penetrate to the other end, and if you want it to be held thus.
However this hollow one is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and extract the sanies from it, and clean it: and if it is not open, then open it, and extract its pus.
Then put on it a cauterization iron, which is made very hot.
And hold your hand for a little while with the cauterization instrument near the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the weak person: and you put the cauterization instrument on the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If then you cauterize at the beginning up to the mouth, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cauterization once or twice, if you consider it necessary: and diminish that for three days.
Then put a plaster with butter, and treat it with excitative ointment, until it is healed.
Which if it exceeds for him forty days, and it is not healed: then put on it a sharp corrosive medicine, until the mouth is laid bare: and shave it according to what is described in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some of the first authorities have described. Direct to the place of the fistula, and probe it: then put in the same fissure a thin tube, that is, a subtle cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of a drachm of melted lead, and hold your hand with the cane in good retention, and do not move the weak one at all, so that it does not run or the melted lead reaches its eye.
And it is fitting to put on the weak eye a plaster under the white of the eye, or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a wonderful healing.
What if the fistula is healed, with what we have said about cauterization, and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage, and to reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what will come into its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing in the fissures of the lips.
Many times there occur in the lip fissures, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat their fissures, with what we have said in the division of ailments, and the treatment does not work, then apply a small cauterization to the scalpel, according to this method.
And let it be shaped according to the fineness of the scalpel.
Then put the ignited thing quickly into the same fissures, until the cauterization penetrates to the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with a dressing, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in a fistula of the mouth.
When an apostema occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes chronic and the pus flows and a fistula is formed: then you treat it and if the treatment does not work, then it is necessary to apply a cauterization according to the quantity that the fistula can contain. Then insert the ignited thing into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the ignited iron penetrates to its depth and bottom: do that once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards, with what we have said about treatment, until it is cured.
If the pus is then cut off and healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and remove the corrupted bone according to what appears at its head.
On the method of cauterizing in the gums and softened teeth.
When the gum becomes softened because of humidity, and the teeth are loose, and you treat it with medicines, and it does not work: then put the head of the weak one on your lap.
Then apply a cauterization, whose form will appear after this, so that you put a reed on the tooth: and insert into it the ignited cauterization quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the weak one feels the heat of the fire has already penetrated to the root of the tooth.
And raise your hand; then repeat the cauterization several times, according to what you need.
Then let the weak bone fill itself with salty water, and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For a dense motion is strengthened, and the softened gum is constricted, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
On the method of cauterizing for toothache.
When the toothache is due to cold or there is cold or worms in it, and treatment with medicines is not effective: then cauterization of it is according to two methods: either cauterization with butter, or cauterization with fire.
But the cauterization of it with butter is, that you take cow's butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a pan. Then take the butter, and apply it to the end of the affected tooth. Then submerge it in the boiling butter: and place it quickly on the painful tooth, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you want, submerge a thread, or cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth: and put over it a heated iron, until the fire penetrates to the deep concavity of the tooth.
But the cauterization of it with fire is, that you heat a bronze or iron tube. And let there be in its body something of thickness, so that the sharpness of the fire does not penetrate to the weak tooth.
Then cauterize with fire, whose shape will come: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand, until the cauterization cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be relieved, either on that same day, or another day.
And it is necessary in the application of that cauterization, that it fill the weak bone with good pus, and that it hold it for one hour; then it expels it.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize with a cauterizing iron whichever extremity you use, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the Cannula.
Of the method of cauterizing in Strophules.
When Strophules are from phlegm and from cold humidities, and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and use accelerates their digestion: then a hollow cauterization of fire, whose form is this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke may go out from the cauterization at one extremity: and put fire on it above the aposteme once, and a second time, if you judge it necessary, until it penetrates to the depth of the aposteme.
Which if the aposteme is small: then put the cauterization according to the quantity of the aposteme.
Then leave it for three days, and put on it a plaster under butter, until there is removed what the fire burned.
Then treat it with toothpaste ointment, until it heals in the form of the cannula.
Of the method of cauterizing for roughness of the voice, and constriction of the breathing.
When the humidities flow over the canal of the lung, and especially when it is with a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the weak one be evacuated first with solvent medicines.
Then cauterize it in a nostril at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and beware, lest you penetrate with the cauterization to the throat, nor into the skin, except for a little of it.
Then cauterize it with a cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra, applying it from below: and let the cautery be a moderate one, in the manner that has been described before.
Then treat it with what has been described before, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in diseases of the Lung and Cough.
When the cough and disease of the lung are due to cold humidities, and the patient has no fever, nor phthisis, nor an old disease: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the armpit in depressed, gentle, empty places. And cauterize with another on the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a reed one, according to the form that has been described before.
And if you need to cauterize by pricking with a cautery, which is called a Point, whose form has been described before in the pricking of ear pain: and let the points be from thirty points up to almost sixty.
Then treat it with what has been described before, until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches, according to this form. For it is alleviated by this cauterization, when you make with it one of three cauteries.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to an excess of humidity, and it does not return to its place immediately after its dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to returning from its dislocation, then it becomes dislocated by a slight movement, which occurs as we have already testified, then you ought to reduce the dislocation first. Then let the patient lie on his back, or on his healthy side. Then elevate the cut which is inside the Titillici upwards with the fingers of your left hand and if the joint becomes dislocated inwards.
Then hold the cauterization iron with two fingers. Its shape is like this.
Then cauterize the cut until it penetrates to the other side and the figure of cauterization appears with four cauterizations.
And when the cauterization is done with a cauterizer having three fingers, then the figure of cauterization is made with six cauterizations: and they are fingers according to the subtlety attempted.
And this is the shape of a cauterizer having three fingers.
And when one is added to it in this manner, then there are eight cauterizations.
Then put on the cauterization ground pork with salt. Then make the weakened part adhere to quietness, so that it is not moved for a period of time, until it becomes strong.
And if the dislocation is upwards and it rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a cauterizer for the shoulder or with many punctures.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed: and the weak part is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
When many colds and moistures occur in the Stomach, until they extract it from its complex and multiply the catarrhs to it, and frequent modes of curation, and do not strengthen: then it is necessary that the weak one lies on his back, and stretches out his legs, and hands. Then cauterize with three cauterizations, one cauterizer under the cochlear of the breast, the size of one finger, with the shoulder cauterizer, and two cauterizations below by the two sides of one cauterizer, until the triangular figure of the cauterizations appears. And let it be extended between both so that they do not come together when they produce pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without addition, and if you use a large cautery on the middle of the stomach according to this form, and let the cautery that makes this cautery be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking him who trembles at this cautery, and it is, that you mark on the stomach a point according to the quantity that you use with the encaustic, then cauterize it with the cautery of the point, then cure it with the curation which preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a cold liver.
When there is pain in the liver from cold and moisture, or from a gross flatulence, until it goes out from its natural passage, and the weak one is treated with what we have said, and does not profit from it: then it is necessary that the weak one breathe on his neck, and you mark with encaustic three cauteries according to this figure, and the same quantity on the lower liver below the hypocondriac region, where the elbow of a man penetrates: and let the space that is between each cauterium be according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cauterium be straight in length according to the body: and do not press your hand with the cauterium much.
And let the quantity of what is burned be from the thickness of the skin, the quantity of its half not added, and let the weak one stand on his feet.
If however he is not standing, then let him be lying, who has already extended his legs and lifted up his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a knife cautery, when there is subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware, that you do not proceed to the extreme in cauterization, and the thickness of the entire skin is burned, where the entire body is burned, and it penetrates to the intestines: for the skin there is delicate, therefore know that.
On the method of cauterizing apostemes of the liver.
When there occurs an exit wound, and you want to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, a weak pain and heaviness without sharpness invade: and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is vehement sharpness: and you see already that it has wearied its physicians with treatment.
It is necessary therefore that the weak man breathes upon his neck. Then figure the place of the apostema with a searing heat: then ignite a cautery which is similar to a hot branding iron. And this is its form. And cauterize with it one cautery, until the entire skin is burned, and it penetrates to the siphac, until all the pus comes out: then treat it with the treatment of exit wounds, until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that this species of cautery be used, except by one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hands these diseases run with experimentation many times: then indeed he dares to undertake an operation of this kind.
But to leave it, with me it is better.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of Pleurisy.
The ancients said, a cautery with the roots of aristolochia for a cold Pleurisy in this manner. And it is, that you take from the roots of the dry long aristolochia, one root which is longer and found on it, and is as thick as a finger. Then submerge it in oil: and ignite it in the fire. Then cauterize with one cautery at the place which is between the junction of the jaw and the neck, and with two small cauteries slightly sloping downwards towards the part that is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also at the place which is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping downwards towards the back a little: and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries on the back: one at the place which is between the two shoulder blades: and two cauteries on the two sides of the chest, below the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand with the cautery, unless it be on the manifest skin with a foul smell.
And certain ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery of iron similar to a probe: and they ignite it, and insert it inside between the ribs, until it reaches with it to the apostema itself, and the pus comes out: as we have said concerning the apostema of the pleura.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is fear that either the weak person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place, for which there is no cure.
On the method of cauterizing the Spleen Chapter XXXII.
When you treat the disease of the spleen, with that which we have said concerning the cure in the division of diseases, and your treatment is not effective, then a cautery on it is according to three methods, all of which are correct.
Of these one is, that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the pleura, whose figure has preceded.
And let there be between the cautery a quantity of the thickness of a finger, or a little more.
And let the method of the cautery be that which we have described for the cautery of the liver equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient lean weakly on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder, to hold two rods of a fiery cautery, and to raise the skin which is along the spleen, where the weak left elbow penetrates: and let your elevation be such that you raise the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two ignited rods well in, until you penetrate the skin with them from the other side: then extract the cautery: thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cautery having three rods.
Then take care that the cautery, after you apply it, discharges pus for many days: for it is more conducive to healing than all the other things which have preceded in the cure.
On the method of cauterizing in Dropsy.
The cautery does not fall into a case of dropsy, except for a proper ascites.
When you treat a case of dropsy with the methods of cure which we have described in the division, and the cure is not effective, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two cauteries on the back between the spine, and one along the breast, and another along the stomach: and let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be near to the thickness of the skin.
Then diminish the open cauterization so that it emits pus over a long period.
And the weak should not be evacuated from the cure after the cauterization with what is necessary so that two intentions are added to it, and the healing will hasten with the help of God.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be a clamp, according to the form that preceded it: and that with which the back is cauterized, an olive, according to the form that preceded it.
On the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When they have apostemed in a hydropic and are filled with citrine water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocturnal, which is between the ear and the ring finger: and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For the citrine water will flow out, and let the cautery be according to this form.
Then make on the two legs two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be made with the extremity of the knife's edge: and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee and another lower than that, around the middle of the leg: and on the entire thigh make two cauteries: and diminish the open cautery without cure for a long time: so that some water flows out from it: then cure it with the remaining things that we have said.
On the method of cauterizing for the relief of the belly.
Chapter 35.
When there is a solution of the belly from cold and humidities, until it debilitates the retaining and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with modes of cure, and not healed: and you see the weak one tolerating the cautery of abundant virtue, then cauterize it with a great cautery on its stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle clamp cautery: and a great cautery above the alcatin above the hump, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive humidity and the weak patient tolerating it, then cauterize it with a cauterizer over the chest, and cauterize everything with it: and perhaps you will add two small cauterizations over the stomach near the large one.
It is indeed a advancing treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from gross humors, cold, or corrupt humidities, and they are treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment is not effective: then cauterize with three cauterizations above the lower vertebra of the back under the alumidei for a short time in a triangular fashion, and cauterize under the navel almost two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face breaking out in a rash, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cauterizer, according to what has preceded: and cauterize over his liver, and another over his spleen, with a cauterizer of the spine: and apply the open cauterization for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you remove a wart, then apply a cauterizer that resembles a radish. Then insert the ignited thing into the removed wart: and with your hand, until the cauterizer penetrates to the opening of the vein, from which blood runs: do it once, or twice.
If there are many warts, then cauterize each one with a cauterizer according to what we have described. Then treat them with that which is beneficial to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cauterization on the shoulder, it is more so in the joint.
Of the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the weak one does not undergo the cutting and operation that we described in its own place, and is deterred by it, perhaps he will be healed with a cauterization.
When therefore a fistula occurs to someone, and it becomes chronic, pus runs out of it, and corrupted moistures. It is fitting therefore that which ought to be done, that you should examine it with a subtle probe. Then recognize the quantity of its depth with a probe.
Then apply a cautery iron, which is similar to a probe. Then insert the ignited instrument itself into the fistula and the quantity in which the nail entered.
And repeat the cautery over it, until all those corrupted bodies are burnt, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And beware of the burning of the nerve, if it is there, or of the great vein: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all these places.
And do not do that, unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and you think, that it is not penetrating.
Then treat the place until it is healed.
If however the place becomes closed, and matter is cut off from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then know that it is already healed completely.
And if matter is not cut off from it, then know that it is penetrating, or in its depth there is a corrupted opening, or something like that: the reminder of which will come in its own place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When there is pain in the kidneys from cold or from gross flatulence and it becomes weaker because of that, then it is necessary to cauterize it on the almethen over the kidneys themselves, to cauterize each kidney with a cauterizing iron, whose description has preceded.
And perhaps we will cauterize it a second time on that same almethen. Three linear scars will appear. Therefore, the last ones will be more in the flank.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When there is weakness in the bladder and softening from cold and humidity, until it does not retain weak urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the pubic area over the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and cauterize with one cauterizing iron on the right side of the pubic area, and another on the left side: and let the length of that cauterization be according to the quantity of a knot of the thumb: and cauterize it with a lower back cauterizing iron, or two cauterizing irons, if you judge it necessary: and let it be according to what has preceded, the cauterizing iron of the clavicle.
On the method of cauterizing the uterus.
When there is cold and humidity in the uterus, and it is prevented from conception because of that, and its menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain happens to it at the time of their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize with three cauterizing irons around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and cauterize over the lower abdomen with a back cauterizing iron, or two cauterizing irons: and let the cauterizing iron be of the clavicle.
On the method of cauterizing an ankle in a state of dislocation.
When the mucous humidities are poured out to the ankle's box, and they become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that one leg is longer than the other when they are compared together: and the place of dislocation is found vacant in it.
It is necessary therefore that you cauterize the weak place above the ankle's box with a similar circular cautery: after which you mark with a branding iron around the circumference of the box, as it turns out: and so that the box itself falls in the middle of the circle.
Which if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-tree cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole skin.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the box of the ankle, and the causes of it are cold and humidities: and the weak place is treated with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and it becomes worse: then it is necessary that you release the weak place from gross humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things. Then cauterize it.
And the method of cautery in it is according to two methods: either a cautery with adhering medicines, or a cautery with fire.
The cautery with fire is according to many methods.
Of which one is, that you cauterize above the ankle's box with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape. And make for them a good depth, or a bad one. And let the space that is between all cautery be of the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be of olive.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the same ankle. There are four cauteries.
And if you apply the cautery with a circle, whose shape has preceded in the dislocation of the ankle, to one: so that the circle contains the whole ankle.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of the cautery for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the ankle itself, and does not extend to the hip and the leg.
If it extends to the hip and the leg, then apply the cautery with two cauteries above the hip, above the place to which that weakness points, in which is the pain, and apply your cautery above the haunch four fingers towards the wooded area for a short time: and let the cautery be knife-shaped.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
Which if the weakness indicates that the pain extends nearly to the toes of the foot, then apply the cautery there where it points with a cautery of one point, or three, or four, or more, if it needs it.
And if it points to the pain being under the knee turned to the leg, then apply the cautery there with one knife-shaped cautery.
And beware in every cautery of yours, that you do not apply the cautery to this, so that you burn a nerve, or a large artery, and draw through it above the weakness a bad nocument, or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another, of those who applied the cautery above the haunch, and finished in the cautery, and the leg became inflamed, until a tumor followed to the foot, and it was entirely perforated, and the entire foot was corrupted: then there occurred a loosening of the belly, and death after that.
What if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each according to this method.
And certain wise men have said regarding cauterization of the ankle, whose cauterization this is the method. Make a similar iron instrument, the diameter of which is half a palm, and let it be at its orifice according to the thickness of a date stone, or a little less, and inside that instrument let there be a third instrument.
And let the space that is between all the instruments be the size of a thumb joint, and let the instruments be open on two sides, and let their height be like a knot, or two knots, and make for them a handle from iron decently fitted to the instruments.
Then let it be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and throws off sparks: then let it be placed on a weak ankle, having reclined on the healthy side. Cauterize it therefore with three round cauterizations in one spot.
Then leave it for three days. Afterwards apply a plaster with butter, and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with ointment, until it is healed.
Albucasis says, we have made little use of this type of cauterization, on account of the terror of its appearance, and because we find few who dare to try it.
However, it is one of the good cauterizations for him who suffers it and finds its place.
A cauterization with adhering medicines is to make two instruments having a perforated armlet, into which descends a rod of the door of bronze or iron, the length of a wall, and for their height there are two knots, or nearly so.
And let the space that is between both be the size of a finger's thickness, and let it be open below and above, and let what they contain be joined to each other, according to this form.
Then remove it and place it on a plaster bandage, the weak lying on the healthy side. And press your hand strongly on the plaster bandage. Then pour between the two circles from warm water, which has been heated with fire for a short time, and hold it for an hour's quantity of time: and let the weak endure its biting and burning, for he finds the biting as fire, until the biting subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the warm water from the entire bandage with sweet water: then leave it for three days.
And put on it butter, until the blackness of the burn is removed: and leave it for several days, and pus will be cured from it. It is indeed the last in the treatment.
Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
What if the pain extends to the hip or the leg: make for it a plaster that contains water, according to what you did on the bandage equally.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take of alkaline substance and unslaked lime each one part: grind both, and put them in a new pot, the lower part of which is perforated with one small hole, according to the quantity that the radius may enter: and put under the bottom of the pot another pot vitreous: and throw over the alkaline substance and lime sweet water, which submerges both by the finger: after which you compress it with your hand with good compression: and leave the pot until sharp water descends to the lower part of the vitreous pot.
Then collect that water entirely, and throw it over another lime: and filter, until it is renewed.
It itself will then be of strong sharpness indeed, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterization of the remaining members. Since it performs the operation of its own fire.
And there are medicines with which they cauterize the anch, and also such as tessie, and honey of the anacard, and lime with soap, so that both may be mixed together.
And Galen told of a certain man from the ancients, whose cure was for the pain of the ankle and the vein of the thigh, and he declared its effectiveness to be very great. And he said that it did not need another cure, and that he was healed by one remedy, until he related that he perhaps entered a bath and came out of it already healed.
And it is, that it be taken from the green vitriol, and if the green is not found, let the dry, fresh one be taken, and let it be ground much with some fat, and let it be put on the ankle, where there is pain, or the leg, or in the hip, and let it be tied, and let it be left for the quantity of three hours, or as long as he feels the weakness of the heat of the application. Then let him enter into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes very sweaty, let him enter into the sun. For the pain recedes and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use any cauterization with these medicines, unless after the purging of the body.
And Dioscorides said that the dung of capers, when with it the vein of the thigh is cauterized, brings to it relief, and makes a cauterization in this manner. Let wool be ground, and let it be soaked with old oil, and let it be put on the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot, and the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take dry dung of a goat and set it on fire, until it becomes charcoal.
Then put it on a cloth and let it be, until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Do not stop doing that until the sensation on the middle and up to the ankle is penetrated and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the cauterization of the cow.
Of the cauterization of pain in the back.
When pain occurs in the back for many reasons, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and damp material: and cauterization is not applied, except in this single case, which occurs from the infusion of cold material.
It is necessary therefore after evacuation of the weak with fetid pills and similar things, so that they make on the back, where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the affected part, then mark with a cautery in each line five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the weak, by virtue of which: and let the cauterization be made with cauterized points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations, with the middle clavicular cautery, according to this method.
Of the method of cauterizing in cases of gibbosity.
This sickness often happens to small infants.
And the sign of this disease in children is: that there occurs a tightening on it with shortness of breath at elevation and movement: and you find in the last vertebrae of the back and its knots, which already begins to protrude over the remaining vertebrae.
When I raise that and make a use for it, then I cauterize it with a cauterizer that is a circle according to this form.
And let the cauterization take hold equally over every part of the vertebrae: and if you cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cauterizer two or three lines: and let the points be close to one another.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we have said.
And beware, lest you administer a cauterization on a hump that forms in a spasm of a nerve.
On the method of cauterizing for gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are from cold humidities that flow to any members of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is by custom of physicians to name that specifically Gout.
When therefore gout caused by cold is treated with methods of cure and the pains are not removed, then a cauterization removes them.
And it is that you cauterize after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauterizers: and let the cauterization be with an oily one.
And if you indicate that there are points on the surface of the foot, then make them with a pointed cauterizer. Which if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints and it often happens, then cauterize it above every knee with three or four cauterizers on every side, with this same cauterizer of the ankle.
If however many are needed for you with this cauterizer, then cauterize it. And do not submerge your hand with the cauterizer, but rather let it be to the thickness of the skin as much.
If however pains ascend to the knees and the back: then administer what we have said from cauterization in its chapter.
What if pains are in the hands only, then puncture at the circuit of the elbow joints, as two lines turn.
If however there remains from pains in the fingers, then puncture them, above every joint a puncture, and above the palm of the hand.
If however pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then cauterize both from every side.
And do not evacuate the weak from a good regime, from the reception of medicines. For if a good regime is made, and phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God by this cauterization.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of rupture.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and intestine descends, or a cyst to the testicle, and it is beginning nearby: then it is necessary to prescribe to the weak that they abstain from food on that day. And let him use laxatives, so that feces may descend from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and prescribe to him, that he hold his breath, until it comes out, or the cyst appears, or intestine.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a cauterizing iron under the rupture on the bone of the hip, with a mark whose extremities are similar to the middle of a circle towards the upper parts of the body.
Then ignite the cauterizing iron, which has this form, until it becomes white, and throws out sparks. Then reduce the intestine or cyst to its concavity. Then let the servant put his hand on the place, so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the thighs of the weak, and placed under it a pillow, and one servant over the thighs of him, and another over his chest who holds the hands.
Then apply the cautery on the same sign, your hand with the cautery standing upright. And hold it until you bring it to the mouth, or turn it with it twice, if you have not brought it to the mouth at first.
And carefully observe from the intestine's exit at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and an issue comes through that above the weak or mortified place, or great malignity.
And know that when you do not bring the cautery to the mouth, your operation is of no use.
And it is fitting that the cautery for infants be subtle, according to their measure.
Then treat with the remaining ointments, until it is healed.
And let the weak one lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is closed.
And it is fitting that you put a nourishment for it for the length of time of its cure, which will soothe its stomach: so that the intestine does not come out through the wound and vomiting.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a properly made bandage, and let him hold it for forty more days.
And he should be kept from labor, and from the filling of food and drink, and vehement voices.
For when he uses this regime, thus will he be healed with a complete healing.
And I will speak of the cure of hernias with an incision in its own chapter.
When however hernias occur in the remaining abdomen, and are beginning, and it is seen that they do not increase, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let what is applied be about one third of it. Then treat it with what we have said: and it will not increase.
And now some of the first have said: that a hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with a cautery, and a line is placed which runs along the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line to the lower one. And put your hand in the middle with the cautery on the hip.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
On the method of cauterizing for pains caused by a fall or a blow.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in certain members from a fall or a blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines is of no benefit, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery of each member be a second cautery according to its size, and its smallness, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twisting and pain from it.
If therefore it is healed by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then repeat it over the same cautery.
For it is a habit of these pains that they are transferred from one member to the one that is nearest to it. Wherefore it is necessary to follow them with a cautery until the weak part is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes helped by a very strong cautery. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: when therefore you want to cauterize it, consider it.
If therefore the leprosy is beginning, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it does not decrease, nor stop: and there is a weak spot that corruption has comprehended over its whole complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one on the middle of the head at the knot, and a second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally touch your hand briefly with the cautery, until it impresses a small mark on the mouth, and the cortices will dislocate from it: so that the expiration of gross vapors is eased from it, and cauterize with the cautery also above the same spleen, according to what has proceeded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the weak part, and appears manifestly: then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries, which we mentioned in the beginning, and cauterize above the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries above the two jaws, and with two cauteries above the vertebrae of the neck, and six above the vertebrae of the back, and one large one above the region of the tail near the end of the spine and one above it, in the same flank: and two above the elbows: namely one above each elbow, and two above the knees: one above each knee, and two above the shoulders, and two above the elbows, and two above the tenderness of his chest: and cauterize it above every joint, of the joints of his fingers and toes: and cauterize above every heel of his feet, and the soles of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the heel, lest you burn them.
And sometimes cauterization is performed with a cautery on the bone of the chest, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater is the benefit, and the more it helps.
And know that the weak person does not find pain in the cautery, as the healthy ones do: because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of a size and smallness according to the limbs and joints: according to what has preceded from the species of iron instruments.
Then treat with a cauterization made from powder of the herb with honey, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for a stupor.
When any member is numb, and it is treated with medicines, and oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then cauterize the numb member with cauterizations, according to what its size deserves or its smallness.
And let your cauterization penetrate briefly into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And when the cauterization is applied for a numbness that occurs to the hand and foot, at the joints of the back near where the nerves exit, which move that member: and the numbness is removed.
Indeed, let no one presume to do this except one who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 51.
When the Baras becomes chronic and nothing from the ingenuity of medicine is effective for it: then cauterize over it with a deep cauterization briefly, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then treat it with powder of the herb and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of a pigeon, and blood of a hyrundine: let each be one part: mix all these things, and apply them to a cloth, and adhere to the place, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for a Cancer.
When the Cancer is beginning and you want to restrain it: then cauterize it with a circular cauterization around its circumference, as it revolves.
Wise men have said that a cauterization should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
It does not seem to me: because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that happen many times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we have said, or with many cauteries.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of boils.
When someone has a boil and it is delayed in maturing, either because of the excess matter that makes it, or because of the weakness of the patient, when he is decrepit and has little blood, or because of the time and the need to hasten the maturation of the boil, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, making many punctures. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten the maturation by itself.
If you want to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, whose shape is this.
And place it in the middle of the boil, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be made from that which follows, being weak, so that the flow of pus may be alleviated.
Then treat it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for a corroding sore.
Chapter 54.
A corroding sore is nothing but a corruption that moves in a member and corrodes it: just as fire devours dry wood.
If you see a corroding sore in a place that can tolerate a cautery with fire, then prepare many cauteries, small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the corroding sore is.
Then cauterize it on every side until you eradicate the entire corruption, and none of it remains in any way.
Then touch the same for three days, and apply over the cauterized place burnt sulfur with oil, until all eschars are eradicated, and all corruption.
Then heal it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days sound flesh is born without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery over that which remains of the corrupted places.
And the corroding is treated whenever with sharp medicine. It itself rises in place of the cautery.
But indeed the cautery with fire is of quicker relief: and I have already spoken of its cauterization with sharp medicine in division: therefore take it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing in hammer-like tumors and warts.
Chapter 55.
It often happens that this sickness occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a coarse, foul thing which harms the foot.
And indeed the cautery for them is in two ways: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
But as for the one with fire, it is like a hollow cautery of a falcon's feather, which is made from iron, according to the quantity that the hammer contains on all sides: and let its edges be subtle.
Then apply it ignited upon the hammer-like tumor. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the hammer-like tumor, until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the tumor: and leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then plaster it with crushed forest herbs, ground with salt: and leave the plaster on it during the night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the place with a generating ointment of flesh until it heals.
What if they are not turned and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then administer to them cauterization with hot water: and it is, that you take a small tube made of bronze, or iron, or from a feather of a vulture: and put it on the nail, or the ulcer. Then throw into the tube a small quantity of hot water: hold your hand, and you turn it with compression of your hand for a short time, so that the edge of the tube is impressed on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds a way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the weak one wait for an hour on the biting of the hot water.
Then release it, for the nail is eradicated with its roots.
Do this with them one after another, until you come to all of them that are on the body.
Then treat them after they have been eradicated, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing for Tremor.
When it happens to someone that he has a Tremor from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another: then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauterizations, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and between all the vertebrae a cauterization, and on his chest a cauterization, and on his stomach a cauterization.
For the Tremor is stilled with an oily cauterization, and health hastens to cold feverish illness.
On the method of cauterizing for Albaithar ( possibly a misspelling or variation of "Alb
Chapter 57.
When foul Albathar sores are expelled from the body, that is, pustules, which are made from corrupted gross matter.
It is necessary therefore in the beginning when they appear, that the pustules on the entire head should be cauterized with a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, whose extremities have been kindled with fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cauterizer.
And when they are cauterized with an adamant, at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method: and it does not increase: and the superfluity is disrupted making them, and they are healed from it.
Truly however it is necessary that it be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
It often happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut at the site of a wound, which occurs externally, or at the site of an incision of a postule, or cauterization of a limb, and similar things to these: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When therefore it happens to anyone, then apply your hand quickly to the orifice of the artery, and put your index finger on top of it: and press it strongly, until the blood is blocked under your finger, and does not come out from it.
Then put into the fire small olive cauterizers, and a large number of them: and blow on them until they are ignited strongly.
Then take one of them, small or large, according to the wound and the place in which the artery is disrupted, and put the cauterizer on the vein itself, after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cauterizer until the blood is stopped.
If the blood is expelled when you lift your finger from the orifice of the artery, and you extinguish the cauterizer, then quickly take another cauterizer from the ones that have been prepared in the fire.
You should not stop doing that with one thing after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you confuse the nerve that is there, and the injury affects the weak place.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to cut it off: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its extremities contract, and the blood is cut off. Or let it be bound with a strong thread of ligation. Or let medicines of the proper kind be placed on it, which are to cut off blood, and let it be bound with a dressing of suitable constriction.
He who administers the cutting off of it with a ligature, and binding with a cloth, or application of burning things, and similar, does not penetrate to it at all, except rarely.
If it happens to anyone, and there is not a doctor present to him, nor medicine: then let him begin with the placement of the index finger on the opening of the vein itself, as we have narrated, and constriction of it strongly, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And let the finger not be removed from upon it, with water very cold and violently cold, until the blood congeals, and coagulates, and is cut off.
And meanwhile let him consider what it needs from a cautery or from medicine.
Of the Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
We have discussed in the first chapter, every kind of illness for which it is suitable to use a cauterizing fire and burning medicine, and its occasions, and its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauterizations.
And I have placed chapters from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method: that the seeker may seek what is sought regarding it.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, O sons, what in this chapter is an addition to what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of this, it is necessary that there be a more vehement caution, since in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an apostema, or opening of an exit, or cure of an ulcer, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which are associated trembling, and fear, and death often occurs in many of them.
And I warn you, lest it fall upon you that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes men of a certain type fall into your hands in this art with types of weaknesses. For there is one who becomes angry with his own illness, and death is light to him: on account of the vehemence of what he finds from his weakness and the length of his suffering. And the illness is from fear that signifies death.
And there is one who gives his trust to you, and commits himself to you, hoping for health, and his illness is perilous.
Therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more vehement than your greed and your rapacity. And do not assume anything about it, unless after certain knowledge, which proves to you that which leads to successful treatment.
And may you be skilled in the cure of all your patients, in prognosis and indication of that to which health is most conveniently suited.
For in it is your aid for acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His intellect, and may He not withhold from you guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on Cauterization, from the neck to the feet: so that may be alleviated for you what you wish from it, and what you need.
On the cure of water that collects in the heads of children.
Chapter One.
Know that this weakness often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife pulls the head of the child with force.
And it also happens sometimes for a hidden cause which is not known.
And I have indeed not seen this sickness in others except in children: and for every one of them whom I saw, death was imminent: therefore it seemed to me that it was advisable to omit the operation in it.
And I have indeed seen one of them, a child, whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day, until he could not sit up by himself, because of the size of his head: and the wetness increased until he died.
And this wetness indeed either collects between the skin and the bone: or collects under the bone above the brain.
And the operation on it, if the wetness is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a single incision in the middle of the head in width: and let the length of the incision be about two knots, until the wetness flows out.
And this is the form of a spatula.
If therefore the humidity is greatly increased, and the aposteme is larger, then put two fissures, according to this form.
And if the humidity is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the skull open on every side: and water is pressed out when you press it with your hand to the interior, and it is not hidden from you: then it is necessary that you find in the middle of the skull three fissures, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract the whole humidity. Then bind the fissures with bandages and poultices. Then anoint it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then undo the bandage, and cure the wound with dressings and ointments.
And do not cease to bind the head with equality. And feed the weak person with every dry food of little humidity, until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is that you consider where appears the greatness of the aposteme, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or on one side, or to the right, or to the left.
Go up therefore with the incision where it appears to you that the aposteme and the collection of water is: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, lest you cut the artery, and there occurs a flow of blood, and the weak person dies from that flow with an abundance of humidity.
Of the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter Two.
When there occurs to someone a catarrh to the eyes, or to the breast, and it aggravates that, and the cure of medicines does not help: then the greatest cure is in that, the incision of these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when one makes an incision on them, that the weak head is shaved. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the weak one constrict his neck, with any cloth of his. Then consider where the vein beats. And the places of both are the places which are behind the ears and depressed: and rarely is it hidden, except in certain men.
Then mark with a branding iron above both: and make an incision on both sides with a sharp spatula, the incision extending to the mouth: and let it be as wide as the head.
And if necessary, insert the spatula under the artery, and make an incision upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers joined.
For when the vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the interior with a frequent jump.
If however the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of a space of three fingers. Then mark with a branding iron, and extend to the mouth.
And what is necessary to emit from the blood, is six ounces and perhaps you emit more or less from it. All that according to the quantity which appears to you from the virtue of the weak one and the fullness of his artery.
Then consider the ulcer. Then if anything remains at the mouth of the abscess, then cut it, so that a warm aposteme does not occur: then constrict the ulcer with ligatures from a linen cloth.
Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
Of the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When an old headache occurs to a man, or sharp catarrh due to acrimonious humidities and heat in the temporal arteries, or old abscesses, and ulcers, and similar things: and it is treated with modes of curative medicine, and it does not help: then we are experienced in these ailments in the extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we will narrate.
And the method of operation in extracting them, is that the weak [patient] should shave the hairs which are on the temples, and direct [the instrument] to the apparent artery in the temple. It itself shows to you from its own pulse, and is rarely hidden except in few men, or due to cold withering.
What if it is hidden from you, then the weak [person] should bind his head with any bandage of his: then rub the place with a coarse cloth. Or fumigate the place with hot water, until it appears to you with a clear appearance. Then take the spatula, which I formed a little before. Then scratch the skin with it with ease, until you reach the artery. Then throw into it a hook, and pull it upwards, until you pull it out of the skin, and make it protrude from the tunics which are under it on every side.
If the artery is slender, then entwine it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from it a part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it lengthen and contract, and not cause a flow of blood. For if it is not cut and if it is not severed, the blood does not ascend inwardly.
Then let out from the blood a sixth of an ounce, up to three.
What if the artery is large then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double thread of silk or of a string from a bow, so that putrefaction does not reach it before consolidation of the wound and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then cut the surplus which is between the two ligatures. Do that at that hour or after another hour.
And if you do, cauterize it with a cauterizing iron up to the mouth, with a knife-shaped cauterizer, until its ends are cut and it stands in the place of the same operation.
And it is a better work, unless he who has it is weak with fever, or is of a hot temperament. For the cauterizer is one of those things which help to end moistures. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries, that the place be filled with old cotton, and that powders well made be put on top of it.
And after the dressing, let it be treated with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with bandages, until it is healed.
What if meanwhile while you are operating there occurs a flow of blood from the artery, then hasten to cut it with a cauterizer, or so that you fill the place with cotton, and constrict your hand until the bleeding is stopped. What if none of those things are present to you, then put your finger over the place, until the blood coagulates. And moisten the place with water of vehement cold, until the acute pain is stilled, and constricted according to what is necessary.
And of that which is lighter and easier for the extraction of the artery, it is to cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two knives, and let the sharpness be similar to a double-edged knife. The needle threads are of much smaller thickness than two hairs. For if they are sharp, like two hairs, they will penetrate on both sides and not enter the flesh with speed. When therefore there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: therefore this work is better than any work, and lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space that is between two hairs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with caustic, and apply both ignited cauteries strongly, until they reach the mouth, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between the extremities may be prolonged. For they do not consolidate with this cautery deeply.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of the courses of tears with frequent cauterization from the eyes.
When there are frequent tears and their course is from the veins which are on the outer surface of the skull above the head, and no cure is effective for them with medicines, and you see the face of the infirm already red, and he feels a walking in his forehead like the walking of ants: and his eyes are weak, humid, so that already the hairs of them are corroded by corrosion: and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of tears: then the ancients required for their cure this operation, and they named it cure with Ense.
And it is that you should instruct the infirm to shave the hairs which are on his forehead. Then make three equally spaced incisions in the forehead according to its length: and let the length of the incision be about two fingers, and one incision be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little from the movement of the eyebrows, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries which are in both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all incisions be the quantity of three joined fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge, or many dried cloths, with which you will dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula of two acute extremities, whose following shape is a form. From the incision which is on the temporal side, up to the second incision: and excavate with it the whole skin, which is between the two incisions, with the sifac, which is above the mouth. Then do that also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this spatula, and introduce into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp cultellus, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And put its sharp side towards the flesh joined with the skin, and its blunt side towards the mouth: and drive it, until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all the vessels, which descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues up to that which appears of the skin.
Then do that in the middle fissure up to the other fissure.
And after a quantity of blood has flowed out equally, press out the places from the clots of coagulated blood.
Then put in all the fissure a dressing from old cloth, and put over them small pieces soaked in wine, and oil, or vinegar. And see that a hot aposteme does not occur.
And on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat it with the ointment of royal unguent, and other things which are used to treat wounds: until it heals.
Chapter Five.
Of the treatment of sharp and flowing discharges from the eyes due to internal conditions of the head.
When sharp, acid, and frequent discharges occur to someone, and you see his eyes weakened, pale, and their appearance already debilitated: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and in the depths of the head there is a sharp, laeding pain, and consequent sneezing: then consider among these accidents, that those matters and discharges do not come, unless from many veins.
And better treatment in them is this. And it is, that you order the weak to scratch their own forehead. Then cut in it one fissure in the middle of the forehead, or another a little through its width, and start with the fissure from the left temple to the right temple: and let the cutting be up to the bone: and stretch out your hand from the muscles of the temples, which move during mastication: until when the bone is laid bare: and you will dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a cloth of old cloth, or with a linen thread. Then bind above with pads: and soak the pads with wine and oil, so that hot aposteme does not occur.
And when you loosen it, and you see that the hot aposteme has already begun to diminish: then it is necessary that you rub the bone, until flesh begins to be born in it.
Then treat it with a regimen of excitation that makes flesh be born: as if you take two parts from wheat flour, and four parts from colophony: and prepare from them an plaster, and administer to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Of the treatment of that which falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the Ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or similar to stone, such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans: or it is a fluxing thing, such as water and vinegar, and their similars: or some animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or a kind of stone from those which do not adhere, nor grow in the ear, expose the Ear to the sun: if therefore you see the stone, then distill into the Ear something from violet oil, or sesame. Then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with condisi, and stop up his nostrils at the approach of sneezing, after you put in the opening of the ear pieces of cloth, or wool, and stretch the ear upwards.
For many times it comes out with this treatment.
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction of it with Gest, that is, finely ground Pizigarolis: whose form is this.
If therefore it comes out with Gest, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine hook, subtly, for a short time.
If therefore it does not come out by that, then make a tube of bronze, and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear deeply, and stop up what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there is no passage except through the tube: then extract with your breath strong attraction.
For it comes out many times with what we have described. If it does not come out in this manner: then take from helkalimbat, or from glue, that is, prepared gluten, with which birds are caught, a small amount: and put it at the end of the staff after you have wrapped around it a cloth decently placed: then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, after you have cleansed the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have described, then proceed to cutting, before there occurs a hot abscess, or spasms.
And the method of cutting is, as in phlebotomy, to make an incision in the head at first, and to extract from him blood according to the measure of his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near its fat in the place pressed upon it: and let the incision be of a crescent shape, until you reach the stone: then remove it with that which is possible for you from instruments.
Then you should sew up the wound with speed and care it until it heals.
What if a thing falls into the ear is from one of the grains, which grow and become inflamed: then administer the extraction of it.
If however it does not pass out for you, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this form.
And administer with it the cutting off of that species of grains which fall into the ear and do not do that when you think that the grain is already moistened by the vapour of the ear until you put many a poultice: then extract them with forceps or with subtle instruments or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of it will relieve.
In the water which enters into the ear, it is necessary that he uses a weak snorting with condiments at first: and now has filled his ear with some old cot: and it lies on that ear, in which there is water. If therefore it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, gentle, and warm them with fire for a little while, and gently put one of them into the opening of his ear: and let him hop on one foot and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the ear. He should not therefore cease to do that with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out thus, that you take from a pomegranate or from a juniper one, and put one end of it into the ear: and burn the other end with fire until most of it is consumed. Then take another juniper and do that many times until all the water comes out: and extract it with a tube according to what was previously said regarding the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that enters into it, if it is small in body, such as a flea, and similar to it, treat it as I have said in the division.
But if it is of large body, which appears to the sense, then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks: and its matter is easier than all those that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment is not effective: then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sun. If, therefore, something appears there of worms, then extract it with forceps, or with subtle hooks.
If however something does not appear there, then take a cannula, whose form is this, narrow below, wide above: and introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the weak part tolerates: then suck with a strong suction. Do it many times, until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey you to come out, then block the surroundings of the cannula with wax, as I have said concerning the stone.
What if they do not come out with what we have said: then administer the distillations which the ancients have already experienced in the infection of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your pouring be what you pour oil and medicine into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver, or of brass, narrow below, in which there is a small hole, wide above.
Let it be therefore that the thing which is in the concavity of the cannula, is made from brass, turned on a lathe. And if you use it, take a rod, and insert cotton into the extremity of its insertion decently: then inject oil, or juice, or what you wish of these medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then insert the rod with cotton from above, and express it by your hand with tempered compression, until the oil is poured into the concavity of the hearing, and the weak part feels it inside: and that which is poured into the ear, should already be warmed with fire for a little while: and beware lest there be something which distills in it cold moisture: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of an injury to the ear.
Sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs not pierced.
And it has already happened to some men that an oblation occurred in the middle of the ear from a wound or flesh born in it.
And this oblation is sometimes made in the depth of the ear's opening, which sight does not reach: and sometimes it happens at the outer opening, and sight reaches it.
The one that happens in the depth of the ear, and which the gaze does not comprehend, is in many cases difficult to cure.
And in the one that sight reaches, you should place the ear of the infirm person in the sun and look into it: then if you see an apparent oblation, open it with a subtle spatulum, whose form is this which follows, let its extremity be where there is a small width, of which a certain part is pointed: and the rest of the spatula be of two smooth sides: so that it does not harm the ear.
If therefore the oblation is from flesh born in the middle of the ear: then hold it with a subtle hook, and cut it with a vehement facility, until all the flesh is removed.
What if the oblation is in the depth of the ear: then take a subtle and smooth stick, warm it with fire for a little while: then put it into the opening of the ear.
If therefore you perceive the oblation with that which the infirm person finds with heaviness of hearing, prepare its opening with facility: and beware, lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put on the ear a poultice according to the quantity of the opening's width, which you wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do that for some days, until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Or take cotton cloth and soak it in rose water and sprinkle powdered tragacanth over it.
If you see the abscess has already formed a postule: then it is necessary to extract the cotton cloth and let it out with another cloth which you will have wrapped in cerate made with rose oil until the hot aposteme subsides: then treat it until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood: then submerge a sponge or cloths in cold water and apply it to the ear: and use the rest of the treatment that stops the flow of blood as described in the treatise on distillations.
Of the treatment for ulcers of the eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These are the ulcers that occur on the eyelids of the eye, when they are moist and when they are dry.
It is necessary therefore to pull them with forceps or with a hook, and to cut them with scissors from their roots. Then apply powdered tragacanth over the place.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a sharp pointed cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the treatment for pimples on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
It often happens on the eyelids something that resembles a pimple in its thickness and hardness, and because of this it is called a Grando: and it is an aggregation of thick mucus on the upper and lower eyelid.
The operation for them is therefore to examine if it is a pimple proceeding from that which appears on the eyelid and moves to every part, and its treatment is easy.
Find then an incision above it in width. Then scratch it on every side with ease, until it is clean. Then hang it with a hook, and cut it off.
If however the cutting away of it is not prepared for you, unless after you have penetrated the eyelid with a small incision, then it harms the weak one in something.
What if the incision is large: then bring it together with a suture: and treat it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no evil will come to you from it. For an ointment restores it, and fleshes it over.
And if a gland is turned to the interior of the ear towards the inner surface, then turn the eyelid, and hang the gland with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it on every side.
What if the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, it does not harm it in anything.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the gland, with salt water: and treat the place with that which fleshes it over, until the weak one is healed.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a tumor which is generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid: and it happens to children mostly: and it presses on their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears flow to them, and on account of that you see them constantly wiping their faces, and they sleep with them, and their eyelids are humid under their eyebrows, which inflammation has already covered: and a visible sign of Axirnath is an elevation to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of its operation is that the weak person places their head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare on it ligatures, and make from that ligature a circle according to the quantity that the Axirnath contains on all sides. Then put it over it, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that humidity with a spatula making an incision through the width, and let not be an incision greater than what is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you cut the skin entirely, until you reach the Axirnath, for in many dispositions the Axirnath proceeds from an incision according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it therefore with a cloth, which you had inserted between your fingers to the exterior, and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it is dispersed: and beware, lest you put in the incision, so that you do not reach with the spatula to the eye, and harm it.
If however the Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you should put a little into the incision with ease, until the Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and put them on the place, and bind it with bandages.
And there are men who bruise salt, and put it in the concavity of the incision, so that it melts what remains of that humidity.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however a hot abscess forms in the place, then treat it with cooling plasters, until it is healed.
Of the modes of weakness of the eye, that is, when the eyelids become soft, whence it happens that it protrudes as it should not.
Chapter XI
When additional hairs are born in the eyelids of the eye beyond the normal hair growth, and they become long: then they harm the eye, and cause various ailments, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and a white spot, until it becomes a cause for destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir said that the cure of the eye is by four methods. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with a sharp medicine, as has been mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization. Or Ataxmir cures by incision and suture. Or with a needle, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the weak one on your lap. Then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is thus turned back, it is good. And if not: insert the needle into it, where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs are born: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it back with the thread.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid under the additional hairs with the spatula incident from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct.
Then extract the thread, and put under the eyelid a small dust from cotton, or wool: then mark on top of the eyelid with ink, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Truly it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: because it is already differentiated among men.
For there are some in whom it is necessary that a large quantity be cut from the eyelid, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find above the two lines that you marked, and start from the larger tear duct up to the smaller tear duct, and let there be a single incision near the natural hairs, as is the thickness of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scratch out the whole thing. Then bring together with a suture the two lips, with a needle and thread of fine wool: and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what overflows from the threads above the two eyebrows, with certain things that irritate, if you want to do that: and if not, do not trouble.
Then leave the suture and threads in place for three days, or four: afterwards attend to it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and treat it with that which dries and tightens. For the eyelid is elevated at the time of the wound's sigillation and its closure: but the future one will be better.
This method of healing was taught by the ancient ones of Ataxmir.
But truly in it is solicitude for the weak, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method exists in Ataxmir also: and it is to mark on the eyelid a figure that is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks, according to this shape that follows, then cut away what overflows with small forceps, according to this shape, with equality of incisions.
If however it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not suffice: then take a needle in which there is a thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and a second thread near the smaller tear duct: and bring together between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then elevate your hand to an equal elevation and elevate the skin over which the knot is marked, as we have described.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and cure it, until it heals.
If a tumor or an aposteme occurs at your incision or your fissure: but seat that tumor with a plaster, and similar things, from sitting ointments.
And when the eyelids also happen to convert their hairs.
It is necessary therefore that you use what we have said in the incision: but the suture of both is more artificial. On the treatment of ataxmy with dogs.
And it is, that you convert the eyelid, and split the fissure which is within, according to what I have narrated. Then skillfully make two rods, or two thin sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula: and you have already made an incision at the extremities of both from both parts where you hold the threads.
Then bring together both with subtlety over that which exceeds from the eyelid of the eye, and tie the two rods from both parts with a strong ligature, and leave it for some days. For the constricted skin will die, and become black, and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
If therefore it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then cure it, until it heals.
When therefore it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated: and the hairs do not puncture.
And this is the form of the two rods, which you will make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
Chapter 12.
On the elevation of puncturing hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation on it is to take a thin needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, thinly. Then you will gather its extremities, and tie each node with a subtle knot: and the length of the threads is one palm.
Then compose on the Alinxotati another subtle thread below it briefly, and tie its extremities if you wish.
Then the weak one will place his head in your lap, and it should be near the sun as it declares the operation: since it is a subtle operation, or a minute one.
Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you extract from above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to the thread of the Alinxotati: and insert into the Alinxotati that hair: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it, until the hair goes out with the Alinxotati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If the Alinxotati is pulled and the hair does not go out with it: pull the Alinxotati downwards, with the thread that you composed in it, until the Alinxotati goes out from the upper opening, and you see it with the sight of the eye: then you pull the Alinxotati, and the thread: and extract both, and close the eye: and keep it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh is born above it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from the natural hairs, and raise it with that: or leave it until it grows out after a space, and then raise it.
Chapter 13.
When this affliction occurs to the eye, it is called Leporina by Alxatrati.
And this Alxatrati is either a natural or an accidental one.
An accidental one is made from the consolidation of a wound, or from a cut, or from a cauterization, and similar things to these.
And the method of treatment for it is that you find that consolidation and that you separate its lips and that you put between them a linen pad, and bind it, until it heals.
And it is not fitting to use in the treatment of it things which dry and constrict, for if you do that, the Alxatrati returns worse than it was; but rather use in it things which soften, such as fenugreek: and apply with water, in which the althea has been cooked, linseed: and anoint with dyaquilon, which has been liquefied with some oil: and wrap with that linen, and treat with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you strive with all ingenuity, that it not consolidate, according to the shape which it was initially.
And this operation which we have spoken of, is not but a certain correction of the Alxatrati, so that the shape of the place does not return according to what it was entirely.
On the treatment of Alxatrati which occurs on the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkle or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is what is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one is made from a wound, or a tear, or a cauterization, and similar things to these.
And the method of operation for it is that you take a needle, on which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread passes through both extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with a needle, and cut it with a spatula on the side. If then the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is proper, it is good.
And if not, take a rasp, and put it in the cleft, and convert the eyelid with it: and find two clefts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two clefts be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and an angle is formed from them: until when they are gathered this figure is formed, and it is the letter lauda in Greek.
Then remove that flesh to the amount which is its sharp lower side from that which follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts, and sew it with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with what we have said, with softening medicines and bandages, until they heal.
And if a crust forms from the cleft and suture or burn, then it is necessary that you find a flat cleft under the hair of the eyelids, also according to what has happened previously. Then separate between the two lips with a bandage, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the discussion on the treatment of Alxatrati, when it is above or below, is that it runs in this operation, according to what is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
It itself is of many diversities in form: and the prudent artificer prepares his skill with whatever method is possible for him, so that he makes it return to the natural figure, or near it, and the infirmity itself, according to what is convenient for him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many men, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whiteness of the eye, and it prevents the same from its natural operations.
Therefore you should insert the extremity of the spatula under the eyelid and raise it up, or stretch it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp at the point of the incision, but rather dull for a short time: so that the weak one is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and cuts the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you excise the adhesion with facility, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Pour then into the eye salty water, with water to wash it: or instill into it from a syringe made thus, from dissolved lye with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen thread: and put over the eye a woolen cloth soaked in the whiteness of the eye: and use it for three days with dressings, until it is healed.
On the incision of the nail and the elevation of the flesh of the tear ducts.
Chapter 16.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is nerveless: and is similar to a subtle, hard callus. Or it is not nerveless, similar to the humidity of frozen white matter: which when it touches iron, or a hook tries to seize it, it is cut off, and the hook does not stick to it.
And both types do not begin except from the larger tear duct, until which it goes gradually, until it covers the use, and prevents the light, and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operating on it is: that the weak person should put his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with the pincers of a pair of forceps, and extend it upwards. Then take a needle, and insert in it a horse hair or an ox hair, or a cow hair: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a little while, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it upwards: and scrape with the thread the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were to sew it with the thread up to its posterior.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula, or with small forceps: and remove the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that it does not happen from the cutting that there is a frequent flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended with pincers alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then let it be scraped with a gentle spatula, of which this is the shape.
And beware, lest the spatula touch the cornial tunic, and there happen to it a rupture, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the incision, cast into the eye something of ground salt, or made from zinc oxide, and leave it until another day. Then treat it with what is necessary, until it is healed.
For if the nail is not nerotic, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a pincer be fixed in it, then this type of nail is often treated with medicines, and healed as I have described in the division.
For if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the weak person, and take a subtle, gentle, and fine-pointed spatula, according to this shape. And scratch the nail from above with subtle scraping. What if you see that it itself becomes rarefied and broken, and the scraping impresses on it, then distill from your hour on the eye of what has been done with lye or with red or with rough salt: and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation over it, until all of it is removed. Unless there is a hot abscess in your eye to the contrary: then cease that, and cure the abscess, until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation over it with scraping, until it is healed.
The flesh of the tear duct, if it harms the eye with great annoyance, should be suspended with a hook, and a portion of it cut away: and let not the cutting be ultimate, so that the flow of tears is not interrupted.
Then pour into the tear duct either red orpiment, or made from lime, until it is healed.
On the incision of the cataract, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
There is born in certain eyes of men a red flesh, composed or overlaid, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps converts the eyelids to the outside: and it is like the rose of the pomegranate.
And the operation for it is also that the weak one places his head on your lap. Then open his eyes, and collect all that flesh with hooks converging to it: and hold it with one forceps or tongs.
Then cut the flesh first, until the whole of it is finished with the incision. And beware of the eye, so that you do not harm it during the operation: and let your incision be what you cut with, or with the spatula, which we described in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which the hazel is collected, according to the form it will take after this chapter.
When the wound is completely healed and all the alguardenici has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt or distill into it red powder, and similar things from corrosive medicines, and put on top of the eye a poultice made with egg white.
If some alguardenici remains and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot aposteme: then leave the eye, and cure it with what settles the aposteme.
Then repeat over it with the operation until it is healed.
And do likewise for the flesh that grows on the eye from this condition.
However, it is necessary that you should omit the cure of the whole weak eye from natural or accidental cause, by operating with iron: and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
On the collection of pus from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus is a red vein that forms over the eye, and prevents the sight from performing its function: and weakens the eye with the passage of time.
It is necessary therefore for you first to consider if the eye in which there is pus, is strong and does not have any sickness except for the pus: then collect its pus.
And it is that you should instruct the weak person to put their head on your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your wisdom: and let the hook be subtle for duplication, according to this shape, or let there be two hooks graduated on one body, according to this shape.
Then collect those veins with subtle forceps with subtlety, and remove the blood hour after hour, until you see that the veins are removed from the eye, and dissolved: and beware lest you damage the eye with the extremities of the spatula.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and you should be firm in your operation indeed: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have excavated, then pour into the eye a green or red liquid: so that its acidity eats away what remains of the cataract.
If however it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for some days, until the pain is soothed: and it is secured from a hot abscess: then repeat over it the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Of the reduction of the nose to its proper shape.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call it Arissat's fistula, which you will treat with a cautery, or with a medicine of burning acid, according to what its description has previously stated.
And if it does not heal, then there is no ingenuity in it: unless you find a collection of pus above the abscess at its birth, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone is exposed.
When therefore the bone is exposed, and you see in it a corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument, whose form is this.
And it is called a head scraper.
Let it be made from Indian iron, and let its head be round like a grindstone, which is dotted with the dotting of a file, or the dotting of a fine awl: and place it over the corrupted place of the bone.
Then turn it between your fingers, and you press your hand for a little while, until you know that the corruption has already been scraped: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with medicines of contracting and astringent qualities.
If the place is consolidated, and flesh grows in it, and the flow of blood is stopped: and it remains for forty days, and is not renewed, and is not complicated, and no accident occurs in it: then you should know that it has already healed.
And if not, then there is no ingenuity in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this method.
And it is, that you scrape the bone with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is scraped, then take an instrument according to this method, let it be a metal extremity, triangular: and its wood be a pyramid extended up to the extremity, as you see.
Then put that on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and stretch out your hand from the eye a little. Then turn your hand with the instrument, until it penetrates the bone, and the weaker one feels it: by which he finds the wind to exit from it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
Then restore the place with medicines that dry and constrict, as I have taught you.
When therefore flesh grows, and the place becomes hardened: then the matter that was flowing to the outside, returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter on the weaker one.
On the reduction of the prominence of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the Eye protrudes with its entire mass, and no harm occurs to the sight, nor diminution: then it is necessary that you release the weaker one: then you bleed it: afterwards you put cups on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then put on the Eye an ointment that is made from acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarcocolla. Then bind the Eye above with a plaster with many powders.
And the method of bandages is: that you take soft cloths, many, and double every cloth from them over four; make many of them; then put them one on top of another, a second according to the quantity which the Eye needs; then tie over them with a hard cloth tightly bound.
And repeat the applications with suction without scarification.
Then remove the bandages and loosen the eye by day and by night.
If however the ligament is again softened, then it is necessary that it be tied much; then remove the ligament after a day and a night, as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye has already returned to its own tunics, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, and bandages, and binding, and applications, until it is healed.
On the incision of the conjunctiva.
Chapter 21.
When there occurs a disruption in the conjunctiva, then it protrudes and proceeds out of the eyelids like a grain of the conjunctiva, and the form of the man is disfigured because of that, and one must make an incision on it: then the operation on it is, according to what I relate; and it is, that you insert the needle at the root of the conjunctiva from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread on the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate; and let the first needle remain according to its own disposition.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the conjunctiva around the needle; and tie it very tightly.
Then pull out the needle, and put over the eye a soft wool on the white of the eyeball; and leave it there until the thread falls away with the conjunctiva.
Then treat the eye with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And when a suture is tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth, until the eye adds great prominence.
Then it is perforated with a subtle spatula, which penetrates to the depth of the eye, and the white humidity flows out, and the eye descends, and immediately enters: then it is tightened, until it is healed.
On the treatment of Cataracts.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called Alcomnati, is not but a cloudiness, which gathers in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is, that you make the weak person sit on a prepared seat, or a directed one.
Then take the head of it with your hands on both sides, and move it, until you see the cloudiness penetrate to the lower parts of the eyes. Then it is fixed, and does not descend, and the light is freed: and the weak person sees things as he used to see: and if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
If however the descent of the cloudiness is not prepared with what we have said, then make the weak person sit between your hands. Then take a subtle spatula, and probe with it above the corneal membrane slightly at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the corona, until the cloudiness comes out.
When it comes out, then instill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey: then let it be treated with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
On the treatment of the water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have already spoken of the type of water in division, and what is suitable for perforating, as the discourse declares and explains, then take that same thing according to health.
Then you should make the weak person sit between your hands in a square shape, opposite the light, near the torch: and bind his healthy eye, and pull it strongly: then with your right hand touch the eyelid of his eye, if the eye that has water is the left eye: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then take with your right hand the cotton, if the eye is the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right.
Then place the tip of the cotton near the crown through the thickness of the radius in the same white part of the eye visible with a lesser tear duct: then push the cotton with force: and you rotate it with your hand, until it penetrates into the white of the eye: and you feel that the cotton has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the length of the journey of the cotton to the depth be the length of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and this is the crown of the eye. For you will see it in the same pupil of the vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea.
Then put the cotton to the place where the water is. Then press it downwards one after another.
If then the water descends at once, then the weak person sees that thing above which he opens his vision at once, and the cotton in his eye.
Then rest a little. If then the water descends, then put it down secondly, except that the cotton goes out.
When it is thus fixed, and does not ascend: then extract the cotton with ease: and you rotate your hand little by little.
Then dissolve in the water something from clear rock salt: and wash the eye with it. Then put outside the eye the whole poultice, or a cloth soaked in rose oil, and the whites of the eye: and tie it with that to the healthy eye.
We, however, and those who are of our time, put on top a layer of beaten cumin with the whites of the eye.
What if the magda does not penetrate to the entrance of the eye on account of its hardness, because it is from humans, whose eye is very hard: then you should take a spatula, which is called Alberid, this being its form.
Make a perforation with it therefore to the conjunctiva itself as much as possible, and do not put your hand in the opening: and it is not but that you make a way to the magda place subtly.
Then insert the magda, according to what we have said.
And at the completion of your operation, prepare for the weak person a dormitory decently made, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark house: and prohibit him from all movements, and from coughing: and give him food that soothes his nature: and let him not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then loosen it in that dark house, and try his vision: and make him see things. Then put back the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do that at the time of curing, or immediately after the incision: but rather, it is necessary to avoid that: because water ascends quickly through vehement sight.
If however a hot apostema occurs: then it is necessary to release the eye before the seventh: and treat it with that which calms the apostema, until it is calmed: then free its vision, and put on its face an oral remedy which regulates its vision for some days, it being in that dark house.
Then he should go out from the house gradually and return to his own home.
And know that a disciple is not excused from witnessing several times on the operation for then he will be confident over the procedure.
And now indeed there has come to us one of them who are from Alayrach, who said that a perforated magdan was made in Alayrach through which water is sucked.
For I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that: nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of types from a magda, so that one who is ignorant of them will stand upon them.
Let them be made from their own copper: and let their extremities be with the same subtlety triangular, and the extremities pointed.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
Sometimes there are born in the nose diverse fleshes added to it, among which there is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet: and from it is flesh cancerous, stone-like, of dark color: and from it is what is flesh soft, not of dark color.
In the one therefore which is from these fleshes soft, not deceptive, nor cancerous, you should make the weak one sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and thrust a hook into those fleshes: then draw them to the outside, and cut what you have grasped of them with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh has now been removed.
What if something remains of it whose removal is not possible: then scrape that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains of it. If however the blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then apply to it what is necessary: or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cauterize him quickly, until the blood is cut off, and all the flesh is removed.
Then vinegar and water, or wine, should be thrown into the nose after the incision. If however the nose opens, and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then know that he is already healthy.
If however the moisture does not penetrate according to what is necessary, then know that there is rotten flesh inside it in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then therefore it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen which has some thickness, and knots on it many knots: and put between each knot the quantity of a finger, or less: and let the weak one push, so that he puts one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or with what is possible for him after he made something similar to adzer: and pull his smelling thing, until it reaches up to the caassum, and comes out above his throat.
And many times indeed do boys similar to this in schools of Atto: and it is an easy thing for one who wants to.
Then put the two ends of the thread, one end which comes out above the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then as a servant cut the flesh with the sawing of the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already caught with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread: and put into the nose after wiping away the blood a linen cloth which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then put at the end of the thing a tin pipe into the nose, for some days, until it is healed.
If it needs a cure which will dry it out, use that.
For making a head purging, with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it of silver or of brass: which should be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you want to make a closed pipe, like a reed.
And the shell-like instrument for making a head purging, should be full, and uncovered: which should have a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat oil in it, or whatever you want from juices, and flowing things.
Chapter 25.
A polyp often grows at the end of the nose and increases and grows with time until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of that, it is necessary to remove it at the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it. Then put on the place a cautery or a medicine that burns which stands in place of it.
If the cutting of it is delayed until it becomes large, then consider if it is stony, hard, of a dark color, of little feeling: then do not touch it with iron: because it is a cancerous aposteme.
For I have often seen that he who cut a bad aposteme, and it happened from it a great evil to the man who had it.
And if the aposteme is of a soft touch, not of a dark color, and you see that cutting is possible in all of it, then evacuate the weak part, and cut it without fear, without anxiety: and treat the place with what dries and constricts, until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
We know that when there is a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, the operation is not very reliable, except in certain men.
It is necessary therefore when anything of that sort happens to someone, that you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then bring the lips of the wound together with a suture, afterwards treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of the separation are already separated, and each part has become healthy, then it is necessary that you should scratch out every part from its own skin until it becomes bloody. Then bring the two lips together with a suture, and tie them, and powder over it the blood of dragon, and ground frankincense: and put over the powders a piece of Diafiac plaster, or some other of the consolidating plasters: and leave it tied for two days, or three. Then untie it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads come apart by themselves. Then treat it with an ointment, until it heals.
The method of the suture is that you bring together the separation of continuity, either with needles, as we have described in the suture of the belly: or bring together the separation with a thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of knots of the lips.
Many men have lumps occurring inside their lips, hard excrescences like grains of herb, and some of them are small and others large.
Therefore it is necessary that you should turn back the lip, and find the lump, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it on every side.
Then fill the place after the incision with a powdered zeolite, until blood is stanched.
Then let it be wrapped with vinegar, and the place where there is a styptic be treated with it, until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
On the cutting of the flesh born above the gum.
Frequently there grows above the gum a flesh that the ancients call bullock or alveus, but which we name "addiat".
It is necessary therefore that you suspend it with a hook, or that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
Then put on the place zeeg powder crushed, or other powders styptic and astringent.
For if that flesh returns after the treatment, for it often returns, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
On the scraping of teeth with iron.
Sometimes there collect on the surfaces of teeth from the inside and outside part, and between the gums rough, foul, and blackened cortices, and sometimes they become stained, and yellow, and green, until corruption comes from that to the gum, and the teeth become foul through it.
It is necessary therefore that you make the weak person sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape the molar and tooth, in which there appear to you rough cortices, and things similar to sand: until nothing of them remains, and do likewise with the blackness, and greenness, and yellowness, and other things until they are clean.
If therefore that which is in them from the beginning of the scraping is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the scraping over them on one day, and on a second, and on a third, until at last there comes a stop to it in that which you use.
And you should know that the tooth requires razors of diverse forms and many figures, according to which your operation is prepared: namely, that the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors should be prepared by you, which you will use.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of toothache.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth for its pain with all ingenuity, and delay in extracting it. For it is not that the vicinity of the tooth supplies it when it is extracted: since it is a subtle substance: until when there is no excuse for extracting it, then it is necessary when the weak one is forced to extract it, so that it is strengthened and certified by you, the aching tooth.
For often the pain deceives the weak person, and he thinks it is in a sound tooth and extracts it: then the pain does not go away, until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen that from the operation of bloodletting practitioners.
When therefore the aching tooth is certified by you itself, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until the gum is loosened on all sides: then move it with your fingers or with subtle forceps at first little by little, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in it, with good positioning, and hold the weak head between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to straightness, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments, and insert it under the tooth from all sides with ease, and constrain its movement, as you did at first.
If the dense is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a cloth and tie it with a thin thread of a radius, so that it does not break at the time of your constriction on it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you act carefully with scarification around the gum on all sides abundantly.
And guard your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and it returns over the weakness from that evil which is greater than its pain at first.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness over the eradication of it, beyond what we have administered.
For they often cause great weaknesses to come upon men, which are difficult to break, and all the roots of it remain, or some of them: or so that they extract it with certain bones of the jaw: as we have often testified to that.
Then let it be glued after the eradication of it with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
What if a flow of blood happens from the places (for it often happens) then take something of gum and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if the gum does not adhere to you.
The shape of the thin forceps which move the dense at first, should be of long extremities, short handles, thick, so that they do not double when pressed with them on a tooth: they should be as you see of thick handles, until when you squeeze with them, they do not release themselves, nor double: of short extremities, and let them be made from iron or wrought and properly made iron, with straight extremities: and in their extremities let there be teeth, some of which enter into others, and squeeze with a decent constriction, strongly.
And when the extremities are formed in the shape of a parrot's beak, which is called ciconia, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
On the eradication of teeth, and the extraction of fractured jaw bones.
When something remains after the eradication of a tooth that breaks, then it is necessary to put a cloth soaked in butter on the spot for one or two days, until the area softens: then insert into it forceps or tongs: whose extremities are similar to a parrot's beak which is called ciconia. This form indeed is of the forceps.
Let their extremities be made like file or like toothpicks.
If then it does not come out for you with these forceps, then it is necessary that you dissecet above the root and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called a small lever, whose shape is this.
Let its extremity be short, somewhat thick: and let it not be fragile, so that it does not break.
If then the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to use with these other instruments whose shapes are these.
The shape of the first one has a triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness.
The shape of the triangular extremity is slender.
And with other instruments and iron tools which preceded in the rasping of teeth.
And also use with this instrument which is similar to a large hook, of this shape, triangular twisted extremity, in which there is a certain thickness, so that it does not break: and let it not be fragile.
And know that the instruments of teeth are many: and similarly the rest of the instruments are not accounted for, and the skilled artisan, subtle in his art, finds by himself the instrument, according to which he signifies to himself the operation and the difficulties.
Since there are pains for which the ancients did not mention an instrument, because of the diversity of their species.
If the bone is broken from the jaw or from other bones of the mouth, or becomes putrid: then probe over it in its place with that which suits it from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and help with a gest, whose form is this.
Let there be in it something of thickness little by little, so that it may be tightened, or the bone may be held with it, and it does not flee and is steady, until the bone goes out: and restore the place with medicines suitable to it.
If however there is rottenness in the bone, then scrape the bone itself from its rottenness, and cure it, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the sawing of prominent teeth above the others.
When teeth do not protrude according to their natural course, a foul shape is made by it: and especially when this happens in women, and girls, namely those with venereal ailments.
It is necessary therefore that you consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth, and does not have a place, or it is possible for its sawing, nor its smoothing: then extract it: and if it is connected to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small beak, and is made from Indian iron, of sharp extremity, strongly.
And let your cutting be that which you cut with it for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that another of the teeth is not disturbed.
If however it is prominent and exposed for its smoothing: then smooth it with a file made from Indian iron, whose form is this.
Let it be entirely made from Indian iron, and its handle smaller by a few points, strongly: like a file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is smoothed little by little over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls: then clean it, and finally scrape it with certain scrapers.
What if it is dense, from which a part will be broken and it injures the tongue: then it is necessary to smooth it also, until the roughness of that breaking is removed, and it is made even, and flattened, and does not injure the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
Chapter 33.
Of the gold wire filling of teeth.
When the front teeth undergo a concussion and commotion from a blow or a fall: and the weak one cannot chew on what he eats so that it does not fall: and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and the treatment was not effective: then the idea for them is to be fastened with a gold wire: because silver turns green and putrefies after days: but gold never changes.
And let the thread be moderate in fineness and thickness according to the quantity that it can hold between the teeth.
And the form of the filling is that you take the thread and insert double its length between two healthy teeth: then weave with both ends of the thread between the moved teeth, whether it is one or several, until you come with the web to a healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving until the part from which you began: and pull your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not moved forward: and let your constriction by which you tighten the thread be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not protrude.
Then cut the overflowing ends of the thread with scissors: and gather both, and shape them with forceps: and hide them between a healthy tooth and a moved tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue: then let it be thus tightened while it remains.
If however it becomes loose or is cut, tighten them with another thread, and it will stand with that for the whole time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of the filling of two healthy teeth, and two moved teeth, as you see.
And when it happens that one or two teeth fall out after the removal of each and they are retained in their places as we have described, and remain; and this is not done except by a skilled and experienced artisan.
And when something is fitted from the bones of the jaw and made into the shape of a tooth, and put in the place where the tooth was lost and tied as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the weak one on your lap, and elevate their tongue: then cut that nervous ligament across its width, until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
What if there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound: then put a hook into it, and cut across its width, until you cut the ligament and the knot is loosened.
And beware, lest there be a fissure in the depth of the flesh, and you cut the artery there, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then let the area of the incision be colluted with rose water, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then put under the tongue a plaster of flax, which the weak one should hold all night, so that it does not consolidate again.
If however there occurs a flow of blood, then put on the place powdered gum. If the blood overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a lenitive cauter, which is suitable for it: then treat it with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue an aposteme resembling a small frog, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and perhaps grows to such an extent that it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the mouth of the invalid before you, and examine the aposteme.
If you see that it is of a dark or black color, and hard, and the invalid has lost sensation in it, then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
And if it inclines to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then apply a hook to it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and free it from every part. What if blood gushes out during your operation, then put over it pounded alum, until the bleeding stops: then return to your operation, until you extract it with its appendage.
Then let it be cleansed with vinegar and salt: and treat it with the rest of the treatment suitable for that, until it is healed.
On the cure of an aposteme of two tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes there occur in the throat two glands, that is, tonsils, which resemble two almonds, which occur at the back of the throat: and are called two Amigdalae: which when you treat with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard aposteme, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color, and its root is thick, then do not touch it with iron either, fearing a flow of blood, but rather leave it alone until it matures. And then either you will perforate it or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is subtle: then it should be cut.
And the operation on it is, that you consider before its operation, if the apostema of its tumor has completed quiet heat, or is diminished by some diminution: then make the weak sit in front of the sun, and its head be in your bosom: and open its mouth, and the servant receives between his hands, and presses its tongue below with an instrument, which has this form.
Let it be made from silver, or copper, which is subtle like a knife.
When I press the tongue with it, and the tumor is shown to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and extract it to the exterior as much as you can, except that you draw with it something from the tunics.
Then cut it with an instrument, which has this form that follows. It is assimilated to forceps: nevertheless its extremities are curved, so that the orifice of each of them is directly opposite the other's point: hence take care that it be made from iron or tempered steel.
If however this instrument is not at hand, then cut it with a spatula, which has this form. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one tonsil, cut the other according to this same species of cutting.
Then after the cutting, let the weak person gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If however there happens to him a flow of blood, let him gargle with water in which the barks of pomegranates have been boiled: or leaves of myrtle, and similar things from astringents, until the flow of blood is stopped: then take care of him, until he is healed.
And whenever abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them therefore equally as I have said in the cutting of the two tonsils.
And I indeed have already treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat, which was pulling towards the trachea, with little sensation, which had almost closed her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and it had already forbidden her both food and water: and she would have reached death, if she had remained one day or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had sent out two branches, until they went out above the two nostrils.
I proceeded therefore with haste, and I fixed a hook on one of them. Then I pulled it, and a large portion was pulled out from it.
Then I cut it off, where it was grasped coming out of the nostril.
Then I did to it what had come out of the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess: then I cut off from it a part of it, and there did not flow out from it except a little blood: therefore the throat of the woman was cured, and she began at once to drink water, then she took some food.
I did not therefore cease to cut into that abscess many times for a long time: and the abscess was succeeding in the place of what I had cut, until it was prolonged too much and with it.
I heated therefore, and cauterized the abscess in the throat.
It stood therefore from increasing: then I walked away from the place, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
Of the cutting of the abscess of the uvula.
Chapter 37.
When the cold descends to the gum and becomes an abscess and is long: then it itself is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it itself is called a gum boil.
When it is treated with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work: and you see that the hot abscess has quieted from it, and is subtle: then it is necessary to cut it.
And that which is gathered from it round, and is not in length, and is bloody, or of a dark reddish color, or black, and has no sensation: then it is necessary to avoid cutting it. For there is fear regarding the weak place.
It is necessary therefore when you see it according to the measure which I spoke of from its whiteness, and its length, that you make the weak one sit before the sun: and press its tongue with an instrument, whose description has preceded: then fix a hook in the gum, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have spoken of in the cutting of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it, except that which is added beyond the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting use that which we have described in the cutting of the two tonsils: and treat it, until it is healed.
If however the weak one trembles from the cutting: then it is necessary that you use skill in cauterizing it without fear and trembling.
And the method of cauterization on it is not, except with sharp water: and it is, that you put the head of the weak one in your lap. Then press its tongue with the instrument which we mentioned. Then take from the water which I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with lime that is not extinguished, and put it not thick, nor subtle, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, whose form is this.
Let the extremities of it in which the medicine is placed be hollow, like the hollow of a spoon.
And put the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself: and let the weak person be lying on their side, so that saliva runs out of their mouth from the inward medicine, so that nothing from it descends to their throat, and harms them.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you apply it to the wound for the first time in the quantity of a half hour, until you see that it is already blackened and the biting of the medicine has sat.
And if you want to take a piece of cloth, and wrap it around the extremity of the radius, and dip the cloth in medicine, and insert the radius with the cloth into the tube above, until the cloth adheres to the wound.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound. Then leave it alone: for it will dry out and fall off after three days, or four.
What if you judge that you should repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization cleanse around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and purify what is around it from the medicine: and wash with cold water.
And let it be treated outwardly with poultices, and inwardly with gargles, until it is healed.
This species of cure is healthier than incision and less frightening.
And sometimes the wound is treated with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision: for it is treated with fumigation, in this manner. Take calamentum, and hyssopum, and origanum, and rue, and ssacah, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar things from the herbs: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil: and let the pot be covered with a decent lute: and let there be in the middle of the pot an opening, over which an instrument concave is placed according to this method.
Let it be made from silver, or bronze: and the extremity is introduced, in which there is a grain, into the mouth of the infirm, until the vapor ascends to the palate over the tube, until the palate becomes very obscured.
Then let it be rubbed repeatedly over the same spot, until it is scratched.
And beware, lest you make this cure at the beginning of the appearance of the apostema. For a plaster adds to the apostema: and it is not necessary that you do that unless at the decline of the heat of the apostema.
If however this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane, and place the bark of an oak on the extremity of it: so that the mouth of the infirm does not become scorched: for the bark of the oak prevents the vapor from scorching the mouth: and this is from good cure with health.
Of the extraction of thorns, and bones from the jaw.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Many times a bone, or a fishbone, or something else sticks to the throat.
It is necessary therefore that you extract what of them is apparent on which the sight falls, after you press the tongue with an instrument at the seat, and it is revealed to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the infirm vomit before it is digested by the foods in the stomach. For a foreign body will come out through vomiting.
Or let the weak person swallow a piece of nap, or a root of lettuce, or let him swallow a small piece of dry bread: or let him take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it with a thread, then swallow it. When therefore it reaches the place where are the spine or bone, and is extracted, then it comes out.
If it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than a Rod a little, and at its end let there be a curvature, which it introduces into the throat with ease: and let it have its head elevated upwards.
And let it beware of the touch of its epiglottis, so that coughing does not happen to it, and let it push the mouth, or bone, or let the doctor introduce it with his hand.
But what the weak person introduces, this is better: on account of his knowledge of the place of the annexed thing: and he pushes downwards, or pulls his hand with an instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it comes out.
On the extraction of a bloodsucking creature.
Chapter 39.
When a bloodsucking creature is treated with what I said in the division on curation with medicines, and it does not work, then consider in the throat of the weak person before the sun, or at the sun after you press his tongue with an instrument that I have described to you.
If your sight then falls upon the bloodsucking creature, extract it with a small hook, or with delicate fingers.
What if it is not possible with these: then take a concave tube, and introduce it into the throat of the weak person until near the throat: then introduce into the concavity of the tube ignited iron with fire. Let him do that many times, and let the weak man abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a full drink of cold water, and open his mouth in it, and let him spit out the water, and not swallow anything of it, and let him move the water with one hand after another. For a leech indeed falls when it feels the water.
If however it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the weak person with cemephis, or with ase with an instrument that I described for fumigating the womb.
Do that many times, because it itself will fall.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot, in which there are burning prunes of a womb with fire, and the pot is covered with a cover, in whose middle there is a hole, and let the end of the instrument be placed in that hole.
Then throw in the fumigation, and let the weak person put his mouth on the end of the cannula, and let him close his mouth, so that the fumigation does not come out, until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall.
Because if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the weak person endure thirst, and eat salty things, and garlic, and not drink water.
It is necessary therefore that it comes out with this treatment.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat, when it falls onto the same sight.
It is similar to forceps, as you see, except that it has this curvature which is introduced into the throat. And its end is similar to a bird's beak, which is called cicoria, in which there is roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
On the opening of abscesses and their cutting and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of many modes, according to which the treatment of them is remembered, namely one, and one in this book: and they are diverse in the perforation of them, and their cutting from two modes.
Of which one is from the species of abscesses in itself, and that which it comprises of humors.
And the second mode is because of the places, in which it happens in the body.
For an abscess happening on the head is different from an abscess happening on the anus: and an abscess happening in a fleshy place is different from an abscess happening on the joints: and each of them has its own judgment from the operation.
And of the abscesses there are some which should not be perforated, unless after the maturation of the pus in them and its completion: and of them there are some which should be perforated while they are raw and do not mature according to completion.
Such as abscesses that are near the joints.
For when an abscess happens near a joint and its existence is prolonged until the putrefaction of what is in its surroundings perhaps corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, which is a cause of more likely contraction of that member.
Or it is an abscess near a principal member: for if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will harm either that or through that principal member.
Or it is near the anus, perforate it therefore while it is immature: and it is not necessary to perforate a raw abscess, of incomplete digestion, unless that which is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or become in its termination what does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the apostema, which has matured according to its completion: and it is at the sedation of pain, the recession of fever, and the diminution of redness, and pulsation, and the acuteness of the head of the apostema: and other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower place of the apostema, and of the more prominent elevation: and let the perforation be going in the length of the body, if the apostemata are in the parts of the hands and feet, and the places of the armpits, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and at last in all equal places, to which there is not a reflexion.
In those however which are reflected, let it go with the perforation according to that membrane.
When the apostema is in fleshy places, then it is better that you omit its perforation, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to its completion.
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus is prolonged from it, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps the lips of it will become hardened, and its depth.
And some apostemata are perforated according to the width of the body, by necessity: or according to that which the membrane needs.
And it is necessary that you administer in small apostemata a small perforation, and in large apostemata a large perforation: or many sections by similarity of the magnitude of the apostema.
And there are of the apostemata, in which it is necessary that the skin be concave: and let it be cut when already it has been made like a cloth, and it has been made at the end, which already is dead: as that which happens to many, such as buboes and dubelles.
And of them there are those which cut with a section having three angles. And from them is that from which an incision is made as the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like an abscess in the groin.
And from them are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, and similar to them from the incisions.
That one indeed which has no head, as are lenient superficial abscesses, ought to be pierced by a superficial piercing, or only a flat one.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is thick, and has already collected much purulent matter, and you pierce it, that you not hurry and extract all the pus at that hour: but rather extract a part of it from it. Then stop up the abscess until another day. Then extract something from the pus again.
Do that many times according to the gradation, until it goes out: especially if he is weak and of little strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit man: for the vital spirit is often resolved from the animal with the going out of pus: and perhaps the weak person dies, and you do not perceive.
Beware therefore this chapter with great caution.
And after your piercing, by which you pierce the abscesses, it is necessary that you cleanse the wound: and take care. If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat incision, then administer dressings made from linen, or old cloth. And if the abscess is large, and there are many openings of the piercing, it is necessary then that you insert a dressing into every opening, until they reach the bottom.
And if you have cut away a part of the skin in the abscess, or have hollowed it out around: then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth, or as when a fabric is woven, or wool from linen without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then anoint it, and treat it with what is necessary from the ointment, until it is healed.
And if there occurs a flow of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which the cloth is soaked in them: and you put it on the place of the flow of blood many times.
And if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you administer a treatment and a cure and powders, which I have described in many places of this our book, and from division.
And if it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves: then it is necessary that you pour in powders with wine, and hot oil: and you put them on the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you put powders soaked in water, and oil, or wine and oil, and all of that is cold. Until when it will be the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you loosen the abscess, and clean it, and administer in its cure what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess, in what way it is a path to its cure, chapter by chapter, individually.
Chapter 41.
On the section of abscesses which occur on the skin of the head.
There occur on the skin of the head small abscesses, and they are of the species of Knots, which are contained in sacs, and these are attached to them: as if they themselves were husks of a hen.
And their species are many.
Some of them are fatty: and some of them contain humidity similar to slime: and some of them contain humidity similar to friction and poultices: and similar things, and some of them are hard stony.
And in the cutting of all, and their extraction, there is no fear, provided that in their cutting it does not cause a contrariness of the arteries.
And the operation in their cutting is that you try them with an instrument, whose form comes after this, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains humidity, then dry it by a cut according to the length of the superficial cut: according to this form.
And begin with a cut from line b to line g. When therefore the humidity is evacuated, then scratch out the cyst which contains that humidity, and do not leave anything of it deeply.
For it returns many times, if something of it remains.
Then submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For it corrodes what remains of the cyst.
Then repeat over the wound with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if you apply it to it, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst, then treat the wound with ointment, until it is healed.
What if the apostema contains a fatty knot: then cut it according to this form, having the form of a cross: and apply ointment between the lips of the incision, and scratch it out from every part: and examine your skill in the extraction of the tunic which contains it.
If however the artery makes a contrariness to you, then do that which I will tell you afterwards.
And do similarly in the case of a stone, from cutting and cure, the same as we have said.
And the cutting over a stone apostema is easier: since there is little blood and humidity. And whenever there are certain apostemata which are on the head in certain men, with which there is not deep humidity.
Which is: that I cut into an apostema on the head of an old woman, and I found the apostema like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if anyone were to strike it by throwing something at it, it would wound.
In other accidental apostemata on the head, apart from these, namely the apostemata which occur on the heads of boys, and at the roots of the ears, let the dissection of all of them be a superficial dissection.
Or make a perforation of them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of blood may be alleviated to the lower parts.
Then treat it with what is suitable for it from the treatment.
On the dissection of Tumors on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These apostemata often occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groins: and sometimes they occur on the rest of the body.
And above those which occur on the neck, there is one, and many: and they are generated from the nearby area: and every tumor of them is inside its own proper tunic, as it is in knots and apostemata of the head, as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these Tumors. And among them are some that are stony: and among them are those which contain humors: and among them are malignant ones, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you see among them of good disposition to the touch, whose manifest proximity is to the color of the skin, and it moves in every part, and it is not attached with the nerves of the neck, nor with the gullet, nor with the artery, nor is it deep: it is necessary that you dissect it with a superficial dissection from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line, and along the line, and extract it from every part: and extend the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks, if you need them, as we have said in the case of apostemata of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is above the caution, that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula be not sharp, so that it does not add your hand to the incision, or disturb the weak, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut the vein, or artery, it prohibits you from operation, then put on the wound pounded zegi, or some powders that absorb blood, and tighten the wound, and leave it, until the sharpness of the swelling subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to putrefy.
For blood is absorbed by a tunic of flesh, therefore return to your operation, until you finish.
Then examine with your index finger, if anything remains of the small spurs: therefore cut them, and clean them.
What if there is in the root of the spur a large vein: then it is necessary that you do not cut that spur from its root: but rather it is necessary that you tie it with a double strong thread, and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you have already steeped in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the entire spur is cut, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew them immediately, after which you see that nothing protrudes in excess.
If you see that something remains in excess because of the size of the spur, then it is necessary that you proceed to cut its root, and extract it: and administer the suture which we mentioned.
And what of the spurs contains humidity, pierce it with a superficial piercing: so that the place of its maturation appears to you: and put the piercing from that which follows below the body, as we said.
Then administer a dressing with an ointment after the perforation, and similar things to it, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until when you see the wound is already clean: then treat it with a generating ointment of flesh, until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the cutting of the epiglottis by an abscess that occurs within the throat.
The ancients spoke of this incision on the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it: and this is the writing of their speech.
However, in those having synanche, it is necessary that the incision of the Epiglottis be deviated: since no passage can be made through it: because all the veins and the lung are weak.
In those indeed who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use the incision of the Epiglottis, to flee from the destruction which is made by the suffocation.
It is necessary therefore when we wish it, that we cut the Epiglottis under three circles of the Epiglottis, or four, a small incision in width, in what is between two circles in quantity, so that the incision is in the sifac, not in the cartilage: and this place indeed is convenient for the incision, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood from it are distant.
What if the doctor is timid, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then let him pierce the skin, until when he reaches the canal: let him divert the vessels of blood, if he sees any of them.
Then let him cut the sifac which we have described: and it is indicated above the incision of the canal from the phlegm that exits from it, with what disrupts it, and from the cutting off of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When the hour arrives in which the anointing is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and suture it itself alone without cartilage.
Then administer medications which make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Said Albucasis. The sum of this speech which we have narrated is not an exposition, except when they see that one of these apostemata has already strangled the throat of the weak; and the weak has been lifted up from death, and his breaths are about to be cut off: they proceed to cut the Epiglottis, so that the weak may breathe over the place of the wound by some breathing, and may be saved from death: and for this reason they have ordered to leave the wound open, until the evil of the disease is consumed, and its evil is for three days, or thereabouts; then therefore they have ordered to suture the wound, and to treat it, until it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes is, that a certain servant girl took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut the part of the canal of the lung.
And I was called to the cure of her, and I found her to rattle, as is the rattling of the dead.
I probed therefore from the wound, and I found blood which had come out from the wound a little. I was confused therefore that she had not cut the vein, nor the trachea: and the air came out from the wound.
I treated therefore the wound and her wound, and I cured it, until it was sound: and nothing happened to the servant girl, except hoarseness of voice: and she returned after days to her better dispositions.
Hence therefore I say: that in the cutting of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
On the surgical incision of the throat hernia
Chapter 44
This condition called hernia of the throat, is a large abscess, secondary to body color, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is secondary to two methods: for it is either natural or it is accidental.
In the natural one certainly there is no ingenuity.
The accidental one, however, is secondary to two methods: of which one is similar to fatty knots. And the other method is similar to an abscess that forms from a knotting of the artery. And in it there is fear, and it is not suitable that a presumption be made regarding it with iron, unless in that which is small: and you will examine it, and investigate it with an introduction. If therefore you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not suspended with any vein: then cut it, as knots are cut: and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then probe the whole of it. Then treat the place with what is proper for the cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 45
On the surgical incision of the type of knots.
There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division: and it is necessary that I describe here the difference between a Knot and an Excrescence: since it causes doubt.
I say therefore, that when there is an Excrescence, there is heat, and fever, and vehement pains, until the ebullition of the surplus is satiated, and the putrefaction is complete: then indeed the fever and heat subside.
With a Knot, however, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains them in cysts, which is their proper sac, and it is secondary to body color: and its shape is like a seed, and it forms like a boil, and it is larger and smaller.
And they are divided into two types: either fatty or containing humidity. And the colors of humidity are many, according to what I said in division.
It is necessary therefore, when you come to the cure of a Knot, that you try it, and examine it first with an instrument which is called Intromissum, according to which its form will appear in the chapter which is after this.
And the method of examining abscesses and all Knots is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place which you find in the abscess, and you move your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then you put your hand finally according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then you extract the Intromissum, and examine what comes out in its track.
If therefore a running humidity comes out, whatever the color may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said concerning other abscesses.
And if humidity does not come out in the track of the Intromissum, then know that it is fatty: dry therefore above it with an incision having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scratch the skin from every side with ease: and guard the kistin if you can above it, so that you extract it healthy with the Knot.
If however the kistis bursts during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, for this often happens, then extract it by fragments, until nothing of it remains.
For if a little or much of it remains, the Knot returns according to the amount.
If it overcomes you and a little of it remains: then fill the wound at the completion with certain corrosive powders: and bind the wound, and put on top of it what sits on the abscess, a hot application, and treat it with the remaining cure, until it is healed.
If it is a large knot, then sew its two lips, and cure it with what flesh grows around it.
If there is a contrary vein, either pulsating or not pulsating: then press, and fill the place of the zegi with trito, and leave it tied for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the ebullition of blood quiets down: afterwards return to cut that which remains of the Knot.
Chapter 46.
On the forms of instruments for cutting and boring.
These are the forms of the introdgers, and they are of three kinds.
For among them is a large one, and among them is a medium one, and among them is a small one.
Let them be made from iron of Al-fulud, a quadrangular shape at the extremities, so that they fasten the entry into the abscess.
And these are the forms of the Experients, and yes, that is, the perforators: and one of them is named beris, that is, the perforator: and they are of three kinds.
For among them is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They are joined so that they investigate through them the abscesses and the exits and the fistulas and the buboes from what is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, slender, like large needles with which they sew under the skin, namely of citrus, or of copper, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones of them are those that are made from citrus.
And they make the Experients also from black lead, which are joined so that through them they investigate the fistulas, whose concavities are reflections, so that they reflect with their slenderness together with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Since some of them are long, some of them are medium, and some of them are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
The forms of ulcers, and they are of many species.
Since some of them are simple, namely those which have one curvature: and they are of three species, as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And some of them are blind ulcers: and they are of three species.
And some of them are ulcers having two curvatures, and they are of three species: and some of them are ulcers having three curvatures, and they are of three species: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which they cut and excavate knots and apostems: and they are of three species: since some of them are large, medium, and small.
Their extremities with which a section is made are acute, the other extremities are not acute: and they are not placed thus, except so that with them there is a judgment in the excavation of knots regarding the fear of cutting a vein, or nerve: and so that it may be healed by this, and it finds tranquility for a time from the burning which it found at the excavation of an apostem.
They are made of copper, and they are similar to a file, with which the file is sharpened: and on the broad extremity there is a point of Spatumilis hidden: and in it there runs to the interior and to the exterior when you wish, as you see.
The form of Spatumilis which are hidden between the fingers for the perforation of apostems: and the weak do not perceive them: and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
The forms of cauteries with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
They should be made from bronze or brass, rounded, and a little long, as you see: and they should be to subtlety.
And it is fitting that you should have those kinds of large and small bloodletting instruments: so that you can cut blood with speed when necessary, and then when medicine is not present.
But you should not use them for bloodletting in every part of the body, and you should not use them except in fleshy places: such as the arms, thighs, hips, upper arms, breasts, belly, groin, and similar ones to these, from the fleshy arms, humid.
And sometimes small instruments similar to the rinds of gourds are made from them, according to their shape: with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the cutting of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made rounded according to this shape.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts which resemble women's breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflamed during their sleep (that is, when they begin to have an emission in sleep) until they resemble women's breasts: and they remain as foul apostumes.
He who therefore abhors that, should cut above the breast in a lunar section, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scratch out all the fat. Afterwards fill the wound with incarnate medicine. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure it, until it is healed.
If the breast however declines to the lower parts and becomes soft because of its size, as it happens with women: then it is necessary that two sections similar in figure to the moon be found on its two upper sides, each of which is connected to the other at both ends, until there is a greater line containing the lesser, according to this shape from line b to line g. Afterwards scratch out the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
If you do not close the incision of what it is necessary for you to cut, on account of the discomfort of the weak or because of the flow of blood: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a submersed corrosive ointment, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then cure it, until it is healed.
Of the perforation of the apostema, which happens under the tongue.
Chapter 48.
These apostemas which happen under the tongue, are of the species of hard Strophulons, which contain cysts, and of them are those which contain humidity.
Which therefore are of those which contain humidities, it is necessary that they be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g, when therefore all that is in the apostema is evacuated of blood, then fill it with old oil, and leave it until another day.
Then let the plaster be removed, and let it be cured with an ointment suitable for that, until it is healed.
Which if the apostema is of the species of nodes of Strophulons, then cut over it, as we have said in the section on Strophulons equally.
If however the wound extends in this so that it emits pus, then administer to it a cauterization, according to what we have said in what has been previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
Of the cutting of the apostema which happens on account of the Artery and Vein.
When the Artery is broken and the skin which is above it becomes consolidated, then often an apostema happens from this: and similarly it happens to the Veins also, so that an apostema and inflammation happen in them.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an apostema and inflammation are on account of the Artery and Vein, are: because, when an apostema is on account of an artery, it is long, gathered in the depth of the body: and when you press the apostema with your fingers, you feel as if there is a hissing.
And that which is on account of the Vein, is round in the obvious body.
And the cutting above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and the groins, and the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is a great fault. It is necessary therefore that his treatment be managed with iron, and that which is also among them, whether it be in the extremities or in the head, it is necessary that it be managed.
Above that therefore which of them is from the inflation of the orifice of the Artery, make an incision in the skin in length. Then open the incision with forceps, afterwards the Artery: and free it from its coats, until it is exposed.
Then insert under it a needle, and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the Artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two Arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place, which is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is resolved.
Then administer the treatment that generates pus, until the ligaments fall away: afterwards treat it with ointments suitable to it, until it is healed.
What if the abscess is on account of a cut of the Vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can from the abscess with the skin. Then insert the needle under the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be in it double thread, until you extract it from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligament: according to what I said to you about the ligament of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread.
If however you wish to extract the thread, then insert another needle with a different thread under the whole staple at the site of the incision of the instrument: press, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the staple in the middle of itself, until when what is in it comes out: then cut the excess skin, and release what has been tied from it.
Then put on it a poultice which you have submerged in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment, which is made with bandages and ointments, until it heals.
Chapter L.
Concerning the staple that happens from a twisting of the nerves.
Just as a staple occurs in the artery and vein, similarly a staple occurs in the nerves: which occurs from a blow or occurs from excessive labor and similar things: and it happens most often to those in the places of the joints, or heel, and in every place where the joints move: and it is a grave staple.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is pressed with force, one feels in it a weakness similar to numbness.
And it is not a staple collected in the depth of the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and it does not proceed to the front, nor forward, nor backward to the rear.
What therefore is in the joints, does not need to be entered with iron. Perhaps a contraction occurs.
In that which of them is on the head, or on the forehead, cut the skin with a spatula. If therefore it is a small staple, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate it: then remove it, and close the wound with a suture: and treat it, until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the cutting of an apostema that happens in the belly.
It happens to certain men many times in their bellies and in the rest of their bodies, thelils, which are called Fungalias, because of their resemblance to mushrooms.
Of which the root is subtle and their head is thick and their lips are inverted. And there is one of them that is small, and there is one of them that is greatly enlarged.
And I have indeed already seen a man, and in his belly there were two thelils, which were more similar to mushrooms than the others: there was no difference between them, they were white, of small root, and their lips were inverted, and they ended, and moisture flowed from them always.
I cut them therefore, and I found one to weigh about 8 and a half ounces and the other about 6 ounces. And the operation in cutting them is, that you consider then, if it is weak, humid, and the color of the thelil is white, humid, with subtle root: then cut it with a broad spatula, and let cauteria be present to you on the fire.
For often much blood is expelled during the cutting of it: prepare therefore if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
Which if you see it weak, pale and timid from the cutting with iron, then take a thread made from lead and bind with it the athelul: whose method is what we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then put on the stricture of lead. Do not therefore cease to bind with lead, as many times as it impresses on the thelil, until it is cut off, and falls by itself without labor.
If however the thelil is thick of root, then in the cutting of it there is something to be feared and dreaded: especially what is in the belly.
It is possible to cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then treat it, until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not cut into the black bile which is of a foul color, of little sensation, and of a foul appearance: for it is a cancerous abscess: and I come with a warning and a reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of the elevation of the navel.
The elevation of the navel occurs from many causes. Or from a tear of the diaphragm, which is above the stomach: and there comes out of it either gut or intestine, depending on what happens in the remainder of the rupture. Or from blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been previously stated. Or from flatulence constricted within it.
If however it is on account of a tear of the diaphragm, and an issue of the gut: then it is a color similar to that of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and appears in different situations. And if it is on account of the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation is with what we have narrated, of a more vehement diversity. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a gurgling sound: and it is greatly magnified at the entrance of the bath, and vehement labor.
If however it is on account of humidity, it is soft, then it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict, nor is it added.
For if it is on account of blood, then with these signs appears an abscess turning to blackness from the tumor.
If however it is on account of flesh that has grown: then it is a serious abscess, thick, hard, and it is fixed according to one quantity.
If the swelling is due to excess flesh, then the touch of it is gentle.
And the operation regarding it is that you should consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the artery or vein or excess flesh, then it is necessary that you should abstain from its treatment. For there is fear and dread in it, as I have taught you in the chapter, in which I said that apostema occurs due to the artery and vein.
What if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia: then it is necessary that you should instruct the weak person, so that he may hold his breath, and stand standing upright. Then mark with a branding iron around the entire navel area. Afterwards instruct him to breathe again between your hands over his back. Then apply a bandage around the navel area over the place that you marked with the branding iron. Afterwards extend the middle of the apostema upwards with a large hook. Then tie it around strongly with a thread or with a cord of firm silk binding, and let the knot of the binding be secure.
Then open the middle of the extended apostema above the bandage. If therefore you find that it has already been caught by the bandage: then pull out the secured one, and insert the index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a hernia, then take it with a hook, and cut away its excess.
If on the other hand the artery or vein is opposite to you: then surround it abundantly. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert two strong threads into them: and insert the two needles around the area that you made around the apostema in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then tie the aposteme in four places above the needle, and if it is useful, remove the needle and leave the place until the rotten flesh falls off by itself, or cut it when it becomes subtle and rotten.
Then treat it with what is suitable from ointments, until it heals.
What if the elevation of the navel is from the thick flesh in it, or from moisture: then it is suitable to concave the aposteme, as we have said. And extract the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then treat it with what consolidates the place.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of cancer, and how it is the way to cure it with medicines: and to beware of it with the cure of it with iron, so that it does not become ulcerated: and we have spoken of cancer generated in the matrix, and caution in its cure.
And the ancients said that whenever cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, such as cancer which is in the breasts or in the hip, and similar members located for extraction of all of it, especially when it is beginning and small.
When however it becomes old and is large, it is not suitable to approach it.
For I myself was not able to heal any of them: nor have I seen anyone before me who has approached that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede and dissolve the weakness with black bile several times. Then phlebotomize it if you find it with a manifest fullness.
Then prepare the weakness for preparation, in which it will be treated with operation.
Then apply to the cancer ointments that are suitable for it. Afterward press it from every part with the skin, according to the scrutation, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but express the place, and wipe away all gross blood with your hand, or with any instrument that is possible there.
But if a profuse flow of blood is contrary to you from the incision of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein, until the blood is stopped. Then treat it with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
On the treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 54. We have now explained in the division of the species of Dropsy, and how the collection of water is made: and the signs of each species, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron, is not but the species of ascites alone: and it does not approach with iron the species of tympanitis: nor the species of hyposarca inwardly: for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of Dropsy, tympanitis, with medicines, and your medication has not been effective: then consider. For if debility has already befallen the weak person, or if there is another infirmity with it besides Dropsy: such as if there is with it a cough, or a loosening of the stomach, and things similar to these: then beware that you do not treat him with iron: for that is to be feared.
But if you see the weak person of overflowing strength, and there is no sickness with it besides Dropsy alone: and he is neither a child nor an old man: then the method of operation on him is, that you should lift up the weak person standing between your hands, and your assistant behind him presses out his stomach with his hand, forcing water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spiney spongy bone, according to this form. It has two sharp parts, is long, with a pointed extremity like the Spatula. But in it let there be something of shortness little by little, so that you do not transpierce with it during the operation to the intestine, and wound it.
Then consider. For if there is a generation of dropsy from the side of the intestines, then it is necessary that you should lengthen with the section from the navel by the quantity of three fingers, downwards directly above the chest.
If indeed the generation of dropsy is because of liver sickness, then let your section be on the left from the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is because of the spleen, then let the section be on the right side: and it is not necessary also that the section be on the side above which the sick person wants to lie, so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place.
Then pierce with an instrument the whole skin. Then insert into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin, and rub, as if you are scraping it out: and let the quantity which is scraped out be the quantity of a nail, or about that.
Then scrape through, until the spatula reaches the empty place: and it is the place of water. Then extract it, and insert into the hole an instrument, whose form is this. And it is similar to a cannula: made from silver, or copper, or gold, clean and polished: which has a small hole in its lower part, and on its sides are three holes, two on one side and one on the other side: and its end is cut, according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: on its upper end is a handle.
When the instrument penetrates the water, then it itself descends immediately on the instrument, and thus evacuates from the water at once half the quantity.
Since if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, then perhaps the weak person dies at once through resolution of his animal spirit: or a fainting fit that approaches death befalls him.
Evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the weak person signify to you from the virtue of his pulse, and from his goodness.
Then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is, that it is retained at once on account of the skin which retains the opening that is above the sifac: about which I have spoken, that you should perforate it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the second day, if you see the weak person tolerate it: and withdraw also from the water a small quantity.
Do that for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there does not remain from the water except a little.
If you are afraid for the weak person, and you leave a large amount from the water: then treat it with burial in hot sand, and with much sweat in bath and sun, and await its thirst: and treat it with medicines evacuative, until it is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after extraction of the water: according to what I have spoken in that which preceded.
On the treatment of infants who are born with their urinary places not perforated.
Chapter 45.
When any infant goes out from the womb of its mother, and the head of its bladder is not perforated, or the opening is narrow, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary therefore to help with the perforation of it at once when it is born with a very sharp and fine spatula, according to this method.
Then put in the hole a thin nail made of lead, and tie it: and leave it for three days, or four.
When the skin is raised to pass urine, it should be removed, and wiped. Then reduce it.
And if you do not put in the lead, it is possible that the urine which enters on the place, will not allow it to close.
He whose hole is narrow, is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those however in whom the hole is not in its proper place, are injured. That is, because among those who are born with it, the hole is at the end of the virga: wherefore she cannot urinate to the front, unless she lifts the virga with her hand upwards. And there is no generation for her, because the sperm cannot pass to the womb according to the right direction: and it is a foul and grievous disease.
And the method of operation for that is, that the weak one is placed on her back. Then extend the head of her virga with your left hand with vigorous extension, and cut the head of the head from the place of the priapus, with a needle, or a sharp spatula: as is the incision of a reed, or as you peel something, so that the middle of it comes to resemble the head of the virga: and so that the hole falls in the middle according to what is proper.
And beware for yourself during the operation of a flow of blood. For that thing has happened many times. Apply to it therefore that which stops the blood, and cure the wound, until it is healed.
On the matters concerning Albucasis which occur on the foreskin and head of the virga, and the corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 6
These things often happen to the albather on a branch, and it is an eminence of rotten flesh.
And some of them are malignant, and some of them are not malignant.
You should therefore suspend the non-malignant one with a subtle hook, and cut it off, until you cleanse it completely. Then put on it a plaster submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it after that with the dyafrincon ointment, until it is healed.
Which if the albather is malignant, of foul color, then you should administer to it a cauterization after the incision of it and its rasping.
If the albather is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised person, and part of the albather is inside the foreskin and part of it outside: then you should remove the albather that is inside first, until when it has consolidated, then treat the one outside: because when you treat them both at the same time, the foreskin does not heal unless it is perforated.
And now they also occur on the testicles and a blackening and corruption of the foreskin. You should therefore cauterize all that has already turned black, and what will decay or is already decayed.
Then apply on it after that a mixture of honey which has already been mixed with the flour of roasted grains and the crushed herbs of tritorage.
Then treat it with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
If there is a flow of blood, then administer a cauterization with lunar cauterization, according to this method.
For cauterization is a remedy for two conditions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood and for an ulcer when it becomes decayed.
Which if the head of the branch is eaten away and destroyed entirely in one hour: then you should insert into the mouth of the penis a tube made of lead, so that the weakened man urinates on it.
In the adhesion of the skin to the head of the virga, and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose virga is healthy, and it is not necessary to circumcise over it: and when adhesion occurs because of a wound or apostema, it is necessary to cauterize it with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the virga is freed from every part.
What is difficult to discern with exquisite care, then it is necessary to cauterize something from the head of the virga and from the prepuce. What is, that the prepuce, when it is subtle, is perhaps perforated on account of its subtlety quickly.
Then separate the prepuce and the head of the virga with a subtle linen cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then let it be treated with styptic wine, until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
On the purification of infants, and the cure of errors that occur to them by accident.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, like other wounds: nevertheless since it is from our operation, our will, and its use is properly in boys, it is necessary that we indicate in this operation the better method, and the easier way leading to health.
I say therefore, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: since they do not use it in their laws, and it is not except what we have acquired through experimentation.
What is, that I have found the greater part of artisans and phlebotomists using purification by circumcision with a razor, and with forceps: and they use a cauterized wound, and a ligature with a thread, and an incision with a nail.
And I have already tried all these methods, and I did not find a better purification than with forceps and a ligature with a thread.
Since in cleansing with a lancet, the skin often escapes. For the skin of the prepuce has two tunics: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut and the inner tunic remains: hence it is necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and future pain. And with the cleansing that is done by the digital method, that is, with a needle, which surgeons use, the cutting of the extremity of the member is not avoided: for perhaps it enters into its opening.
In cleansing with a nail, perhaps the iron comes out and spoils your operation: and the skin of a child is brief by nature, and often they are born in such a way that they do not need cleansing: and I have already seen it.
Cleansing with forceps and ligature with a thread has shown me a good experiment: for the forceps are proportional to the incision: therefore, because the sharpness that is above is as the sharpness that is below. When therefore you press with your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they cut according to one operation at one time: and there is made a compression of similar figure, containing the skin of the member from all parts, with which error does not fall in any way.
And the method of operation is its own, that you cause to be extracted, especially a child, if it is one of those who understand for a little while, what you do not do, except that you bind the thread on its member only: and you let it go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be merry in every way that is possible for you, from the fact that he receives his understanding. Then make him stand between your hands prepared in a standing position, and let him not be sitting: and hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the child does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into its branch and blow on the skin and pull it upwards until the head of the branch comes out. Then cleanse it from the filth that has accumulated in the wound.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards tie below it for a short space a second ligature. Then hold with your index finger, and thumb, the place of the lower ligature with good retention, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin upwards quickly, and extract the head of the branch. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better) and put powder on top: and over the powder a cloth in which vitellus of egg has been spread, mixed with good fresh rose oil: and let it remain on until the next day: and treat it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
The shape of a fork is for cleansing purposes this.
Let the two extremities be blunt and let them be cutting: so that the branch of the nail does not come out on them: and let the length of the two sharp edges be as the length of the two handles equally.
The error that occurs in cleansing is: because perhaps it escapes the inner skin entirely, or a part of it at the place of the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you stretch it out with your nail before the marking of the place: and cut it according to equality.
What if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
If however three days have passed and what is under the branch remains inflated, marked: then let it be until the hot apostema has settled, and excise it with ease, and cut it according to that which is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the branch. For it will not harm him.
Treatment is therefore with that which consolidates the wound from powders, which we have described in the treatise on powders: and if it cuts into the skin above the measure, and it goes to the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
Treatment is therefore with that which we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the extraction of retained urine from the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made from stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh that has grown, and similar things to these which we have spoken of as methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that its retention is on account of a stone, which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he should be made to bend over his knees. Then let his feet be placed upon his back, and let him stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and let him tightly constrict his breathing as much as is possible for him. The neck of the bladder is thus compressed towards the expulsion of the stone to the back, whereupon the urine is discharged.
What if it is not solved with what we have said, and the thing is vehement upon the patient: then it is necessary that you administer the extraction of it with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose form is this: let it be of silver, and let it be subtle, thin, concave like the quill of a feather in subtlety of a radius, long in likeness to one and a half palms: to which let there be a subtle pipe at its head.
And the method of the exit of urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its end a wool or a cord, with a good ligature: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with forceps if anything overflows from the wool, truly introduce into the pipe with vehemence, like an Alzer.
Then anoint the siringa with oil, or with butter, and the white of an egg: and make the weak sit upon a seat, and embrocate the vessel, and its own virga with humid oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the siringa into the virga with ease, until it reaches the root of the virga.
Then fold it over double from the part of the navel.
Then push the siringa into it, until it reaches the bladder, and the weak person feels that it has already reached the empty space: and this is not done according to this order, unless the passage, in which it goes, is where there is a tortuosity.
Then extend the thread with a wool slowly. For the catheter will follow the wool.
Then pull it out, and make the catheter run through the urine passage: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do that, until the bladder is emptied, and the weak person finds relief.
On the quality of cleansing the bladder with a Clyster.
Chapter 59.
When there happens to be an ulcer in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is confined in it, and one wishes to distill waters and medicines into it: then let it be done with the instrument that is called a Clyster, and this is its form.
For it is stopped, that is, closed. And in it are three holes, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which pushes, should be according to the quantity that fills it without addition, until when it is pulled with it, something is attracted from the humidities: and when it is pushed, it expels far away: according to what makes the clyster, with which naphtha is projected, that is, Greek fire in the workshops of Mars.
When I insert the instrument to project moisture into the bladder, I introduce the extremity of the catheter into the moisture, and pull with it that which pushes upwards, for the moisture is pulled into the concavity of the catheter.
Then I introduce its extremity into the rod, according to that which we described in the syringe. Then I push the moisture with that which pushes it, for the moisture immediately reaches the bladder, so that the weak person feels it.
The shape of a thin enema instrument by which the bladder is enemad.
Let it be made from silver or gold: whose head is higher and similar to a small hook, and under that a hollow where the ligament falls.
Then take the bladder of a goat, and put in it moisture, with which instrument you will enema the bladder. Then tie it between two hollows with a strong ligature and double thread: and warm that moisture a little over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the enema instrument into the rod, afterwards tighten your hand over the bladder with the moisture with a suitable pressure, until the weak person feels that the moisture has now reached the bladder.
If however the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment, and make from it a circle, and pierce it throughout its entire roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they revolve. Then gather the circle, as the nest is gathered: afterwards you put in it that which you use from moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it in the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder by expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of a stone.
We have already spoken about the division of the species of Stone, and its cure with medicines, and I have said the difference between the Stone generated in the kidneys and bladder, and the signs of all that: and I have said the Stone in which the operation falls with the hand and incision: and there is a Stone generated in the bladder specifically: and that which is fixed on the staff: and I am narrating that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that the Stone generated in the bladder, happens most often to children.
And one of its signs is that urine comes out from the bladder similar to water in its thinness: and appears in it white sand, and the weak man rubs his staff, and labors with it, and many times it hangs. Then it is erected, and goes out with that, the bottom, in many of them.
And the cure of children is easy, as long as they are up to fourteen years old. And it is difficult in the elderly. In youths, however, it is moderate, in that which is between them: and of whom the Stone is larger, the cure is easier: and if small, the care is the opposite.
When we arrive at the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the weak person with a clyster, which will extract all the dung that is in his intestines: for it sometimes prevents the discovery of the Stone during the examination.
Then let the weak person be taken by the feet, and shaken, and moved to the lower parts: so that the Stone descends to the depth of the bladder, or jumps from a high place many times.
Then make him sit prepared between your hands, and let his hands be under his hips, so that the whole bladder is inclined downwards.
Then examine him, and feel him from the outside.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then apply the proper thing at once with incision upon it.
What if it does not fall under your touch altogether, then it is necessary that you wipe the index finger with oil of the left hand, if he is a weak boy: or the middle finger if he is a young man complete: and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone, until it stands under your finger: and turn it little by little to the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and push it to the exterior against the place of which you wish to make an incision: and instruct one assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand upwards: and his other hand, that he may remove the skin which is under the testicles on the part away from the place in which the incision is.
Then insert a spatula or knife with an incision, the shape of which is this. And cut in that which is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left buttock: and let the incision be above the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that the exterior incision be ample, and the interior be strict, according to the quantity that it is possible for the exit of the stone from it not being larger.
Perhaps indeed the finger which is in the anus presses the stone near the incision, and it comes out without difficulty.
And know that because of the stone, in which there are angles and edges, its exit is made difficult on account of that.
And from this it is smooth, like a gland, and round: and its exit is made easy.
Therefore for those which have angles and edges, add to the incision.
What if it does not come out thus, then it is necessary that you apply above it: or tie above it with a device of the center, whose extremity is like a crescent moon, which ties above the stone and does not depart from it: or that you insert under it an instrument subtle, of curved extremity.
If you cannot exceed it, then enlarge the opening a little. What if something of blood conquers you, cut it off with a razor.
If there is a stone more than one, then first push the large one to the mouth of the bladder. Then cut on top of it. Afterwards push a small one after that, and do similarly if there are more than two.
What if the valve is very large, then it is ignorance to cut above it with a large incision. Since it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or that there is a continual dripping of urine: therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
Indeed administer the expulsion of it, until it goes out: or instruments on the fracture with forceps, until you extract it bit by bit.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and put on it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the hot aposteme may be seated.
Then let the weak one rest on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage, until the third day. When you then loosen it, moisten the place with water, and much oil.
Then treat it with the ointment diaphenicum, and the ointment baselicum, until it is healed.
If however there occurs in the wound a hot and corrosive aposteme, and similar things: as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prohibited from it: and that is recognized by the emission of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and apply all the species with what is suitable from the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the hours of treatment that you bind two hips, and gather, the causes of medicines which are placed on the spot.
What if the stone is small, and it is in the flesh of the virgin, and it is fixed in it, and the urine exit is blocked: then treat it with what I will narrate before you proceed to the cutting. For many times indeed you will be exempt from cutting by this treatment, for I have already tested that.
And there is, that you should take a perforator made of iron, whose form this is, triangular at the end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and bind with it the branch under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron perforator into the branch with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone itself: and turn the perforator with your hand on the stone little by little: and complete the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine will be relieved immediately.
Then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the outer part of the branch. For it itself breaks, and goes out with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
If however this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prohibits it: then bind a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the same branch between the two bindings. Then extract it. Afterwards loosen the binding, and cleanse the congealed blood which forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone, unless so that it does not return to the bladder: and another tie above, unless when the thread is released after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and because of that it is necessary for you, when you tie the upper thread, to lift the skin upwards, so that it returns according to your complement, and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of the extraction of a stone from women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
If however it happens to any of them a stone, then the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited because of many methods.
One of them is: that the woman is perhaps a virgin.
And the second is, that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to a physician, when she is chaste, or one of those having husbands.
The third is, that you do not find a woman well knowing this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the remoteness of the place of the stone: where it requires a deep incision, and in that there is fear.
What if necessity provokes to that, then it is necessary that you accept a woman physician, well knowing: and she is rarely found.
If you are deprived of them, then seek a chaste physician, subtle, and present a midwife well taught in the matter of women, or a woman who has begun to learn part of the art: make her therefore present, and command her, that she do all that you command her from the inquiry about the stone.
At first what is, to examine if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she insert a finger into her anus, and seek the stone.
If then he finds it, he constricts it under his finger, and then orders the midwife to insert her finger into the weak woman's vulva, and feels above the stone, after which she places her left hand on the bladder, and presses it with a good compression.
If then he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he moves it gradually from the orifice of the bladder to the lower areas with the greatest strength of his, until he reaches with it to the root of the hip.
Then he cuts above it at the opposite of the middle of the vulva at the root of the hip, from whichever side he prepares for it, and feels the stone on that side: and his finger is not removed from the stone, constricting under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then he inserts the razor above that incision.
Then he inserts the razor above that incision. If then he feels the stone, then he adds to the incision a second cut proportional in quantity to what of the stone emerges from it.
And know that there are many types of stones. For among them is the small and the large, the smooth and the rough, the long and the round having branches.
Know therefore its species, so that it may be indicated to you by this above what you are using.
If then the blood overcomes you, then apply to the place a poultice of toasted and ground, and hold it for one hour, until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation, until the stone emerges: and do, so that you prepare with you from the instruments, which I mentioned in the extraction of the stone from the bladder, so that you may help yourself by them in your operation.
For if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which was cut: then put powder on the place, and constrict it with decent stricturing bandages: and do not move it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. A weak woman will perhaps die from it. Then treat the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is satiated after some days, and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation, until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
On the cutting of a watery hernia.
A watery collection is not a true hernia, unless it be an aggregation of humidity in the white vascular covering that is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg: and it is named a vascular covering.
And sometimes it is in its own proper membrane, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg, until it becomes putrid: which is another egg, and is a skin of the testicle between the white vascular covering that we spoke of: and this does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of this watery collection is from a weakness that happens to the testicles: for which reason this material flows out to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this humidity has many colors. For it is either of a yellowish color, or it is a bloody red, or feculent, black, or it is a watery white, and this is the one that is most.
And the signs by which it is known where the collection of water is, are these. For if it is in the white vascular covering that we spoke of, then the swelling is round in length for a while just like the shape of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the humidity contains it on every side.
And if it is humidity in its own proper membrane, then the swelling is round with a part of the egg, and because of this a man thinks that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white vascular covering, then it falls under the sense.
When I apply my knowledge of the colour of humidity, then I test the colour of humidity in the apostema with the square introversion, whose shape precedes. According to that which appears in the trace of the Introversion, I judge from that which is between it.
When we proceed to a cure with iron, then it is necessary to prescribe to the weak, that they should be bled if possible for them, and you see his body full.
Then he should be placed on his back on something high and a little elevated, and many cloths should be put under him.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, who should stretch out his arm to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the region of the navel.
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles in the middle along the length, up to near the breast; and let the incision be according to the rectitude of the equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white substance that comprehends; and cut out this and observe, or take care lest you cut from hence, that you cut it; and your cutting should be where it is suspended with the egg more: and subtly examine with the cutting according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the full watery substance with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and stretch the watery substance upwards, and do not touch the skin of the testicles that comprehends; and cut the watery substance as much as it is possible for you to cut it, or with its entirety, or in a piece, especially the broad subtle part. For if you do not carefully and thoroughly examine in the incision, there will be no security, lest the water flow back.
If however the egg proceeds outward from its skin during the time of your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the womb, reduce it. Then bring together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then cure it as the remaining wounds, until it is healed.
What if you find the egg corrupted by blackness of another kind, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels, which are the suspensors, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspensor, and extract the egg: afterwards cure it with what we have said.
If indeed water is collected in the two parts, then know that there are two pipes: therefore cut the other part equally according to what you have done in the other.
And if it is equal to you, that there be one operation, then do it: afterwards wipe away the blood. And insert into the incisions a thread soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and put on the dressing a thread which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and the navel: and put above double cloths, and they are poultices: and tie them above with a bandage, which has six according to this form.
Then let two cloths be taken, and they be sewn, and filled with medicated thread, according to this likeness: and let the extremities be made which are pressed from a cot, or a wet thread: and let them be tied with a bandage in the groin of the arms: and one extremity let it reach above the thigh up to the back, and the second let it reach to the part of the breast: and two extremities above the two hips below, and two other extremities above the two groins, and all the bandage be tied in the groin of the arms.
And when this ramex is treated artificially with a cautery at the place of the section with iron; and it is, that you take a sharp cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles; and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when there appears a white scab containing water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
The Greek letters are absorbed.
Then puncture that scab with it, and it is ignited, until all moisture comes out.
Then stretch the scab with forceps, and scrape it with a sharp ignited cautery, and cut it according to what is possible for you, until you eradicate the whole of it.
And beware lest the fire touch it.
And know that this operation is safer, and less inclined to a flow of blood, and better than the operation with a section.
If indeed an adverse condition makes itself known to you at the time of the section, or at the time of the cautery, whether it be a hot aposteme, or a flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary that you treat that which makes the adverse condition known to you from that with a cure which is suitable for it, according to what has been previously stated.
If however he is weak and timid, and does not look forward to this operation, because of its horror: then administer the puncture according to what I have narrated it to be.
When it is confirmed to you by that which we have spoken of concerning the signs, that the ramex is watery: then it is necessary that you make the weak person sit on an elevated seat.
Then puncture the aposteme in its lower part with a broad spatula: and put the puncture according to the length of the body, and let it be wide open, until all the water runs out.
Then put a dressing on the place of the cut, and bind it, and let it stay so that the remainder of the water runs out: then treat it, until the wound is healed.
If however the blockage is an obstacle to the exit of water at the time when you perforate it: and it is not except on account of that, because the white membrane makes a blockage in the opening of the wound, and prohibits the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water of dropsy is extracted, whose form has preceded: or add for a short time in the operation of the wound.
And you should know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time. When therefore it accumulates, then it should be tapped according to the same method, and the weak days will pass.
Chapter 63.
On the treatment of a fleshy ulcer.
You should know that in the incision above this ulcer, there is a fear of inducing destruction in many conditions. Wherefore it seems to me that its neglect is beneficial for its healing.
And I recall the operation on it, and the appearance of an apostema.
I say therefore, that many gatherings occur in the bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and this happens for many reasons.
Or from an excess of sharp or acidic humor, which flows to the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the gathering is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a serious gathering.
And perhaps it is a stone-like gathering, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from the knotting of the arteries, and their swelling: as I have already mentioned before: or from the swelling of the veins.
That which is therefore from the swelling of the arteries, is recognized by the condition of the gathering, when you press it with your fingers. And it is not proper to touch it directly.
That which is made from the inflation of veins is not dispersed from it by compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that a section on this species is made and on the rest of the flesh and it is as one cuts the skin of the testicles. Then extend the egg upwards, and extract it with the white siftach: and free the suspensor from the vessels, and tie up the vessels: and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from every part of the parts of the egg.
If then the egg is consolidated with those born flesh, then it is proper that you should pull the egg and cut it.
And if an adhesion is between any of the siphacet or in that which is between the vessels: then it is proper that you free the whole of that adhesion, and cut it with a round incision.
If however there is a nativity of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is proper that you cut the whole of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine: afterwards cure it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of Varices, which is with Veins.
Uitis is an unresolved aposteme, which occurs with a certain wrapping, similar to a boil, with softening of the testicles: and it makes difficult movement and exercise on the infirm, and walking.
And in the cure of this sickness is fear, because of that which has preceded it, the memory remains.
It is true that we should say the operation on it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore, that it is proper to make the infirm person sit on an elevated seat. Then strike the suspension of the testicles to the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the instruments that are nearest to the rod: and let another servant hold them, and let him stretch them with a vigorous stretching.
Then cut with a broad sharp spatula a transverse section in the direction of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scratch away from every part, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Afterwards fix in them a needle in which is a double thread, and tie it in the first places to which the ties occur: and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut it in a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from foul corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which it is customary to generate a sanative, so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles fall. For it is not an evil through that.
If however the vessel occurs to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles with the vessels be extracted for this: so that the ovum is not deprived of nourishment, on account of the incision, and wither, or dry up, and is not a help with them.
Chapter 65.
Of the treatment of Intestinal hernias.
The coming out of this hernia is from a section, which occurs in the siphac extended above the navel on the groin side from the middle of the navel.
Why the intestines come down from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the siphac or from its extension.
And these two kinds occur from many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy thing, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the wrist. It is what happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal in depth to the intestine: therefore, because the wrist compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it is from a section of the wrist, because it causes sudden violent pain from the beginning: and it is a diverse abscess appearing under the skin nearby: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the outside of the wrist.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine a hernia: and this is called intestinal Ramex and hernia: and sometimes it happens with bloating.
And sometimes feces runs into the intestine and is retained there: and it is with that a danger of weakness: because it causes severe pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of this kind of illness with iron there is fear: for which it is necessary to beware of the case in it.
And the method of the operation is, that you should order the weak person, to reduce the intestine with his hand to the interior of its own concavity, if it has fallen back. Then he should be lifted up onto his neck between your hands: and lift up his thighs.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and cut the skin of the testicles along its entire length. Then fix on both lips of the incision hooks, according to which you will indicate for opening the incision with them: and let the incision be according to the quantity that is possible, so that the egg can come out from it.
Then scratch the wrist, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white wrist is detected, hard on every side: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white wrist, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the wrist according to, and release with it the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the interior of the cut of the testicles: and with this extend the white sifach upwards, with your left hand: and lift the mouth with the sifach to the place of the incision: and instruct the assistant, that he should extend the mouth upwards: and you loosen the adhesion, which is behind the completed solution.
And search with your fingers, that there should not be anything there from the intestine entwined in the white and hard sifach. If you find something of it: then push it to the lower belly.
Then take a needle, in which is a thick thread, made a ligature from ten threads: and introduce it at the end of the sifach, that is, of the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles that follows the incision: then cut the ends that project from the thread, until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over others with a figure that is in the form of a cross: and tie with them the sifach, of which we spoke, which is under the skin of the testicles with a vehement ligature, until it cannot allow any of the vessels, which nourish them to send to them anything: so that there does not occur from it a hot apostema. And put again a second ligature outside the first ligature, a distance of less than two fingers from it. And after these two ligatures, let out from the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity of the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely according to its roundness, and remove the mouth from it.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles at the incision, from which runs blood and serum: as we have narrated in what was previously said.
Then administer a wool submerged in oil, and put it on the wound: and administer the ligature that we have narrated. And when the white vitriarized sifach which we mentioned is cauterized, after its incision, fearing a flow of blood. For this often happens. And release the ligament, until it falls by itself.
If its fall is delayed, then let it be bathed with warm water: and put on top of it what we mentioned, until it falls.
Then treat the wound with the remainder of the treatment of wounds, until it is cured.
Chapter 66.
Concerning the Vein that has a wart.
On this vein I have not seen anyone who dared to perform its cure with iron.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we narrated concerning the vein which is with the Vitae. Which is to bind the vessels after the section above it with facility below: then cut in the middle, and treat afterwards with what opens it, until the vessels fall: and treat the wound, according to what we said, until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Concerning the rupture that occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we said, and the place protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is little, and returns every hour: but truly if the time with this condition is prolonged, a fissure is added in the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And this happens from the extension of the sifach which is in the groins, as we said. Which is because the sifach extends: then becomes soft, and the place becomes calloused, and protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cauterization, as was previously explained.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, in this manner: and it is that the weak person lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the place of the rupture and the prominent part, a cross-section in width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then stretch the Alsifak and what is under the skin until when it is detected the white Sifach which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a rasp and put it on the prominent place of the Sifach and press it to the depth of the belly.
Then sew two prominent places on the extremity of the rasp from the Sifach and join one of them with the other: then extract the extremity of the rasp.
And do not cut the Alsifak at all, nor stretch the groin, nor anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of intestinal rupture.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. When you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound, until it becomes consolidated.
For the Sifach is contracted, and prominence of the rupture is not added.
And cauterization is better in this place: since it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles often becomes softened in certain men, because of which the flesh that is between them becomes softened and its appearance becomes foul.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked to cure it, to make the weak one lie on his back, and to cut the entire skin that has been softened above the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if necessary, first remove the excess of the softened skin with three or four sutures, and secure the suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds, until it is healed, and the threads fall out.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law, and because of that it would be permissible for me not to mention it in my book, and its mention is not necessary except for two reasons.
One of which is that it be in the science of medicine when he is questioned about it, and so that he knows the cure for one to whom it happens.
And the other method is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our utility through them, such as mules, boars, and cats, and similar ones among animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Or by extraction. Or by splitting and cutting.
In that which is done by extraction, the method of operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water, until its testicles soften and relax, and hang down: then we extract them with our hand, until they dissolve and do not appear to the touch.
In castration by splitting and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the spermatic cord, and cut above all one ovum with a single section, until when two ovum proceed: then cut what is after you have excised both, and do not leave on them any of the sifaket except subtle sifac, which is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by extraction: because extraction perhaps leaves something of the testicles, for which reason the animal desires coitus.
Then treat the wound, until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of the hermaphrodite of two methods.
Hermaphrodite from urine is a second two modes. A wound of theirs is, which appears in what follows the space, or on the skin of the testicles, in what is between the two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs from what is on the skin of the testicles.
In women however is one species, and is the woman's vulva above the pubes as the testicles of a small man entirely, protruding to the outside: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from men, and one species from women, is: that it is necessary to cut away the added flesh, until the impression of them disappears. Then treat them with the cure of remaining wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine exits, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
Concerning the cutting of the tent-like thing, and the flesh that protrudes in the vulvas of women.
The prepuce perhaps is added over the natural thing, until it becomes foul and its appearance is ugly: and sometimes it becomes magnified in some women to such a degree, that it expands like in men, and reaches up to the coitus.
It is necessary therefore to hold the excess of the prepuce with the hand, or with a hook, and cut it: and do not go too deep in the cutting, especially at the root, so that there does not occur a flow of blood.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds, until it heals.
The flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the opening of the womb, until it fills it: and perhaps it protrudes to the outside like a tail: and because of this some of the first call the disease "caudate". It is necessary therefore that we incise it as we incise the tentskin and treat it until it is healed.
Of the treatment of Alratica, which is a woman's ulcer not having been perforated.
Chapter 72.
Alratica is, that it is a woman's ulcer not perforated, or is a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from a disease which preceded it: and this itself comes either from flesh born added, or from sifach subtle, or from a spatula: and it comes either in the depth of the matrix, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and prohibits coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps prohibits menstruation.
And its recognition is made by the appearance of an obstetrician, if the obstruction is apparent nearby.
If however it is not apparent, then feel for it with your fingers, or with a probe.
If however the obstruction is from subtle sifach, and it is near to both lips: then touch it and break it apart.
And it is, that you put upon the two lips a poultice.
Then place your indexes of both hands together, and let the woman be on her back with her thighs spread apart. Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the subtle sifach is broken apart, and the obstruction is opened.
Then take a woolen thread, and dip it in oil, and put it on the place: and let the woman apply it every day, so that the place is not consolidated by another thing.
If however the sifach is thick and dense: then it is necessary to cut it out with a broad spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If however the obstruction is from flesh born, then suspend it with hooks, and incise it: and let there be with you medicines which sedate the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus mixed with the whites of eggs.
Then administer a wide tube made of lead, so that the wound does not heal quickly, and it holds for some days: and administer a bandage made from dry linen, then the rest will be cured by treatment, until it is healed.
And when there arises in the matrix a nativity of other flesh: it is necessary therefore that they be cut according to this method: for there is not an apostema which is cancerous, for an apostema is cancerous which is in the matrix, nor does it become contrary with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, of Athehelil, and of the redness of the buttocks in women's wounds.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the openings of the veins, until from them flows much blood continually.
When therefore hemorrhoids become chronic, they become thelil: and I have already spoken of the division of their species, and their signs: and I will say here which of them receive treatment, and which not.
I say therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the matrix, and do not appear to the senses: then there is no treatment for them with iron.
But those of them which are in the opening of the matrix, upon which the sensation falls, are those which can be treated.
It is necessary therefore that you send the woman into a cold house. Then extend the hemorrhoids with the forks, or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle over them at the flow of blood from one powder of incisions without biting: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and incense, and similar to them.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards put her into cold water.
For if the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and crushed pomegranates, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it over its back.
If therefore blood is drawn with it, it is good: and if not, make blisters adhere to the back and the breasts, without scarification.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of the branches of aulalat, that is, aglanter, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the place.
When therefore the aposteme has rested, then treat the place with ointments, until it is healed.
The Albarth root is similar to the heads of alhaasse, and its appearance is rough.
It is necessary therefore that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said equally in the treatment of ailments: and treat it, until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the perforation of the uterus which occurs in the matrix.
There occur in the matrix many kinds of apostemes, such as cancer, and the aposteme of stones, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot aposteme.
And I have already spoken of all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of them, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot aposteme which occurs in the matrix, when it is among the apostemes which collect pus, and you should know how its opening is made with iron.
It is necessary therefore that you consider. Then if the pain of the aposteme in its beginning is acute with percussion and inflammation and fever: and you see it to be red: if sense falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and treat it with that which helps against maturation, until when the acuteness of the accidents has rested.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat that has two seats, and she should lean back or lie on her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of her abdomen: and her hips should be expanded, and she should put her arms under her thighs, and tie both with a ligature close to that.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument by which the orifice of the matrix is opened.
And it is necessary when you administer this instrument, that you fix with the radius the depth of the woman's matrix: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and harms the weak.
If the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary that you put pillows on the surface of the depth of the matrix: so that the entrance of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix is prohibited: and it is necessary that the midwife puts a thread which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and that she holds the instrument, and that the servant turns the thread, until the depth of the matrix is opened.
When therefore the exit appears, and is touched by the hand, and is soft and mild: then it is necessary that you cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the sanies are evacuated, then it is necessary that you put on the wound a bandage submerged in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and put on the bandage, and extract the section from the depth of the matrix.
And put outside on the matrix, and on the pubes clean wool submerged in water, in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And when the matrix and wound are washed, it is cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then anoint with ointment.
What if the wound is hidden within the matrix, then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it with iron, but rather to cure it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 70.
The doctrine of obstetrics, how they medicate living embryos, according to an unnatural birth figure.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the figure of a natural birth.
From the signs of it are, that when you see a woman pressed at the lower parts, and desires to smell the air, and is alleviated above what is above her from the birth, and there is a hastening of the exit of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is over its head, and the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press her womb, so that the embryo may come down quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the afterbirth descends with it, and is cleansed from those superfluities of a good cleansing.
But that which is besides this birth, is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For when the fetus comes out over its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet, and one of its hands, or one of its feet: or its head and its hands come out: or its belly comes out: and perhaps it is inverted over its neck, and similar things from unpraiseworthy figures.
It is necessary therefore for the obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure of them, and how the device is in it, and is signified by that, and is established upon it.
When the fetus moves up above its head with its natural exit and presses upon the woman, and parturition becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her; and fumigate her vulva with a decoction of fenugreek, and with humid oils.
Then the midwife should insert her little spatula between her fingers and find the secondine with it and cut it with her nail until what is in it runs out from the humidity; and press the woman's abdomen until the fetus comes down.
If it does not come down, then it is necessary that the woman be given a clyster made from fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
Then order her after the clyster to be compressed: and make her sneeze with a concoction, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
If both hands of the fetus come out first, then it is necessary that you push them back with ease, little by little. If it does not pass into the birth passage, then put the woman on a seat and lift her feet up; then strike the seat against the ground; and let the woman be held, so that she does not fall with the striking.
If the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut them off, and extract the remainder of the fetus; and tie its hand with cloth, and pull it out gently: for it will come out.
The embryo comes out over its feet. When the fetus comes out over its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards; then turn the fetus little by little; afterwards pull it out evenly.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
When the suppurating matter comes out up to the hips, then order him to be compressed and make him sneeze with the confection, for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then reduce the fomentation little by little, until you put him according to his natural shape. For it will come out then with an easy exit.
What if it is prohibited with all that we have described, then take from the mucus of the altea, and the oil of sesame, and the dissolved gum, and strike everything in a mortar with a good stroke, then smear the ulcer of the woman and her lower abdomen. Then make her sit in warm water, until she gets the hypogastric region affected.
When you see that her lower parts are already warmed, then make for her a seat of myrrh and apply it. When she has held the seat for one hour, then make her sit on the seat. Then make her sneeze and constrict its mouth and nose, and press the lower part of the abdomen with an easy compression. For the pus will come out immediately.
The fetus comes out over the knees and hands. When it comes out according to this form, then insert his hands gradually into the introitus. Then the woman will be raised over her neck, and her feet will hang down to the lower parts, and she herself will sit reclining on a bed, and will clasp her hands. Then press above her abdomen gradually. Then extract what is under her feet from the pubic area, until it is prepared in the lower part. What if the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press what is above the pubic area gently, until the fetus rises to the upper parts. Then he should insert his hands, and gently straighten the fetus: and order the woman to compress, until the fetus comes out.
The fetus comes out hanging sideways from the hands. It is brought down in the reduction of his hands. If however he cannot reduce it, then he should elevate the woman, and make her walk.
If indeed she cannot walk, then he should make her lie on a bed: and strike her thighs with a vigorous shaking.
Then administer the ointment that you prepared from mucilages.
Which if the part taken accepts it, then make her sit on a seat. Then attend to the reduction with his hands, and straighten the fetus according to its natural figure: and make the woman sneeze, and order her to compress herself, until it comes out.
The fetus emerges over its shoulder, with hands outstretched, and its face is towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife holds the hand of the fetus, then she should turn it around gently, and straighten it with ease.
When it is straightened, then put on its neck what we have prepared from oil and mucilages.
Then order her to move it gently. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and order her to lean to the right side. Then order her to compress herself: and make her sneeze with violence.
The prepared fetus comes out over the flank. When it descends to the opening of the womb in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail, until it is evacuated from moisture.
If I suspend it above the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus to the inside, until you place it according to what is appropriate, and tell the woman to press herself several times, for it will come out with a light exit.
The exit of twins, or of many fetuses. Know that twins often are born, and sometimes three, and four. But truly that is extraordinary, and rarely happens.
Five is a thing beyond nature, and they do not live fully: and the afterbirth contains them, however many they are, as one secundine: and they are separated by a siphach, distinguishing between them a tied ligament at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they come out just as one fetus comes out with a natural and easy delivery, and they come out with an infamous delivery, as we have described.
What if some of them are difficult at birth, and they reach that which we spoke of, concerning unnatural positions, then treat them as we have described: and let it be with subtle skill, and do what is done with ease and slowness, and be ingenious according to every figure with what is prepared for him from the guiding ingenuity towards health.
A recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos, and are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has been verified by me, that a woman aborting has expelled seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
Which was done for the measurement of the glorious wise one.
This therefore is all that is necessary to be in the science of Midwifery. For a hole will penetrate to something similar to that: he should apply to it with what is suitable.
Chapter 76, Head or Chapter Seventy-Six
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I have said in the division of medication, and it does not come out, and you need to use an operation with the hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If the woman is of healthy strength and does not have any of the accidents for which loss is feared over her, then it is necessary that the woman should be placed on a bed, on her back, and her head should be bent downwards, and her thighs lifted up: and a servant should hold her from both sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body does not extrude during the extraction of the fetus.
Then the mouth of the matrix should be moistened with humid oils, with mucus of the altea plant, and fenugreek, and linseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucus: then she should insert it into the matrix with ease. Then she should seek with it the place where the nails are fixed from the fetus, and the places suitable for that.
Consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend on its head: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its armpit, or in the places near the ribs, and under the hypochondria.
If however it has descended on its feet, then in its breast, and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand, and put its curve in what is between the fingers of the left hand: and insert with the hand with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places which we have spoken of, until it reaches the empty space.
Then he should insert on the opposite side another hook or a third, if necessary, so that the contraction is equal and does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended with an equal extension, and the extension is not just according to straightness, but rather it should be moved to every side, so that the exit of it is alleviated, as happens with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is fitting for what is between them, that the extension should be made gentle. If a part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some fingers with oil and insert them from the side, so that she turns it out with them, what is retained.
If a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks should be moved to another place that is higher: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If then a hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to push it back, because of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then pull it out until when the whole comes out, cut it at the joint of the arm, or at the elbow: and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and with the two feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or there is a constriction at the exit, or there is water collected on its head: then it is necessary that a sharp Spatumile be inserted between the fingers, and that with it the head should be grasped, and the water extracted: or it should be broken with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly, he should do if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then it is necessary that the shoulder be cut: or it should be extracted with a misdach, as we have said. Then grasp the bones with forceps.
What if the head protrudes and is constricted at the fork then it will be found until the humidity that is in the chest is poured out.
If however it does not become complicated and nor does it press on for the exit: then cut the head bit by bit, according to what is possible for you.
What if the lower part of the belly is an accumulation or there is dropsy in it: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until humidity runs out from it.
If indeed the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the matrix is light.
If however it is constricted at the belly or chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth which you have wrapped over your hand: and find the belly or chest, until what is in them runs out.
If however the remaining limbs are delivered and the head returns: then the Midwife should insert her left hand. If indeed the mouth of the matrix is open, then she should insert her hand into the depth of the matrix, and seek with it the head, and draw it with her fingers to the mouth of the matrix: then she should insert in it one hook, or two hooks, and draw it with them.
What if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, on account of the hot apostema which has happened to it: then it is not necessary that she should labor over it, but rather it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid things, and ointments: and administer plasters: and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
What if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible that it will come out evenly: then administer what we have said regarding a living fetus.
What if it is not possible, then cut bit by bit, and extract.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything of the afterbirth inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said regarding hot apostumes which occur in the matrices.
What if there occurs a flow of blood, then let it be stopped with astringent waters, and administer the remainder of the cure.
And I have indeed already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was, then she became pregnant on top of it with another, afterwards the other fetus also died. Therefore, a postule occurred to her after a long time on her navel, and it became inflated, until it was opened: and it began to emit pus.
I was called therefore to her cure, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound was not consolidated.
I put therefore on it certain strong attractant plasters: and the bone came out from its place. Then several days passed for her, and another bone came out. I was astonished therefore at that, since there is no bone in the womb.
I thought therefore, that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I examined the wound, and I extracted many bones, with the woman being in her best condition: and she lived for a long time afterwards, and a small amount of pus came out from the place.
And I did not confirm this extraordinary thing, except that there is science and assistance in it, for what the medical artisan administers with his hand from the cure.
Chapter 78.
On the forms of necessary instruments for extracting the fetus.
The shape of the Vertiginis by which the matrix is opened.
This figure below is the form of a Strictor, which has equal books, and on which are two equal vertiges at the extremities of two wooden pieces. Truly this Vertige ought to be finer than the Strictor, and that it should be made either from ebony or boxwood.
The width of each piece of wood is about two fingers, and the thickness of each one is about one finger, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two additions made from the same type of wood, which have already been fixed to both, whose length is more than half a palm, and the width of each one is about two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix, so that it opens with them when you turn the two vertigines.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of the forceps. However, on the extremity of it there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition is about a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
When you want to open the matrix with it, then make a woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging, what is between her thighs open. Then insert these two joined additions into the matrix, and you hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you want from the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of another Vertiginis which the ancients called the shape of the Impeller by which the fetus is pushed out.
The shape of the Almisdac, with which the large head is pressed, and it is similar to the forceps, which has teeth at the extremity, as you see.
And sometimes it is made with a wrapping, like forceps according to this shape, as you see, which has teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it cuts and presses.
The shape of a bandage having one spike.
The shape of a bandage having two spikes.
The shape of scissors having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The shape of two broad scissors.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more their kinds are multiplied, and the more they are prepared by the artisan, the swifter he is at his operation, and the higher he is among men, on account of their quantity.
Do not therefore despise any of them, so that it may be prepared by you. Their necessity is indeed inexcusable.
Chapter 78.
On the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained with the part, then it is necessary that you should order the weak one to retain its breath. Then make her sneeze with a condiment: and bind your hand over her mouth, and nostrils. If it then comes out by this means, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and pierce in the cover a hole: and put in it expelling herbs of the matrix, such as calamint, rue, and dill, and chamomile, and sesame, and lignous cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over the fire.
Then put a bundle of reeds over the hole of the cover of the pot, and another extremity into the mouth of the matrix: and let her hold it until the vapour penetrates to the concavity of the matrix.
Then make it sneeze, as we have said. For the second one will come out with ease.
If however it remains after this treatment, and does not come out: then instruct the Midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or flaxseed oil. Then let her insert into the womb, and search for it with that the second one. When therefore she has found it, then let her take it, and pull it out little by little.
If however it is attached deep in the womb, then let her insert her hand, according to what we have described, until when she finds the second one, and pulls it out little by little according to what is proper, so that the womb does not fall during violent pulling: indeed it is necessary, that it be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then let there be added to the amount of the pulling. It itself will cut then, and will be separated, and will come out from the adhering.
Which if the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with sneezing, and from a medication of an ointment with herbs.
If however it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware that you do not fatigue yourself over it in repeated attempts at extraction.
It is necessary indeed, that what comes out to the mouth of the womb from it, be tied to the thigh of the woman. Then anoint her with the ointment called tetrapharmacon. For it will putrefy it after some days, and dissolve it, and bring it out.
Truly however when it putrefies, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and harms the weak woman. It is necessary therefore that fumigations suitable for it be administered.
Certain of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of nasturtium and fig and sycamore.
The form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated for the retention of the secundina and menses.
Let a bowl be made similar to an alcama or from clay: and let the wide end be placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be put on the coals: let her hold it, until that fumigation is consumed: and let another be repeated.
Chapter 79.
On the cure of an unperforated anus.
Many of the boys are born, and their anus is not perforated, whom a subtle fistula has already closed. It is necessary therefore, that the midwife should perforate that fistula with her finger: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula: and let her beware of the arm, lest she touch it.
Then put on top of it a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then cure it with ointments, until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will close, then put a lead pipe in the opening for many days, and let it be removed when the boy wants to defecate.
And now the closure of the anus has also occurred from the consolidation of a wound or an abscess. It is necessary therefore that the consolidation be cut, then cured with what we have said about the cure and lead.
Chapter 80.
On the cure of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
The fistulas that occur in the lower parts are a knot and a thickness that occur near the anus of the fundament or in the space of one of the parts: and it is one fistula or several.
When therefore that knot becomes old, it opens, and a watery white humidity or subtle pus runs out from it.
And when there are some of these fistulas that penetrate. Therefore the penetrating ones are recognized by that which comes out of the evacuation and by the flatulence when the weak one uses the evacuation and perhaps comes out of the worms.
And there are among them fistulas when they are in a space penetrating up to the bladder and up to the passage of the virga. And there are among them penetrating ones up to the joint of the hip and up to the knot of the tail.
From that by which the penetrating fistula is recognized up to the anus, also from the non-penetrating one, it is that you insert your index finger into the anus and you insert a subtle probe made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuousness.
That if there is tortuousness in it, then insert into it a subtle probe made of lead or a hair from the hairs of horses, until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
That if you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything come out of the opening from the evacuation, nor flatulence, nor worms as I have said, then know that it is a non-penetrating one: proceed therefore to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or to the passage of urine, then its signification is the exit of urine from it, and its prohibition from this that the place be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating up to the joint of the hip or to the socket of the hip, then its sign is that the probe penetrates up to that place, if there is no tortuousness up to the mouth: and the finding of pain in the surrounding area of the part, and that pus always comes out of it: and that medication is not effective in it, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity to him, from foolish medicines, on which a form is formed.
In that which is not penetrating and not chronic, healing is expected with a plaster: according to what I tell you, and I have already proven: and it is, so that the weak person lies on their back under your hands: and lift their legs up above their hips, and their hips are inclined towards their belly. Then a probe of lead or copper is inserted, if there is a tortuousness in the fistula, until you know where the probe passes through.
If the weak person feels it around their anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel on your finger that the probe has already penetrated through and detected, besides what you feel between your finger and the siphac or flesh: then you certainly know that it is penetrating: do not therefore labor in it, since its healing is not, as we have said.
They have said, however, that a callus is healed in certain men and from the medication which they hope for a remedy, it is to apply a subtle cauterium of ignes according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and insert the ignited thing into the fistula, until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that two or three times, until you know that all those added fleshy growths which are similar to the filter of a bird's pen have already been seared.
Then treat it with linen wraps in butter, until the seared growths come out: then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it is not healed with any other cure.
And if the probe comes out and does not reach to your finger which is in the anus, and there is between it and the probe a thick covering of flesh or siphac: and you see the fistula in what follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dissect with the probe that is in the fistula, until the dissection reaches where the probe's extremity reaches, and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean those filtered flesh parts that resemble the tubes of a bird's feather, so that nothing remains of them.
But if the blood overcomes you, and it separates between you and your operation so that it cuts off those flesh parts: then what is done is better and for a speedier healing, to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
For the cauterization with fire brings together good habits, an attachment of those flesh parts, and a cutting off of blood, and a drying of humidities.
Then treat it with bandages wrapped in butter, or pounded grasses, until the place emits pus, and those attached flesh parts go out into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments, that generate hard flesh: and there are medicines in which there are astringents and drying.
For when it is restored, then already it is healed: and do not repeat the treatment.
But if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the anus, and is prolonged from the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and examine with it.
If therefore you feel a thinness, and between you and it there is a covering of sifac or flesh, and it is near to the penetration: then there is no operation on that, except according to the way of confidence and hope.
Which is, that one of the three methods is administered in it: either you cauterize it, as we have said: or you cut it, until you obtain its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert bandages, and a cure from nearby. And do not proceed far with the cutting, so that you do not injure the continence of the anus, and it happens over the weak point of the exit of the bowel without control. Then treat it with what we have said.
For a strong [wound] will be healed: either you will lengthen the dressing or clean it after you cut it close to the bone, as we have said, or with a probe, or with another instrument of a sharp extremity. Then clean those filtered flesh parts which are in the cut, as far as you can with scrutiny.
Then consider the restoration of the whole wound with the cut, and the upper orifice where it consolidates: and a remaining open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter above the weaker.
And when a fistula is suited in this manner: and it is, when you insert the probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus: then take the probe of perforated extremity, which is like a needle, that is, preparing the skins, according to this form. And insert into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and tie around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula, until it reaches its concavity.
If therefore it is penetrating on the edge of the anus internally near, then extract the thread from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus, and pull out the end of the thread, and bring together the two ends: and tie both, and leave it for one day, or two days: and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tie it well, until those fleshes which are between the two ends of the thread are cut, and fall: then cure the wound, until it consolidates, and is healed.
If however the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate by whatever method is prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For you must not make it because of the lacertum, so that you do not cut it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spoon for a patient with a fistula is pointed at one end and not pointed at the other, so that it does not cut what is not necessary.
Chapter 81.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows after the cutting of them, and the treatment of fissures.
There are two kinds of hemorrhoids. Either they are inside the anus, like vessels containing blood, or they are like a mass of grapes. And among them there are small ones and large ones: and blood always flows from them, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
But truly those that are outside the anus are for the most part small in humidity, from which flows a watery discharge or a little blood with constant flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of the one that is inside the anus, is to prescribe a poultice to sit on: and it is squeezed, until the anus comes out, and the fibers appear to you. Therefore suspend them with hooks: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not retained by the hooks, on account of their humidity and softness, then take them with a coarse cloth, or with a cloth dipped in woolen felt, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and powder over them after the cutting certain hot powders, so that they may serve in place of a cautery. Or cauterize them according to what was previously said in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
What if the anus does not obey evacuation, then introduce a weak enema in which is a small mordication, so that it loosens what is in the anus and it obeys evacuation quickly when the weak one evacuates.
If however the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, then their treatment is easy and simple: and it is that you catch them with your finger, or you catch them with a hook, and you cut them. Then treat them with what we have said, until they are healed.
And he who is averse to cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you administer their suture according to this method. Take an unwound thread, and insert it into the needle. Then draw out the hemorrhoid upwards, and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the other side: and wind the two ends of the thread on the lower part of the needle, and let them be crosswise: and constrict the hemorrhoid with a strong ligature. Then tie the thread, and withdraw the needle.
Do this with all the hemorrhoids, and let one of them be discharged: nor press itself, so that it runs out from it an excess of blood.
Then put on the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil, or cerate, and put it on the anus: and order the patient to rest. Then leave it alone, until it falls off.
When the hemorrhoids fall off, treat them with ointments, and the remainder of the treatment, until they are healed.
On the treatment of Fissures. For many times it happens from dryness of the feces, and from constriction of the nature.
When therefore they become old, and medicine does not penetrate into them: then it is necessary to scrape with the points of a spatula, or with your finger, until they become humid, and the outer skin which prevents them from consolidation is removed. Then treat them, until they consolidate according to what is suitable.
If they do not consolidate: then treat them again with a more vigorous rubbing than the first, until they bleed much, and then treat them, until they are healed.
On the treatment of inverse and non-inverse piles, and of anal fistulas, and of boils.
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs in the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and pain happens from them when walking.
It is necessary therefore that what is around the nail be cut, and that it be held with forceps, or with a hook, and that it be eradicated from its root.
Then treat it, and if you want to cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
From dry Athelil, one is a small, rough, filtred, round eminence on the surface of the body. And they often occur on the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is, that you stretch out the Athelil, and cut it: or tie it with a silk thread: or with a needle, until it falls. And if you want, cauterize it according to what was previously said with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now both inverse and non-inverse Athelil are eradicated with an instrument that I will describe.
A boil is also a small, filtred, thick eminence on the surface of the body, going deep into the flesh: and when it encounters cold, it feels like the biting of a ant, and it occurs in the whole body: and most often it occurs on the hands.
And the treatment of it is, that you take a small tube from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather: and put that tube on the boil, until the circle of the tube holds in the parts of it. Then turn your hand with the cannula, until you reach what is in the vicinity of the anthill; and you will put it in the depth of the flesh, and you will eradicate the anthill from its root.
And if you need to, do that with a bronze or iron cannula, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be drawn to the underside, so that a covering is produced, in order that the grip on the finger may be alleviated and its own rotation.
And if you need to, cauterize the anthill according to what has been previously stated regarding cauterization in the chapter on the cauterizer.
Chapter 83.
Of the forms of instruments which are administered for clysters in diseases of the anus, and of relaxation of the belly, and of colic.
Sometimes the clyster is made of silver, or of gold, or of forged copper, or of hammered metal.
And sometimes they are made small and large from these instruments, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, that which is administered for the treatment of little children should be little; and those whose anuses are weak or painful, thus also their clysters.
A large clyster.
The cannula of it, that is, the upper head in which the thread is tied, should be spacious according to this method: and it should have a distinction so that the thread may be tied as you see, and its lower extremity which is inserted into the anus, should be rounded, that is, not open, gentle, strong, drawn to subtlety: and on one of its sides there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the threads, and a little thicker, and there should be a thread in which medicines are placed from the intestine of an animal: or from paper, which is according to the form of a small asafoetida: whose root is one palm.
And it should be perforated with many holes as the revolver suggests, and let there be a space which is between every hole the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made from crude thread, which is of ten threads or about that, and apply to it the ureter like a sponge. When therefore the ureter is placed in it, let it be tied at the head with strong constrictions between two distinguishing ligatures. Then tie it up with that.
And this is the form of the circle of the ureter depicted here, and of the holes.
The quality of tying with it, is: that you fill the ureter or bladder with medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the weak person: and beware lest it be very hot or very cold.
Then the weak person should lean on his back, and lift his thighs upwards: and put under him a mattress, that is, a skin on which men lie, or a linen cloth.
Then anoint the extremity of the clyster with oil, or with the white of an egg, or with the mucus of the fenugreek, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then let the assistant take the ureter with both hands together, and express it with vehemence, until he evacuates all that is in the clyster into the intestine.
Then extract the Clyster, and let the weak person lift his thighs to his belly.
Which if the medicine compels it to come out, then let him hold as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it the whole night, it is even more useful for healing.
If however you clyster him for illnesses of the belly, and his excretion is hastened: then repeat the clyster until he is healed.
What if there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or painful apostems, then let there be a subtle and mild suppository from those suppositories with which children are treated.
And this should be the form of a subtle suppository placed on a strictured skin.
Head 83 or Head Eighty-three
I have already spoken in the division on the cure of wounds that which belonged to the book, and I will say here the cure of them with the hand, and with medicines according to the complement.
I say therefore, that wounds are differentiated according to what the wounds are made of, and according to the place where the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are made are often such as a throw of a stone: or a cut of a sword, or a blow with a knife: or a strike with a spear, or a stick, or an arrow: and similar to those from many other things.
Wounds that are made according to the places of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver: and similar from those members.
And I am telling the cures of certain wounds, so that I may set down this reasoning and rule concerning the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: since the discussion of complicated cases will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When there is a simple wound on the head and it is not a fracture of bone: consider then if it is from a throw of a stone, or something similar, and has only broken the skin: and it is a large wound, and above an uncertain apostem, and a hot euent: then hasten, and perform bloodletting on the head immediately: and do not delay it: and extract from it blood according to the quantity of its virtue: if there is nothing that prohibits bloodletting, especially if the blood which comes out of the wound is little. And let bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the weak man beware of overeating and wine and coarse foods.
If anything prohibits diminishment, then he will diminish from food and not approach meats nor wine.
And put on the wound if there happens to him a hot aposteme, a plaster made with oil of rose alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
If you are secure from a hot aposteme, then put on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and the air has not yet changed it, a powder which I will describe after a little while: and if the air has already changed it, then put on it certain ointments, until it is healed.
If the wound is large, or is from a cut of a sword and similar, and its lips do not come together with pus, then bring them together with a suture, according to what I will describe for wounds of the belly concerning their suture.
If the wound has already been torn from the bone, and hangs, and there is no retention of it, except in a little suspension, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore to it hard flesh in place of skin, and order the weak person to be nourished with foods in which there is thickness, such as are heads and cooked wheat, until he is like a pulse: and similar things.
What if you find in the skin a rotting, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut away the entire rotten part, and cast it away: then treat the area.
If however in these wounds there is an artery or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not stopped by medicines, then apply above the artery. If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it. What if necessity demands when that which we have said does not suffice, then cauterize it, until the blood is stopped.
If however the wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy, light: so that you powder over them this powder: because it consolidates them before it changes their appearance.
Method of the powder for incarnation. Take one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime: pound the whole thoroughly, and sift: and fill the wound with it, and bind with a good bandage, until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it above with little cloths, and leave it, and do not loosen it while it remains, so that it does not become an aposteme. For the medicine should not be eradicated from it until it is healed.
And when lime alone does that, when olibanum and dragon's blood are not at hand, and also dragon's blood performs the same operation in many great wounds, when it is suitable to be put on them and bound, and they are recent wounds with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
For if the air has already altered them by some alteration, especially when it is in summer time, then it is not in a position for the intention of this powder: therefore treat it with what we have said, so that you put on them certain digestive ointments: or put on them plasters made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then treat the remaining ones with treatment, until they are healed.
If it happens with a wound that there is a fracture of the bone, and it is small, then extract it with a gesture: and I will later speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what is to come.
Of neck wounds.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between its treatment and that of a head wound when it is simple.
If the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no cleverness in it, except that its treatment must be combined with what causes vehement constriction, such as lycium and zegi, and similar things. For they injure the nerves and constrict them.
And do not put anything cold on the wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most elevated of the membranes: and let that with which it is treated be mild medicines, such as calx lota with sweet water infused several times with oil, or with rose oil and tutia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture: or constrict its lips with powders. Then treat it, until it is healed.
If the wound has depth, or if a sinus occurs in its lower part, in which pus has already collected, then perforate it in the most depressed place in it.
For if an artery has been cut in the wound and a flow of its blood has followed, then separate it, or cut it off, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if necessity demands it.
If the spongy parts of the throat have been cut, or all of it, and the alhaugei have been saved: then bring together the lips of the skin with a suture over the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat, but equal it, and reduce it to its natural figure. Then tighten it with a decent stricture, and diminish it for some days. Then treat it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitation, until it is healed.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then perforate it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them, or as many as you can: and what is not prepared, let it be, until the wound putrefies, and is separated and the protrusion is alleviated.
What if the wound is fresh, then powder over it the powder that I have described. If however a bone is seen in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with that which I have mentioned in its own chapter.
On the wound of the shoulder blade.
If it is a thrust of a lance or a dagger: and you see its depth, then consider. If therefore foulness exits from the wound, when it is breathed out from it by the weak, then know that the wound is mortal.
What if the depth is not to it, and it is fresh with its blood: then do not put on it powder from the first hour, nor tighten it, so that the blood is not retained in its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the weak person: but put on it an attractive ointment, and dress it twice a day.
If indeed the ointment is not present to you, then put on the mouth of the wound old cotton, so that it sucks out what exits from it from its humidities: and make the weak person sleep on the wound, so that what accumulates in it runs.
If indeed the wound has already passed three days, or more, and it does not happen to the weak person a spasm, nor a bad trembling of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see its other dispositions good: then know that the wound is saved. Treatment is thus applied to it with bandages, and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If the healing of the ulcer is excavated and it always opens, then you should know that a fistula has already been formed. Treatment is thus applied to it from its own source or chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut of a sword or a knife, and it is superficial on the chest or back: then treat it with what was previously mentioned concerning stitching, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If however it has already made an impression on the bone, and a fragment of it has cut in: then examine the wound, and hasten to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If indeed they are not separated, then leave them alone, until the wound becomes putrid, for the extraction of them will be alleviated.
The judgment of treatment for other accidental wounds in other limbs, is the same as what we have already said.
On the wounds of the abdomen, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their treatment.
The disruption that occurs to the abdomen is great, moderate, and small.
From a great one, therefore, sometimes the intestine comes out, or the contents of the intestines.
Because their protrusion is more vehement and difficult to treat.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult from another mode. It follows therefore, that their reduction is more difficult, if you do not hasten to push them back into their place immediately: because they become swollen, open, and enlarged: which makes their re-entry difficult.
Because of this therefore, a moderate disruption is better than the others: since with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in these two types.
Know that the suture of a vein is secondary to four modes.
Two common suture lines come together in the suture of the vein, and in the suture of the other wounds of the body; and two other sutures properly communicate with the remaining wounds. But they are more properly associated with the suture of the vein: and I will describe to you each one with exposition, and declaration.
I say therefore, that when the wound is small, and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then it is on account of one of the two methods. Either on account of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said: or because there is inflammation in the intestine on account of cold air.
When therefore it is thus, then it is necessary that you warm it, so that you immerse a sponge, or a moist cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water cypress, and cumin, and spike, and chamomile, and apply it to the intestine, until the inflammation is relieved.
And sometimes make a wine in which there is astringency: and it is better than water alone for relieving inflammation.
When therefore you see the inflammation is already relieved, then moisten the intestine with water in which has been decocted marshmallow or mallow. For by that will be alleviated its entrance with something of little importance.
But if the return of it is hurried after this cure, then make an incision in the small disruption, with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when prepared, than the incision: and there is no need to cut after necessity and lack of the instrument.
Let one part of it be twisted and acute, and the other part not acute, and the extremity not be subtle with the subtlety of Spatula, but rather more obtuse for a little while: and it is that which resembles a probe, as you see.
When the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes, then it is necessary that there be a reduction of it according to its natural shape in its own place, if possible, over that, because it is better.
When the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the weak one lie on its back, and put its legs higher than its head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then put its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your intention and your consideration always in this, that the part in which is the wound be higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary, that you administer it in large wounds, and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, put it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make that the attendant between your hands, a careful servant, who holds the whole disruption with his hand, and bring together its lips. Then let him who follows sew from it something after something, and this is the manner of a common suture of one.
And it is that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's width. Then measure from the edge of the disruption a quantity of a finger's breadth, that is, of a doctor's, and insert one needle besides what you put thread in both edges of the skin, with two edges of the suture which is under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and now you have brought together two edges of the skin, and two edges of the suture: and they become four rows.
Then tie with double thread around the needle several times on both sides at once, until the two lips of the wound are brought together by a decent union.
Then diminish the thickness of the finger also, and fix another needle in it: afterwards tie it with a thread, as you did with the first needle. Do not cease to do that with what you insert from the needles, until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and fineness: for subtle needles easily penetrate the flesh: and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin: because of that it is necessary that they be medium in fineness and thickness.
And it is not suitable that the needle be fixed in two extremes of the skin close together: so that the flesh does not penetrate quickly, and the wound opens before its consolidation, and they do not stretch also with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the ends of the needles, so that they do not injure the weak place at its sleep: and put pillows made of cloth on every side, which hold the ends of the needles: and leave them, until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For one or two needles, or around them, are sufficient for the suture.
The second common suture is to gather with the suture four ends: two ends of the skin, and two ends of the thread in place of one, with a needle in which there is an equal thread in fineness and thickness.
Then when you penetrate with the needle these four ends, bring the needle back from the side where you began, so that the tied thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so that it is a suture, like the suture of cloth that clothes are stitched with, and put between every suture the thickness of a smaller finger.
Men know this suture.
And with this suture I myself sewed up a wound that had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a major disruption of the wound the size of one palm, and about two palms had come out of his intestines from the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
I put back that which after it had stood, his intestine outside of the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was then consolidated in the space that it had been, for about 15 days: and I treated it, and it healed: and he lived after that for many years, living out his natural term.
And the doctors judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with an ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment was to be found, nor any of the medicines. I put a old cloth over the wound, twice a day, and I persevered with washing it with honey water until it was healed.
But I will describe two proper types of suture according to the account of the discourse.
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture, and you insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle thus penetrates the skin, and into the flesh equally along the length and width of the whole body: leave the thread end on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer in the other flesh on the opposite side.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this same side of the flesh from the outer part to the inner: and leave the thread end which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate to the other side from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration that you make it penetrate in the thread end of the flesh, which is on its side, until it penetrates into the whole.
Then seize also from this same side and its extremity, which is the spleen on the other side, and extract the needle from the skin that it has penetrated.
Then reduce it to that skin, and its extremity of the spleen, which is on the other side, with this extremity of the spleen: and extract it from the skin which is on its side, and make one suture, and another: and make that suture after the suture, until you have sewn all of it according to that example.
And the sum of this suture, is that you should sew like those who sew pelles: so that you have one suture on one side of one extremity of the skin: and that you should pass it to the other side, until you complete.
The second type of its own suture, which Galenus called.
This speech of his has been related, that they sew it according to a likeness, which some physicians do, so that they bring every part to its neighboring part fitting by nature: and apply the extremity of the spleen to its other extremity, and the extremity of the spleen to its other extremity. And that is done according to what I relate to you.
It is necessary that you thrust the needle into the extremity of the spleen nearest to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the interior in that alone: and let two extremities of the spleen pass through. Then turn the needle around, and make it penetrate from the outer part to the interior in the two extremities of the spleen, namely on both sides.
Then turn both around, and also make both penetrate from the interior to the exterior, into the two other extremities of the spleen, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of sewing is better than the common and easy suture, and it is a suture whose mention came before.
This is the treatise of Galen.
And some have said. The suture of the wound is reinforced with two stitches. That is, you insert into them a single thread: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from that which is with you, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew skins equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the wound, then its suture is more difficult than that of the other places of the wound.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound is the judgment of the rest of the wounds.
That is, because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, and sew it, and adapt it: then put on top an incarnative powder.
That if the air has already altered the wound: then put on top of it certain ointments, which are present to you, until they produce pus: and fall apart the threads, and consolidate the flesh, and form a scar. Then treat it as is the treatment of the other wounds, until it heals.
If however the medicines are not present to you, then put on top of it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, an old dressing: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not apply other medications in many treatments, when the wounds are simple.
If however you fear that the wound communicates with the principal members in the injury, then it is necessary to immerse a woolen thread tempered with warm oil, or in rose oil: and put it around the places that are between the groin, and under the armpits.
That if it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in its intestines (for many times this happens) then clysterize it with a styptic wine, black, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already penetrated to the intestine, and an ulcer has been made which penetrates to its concavity.
And you should know that what is from the thick intestine is of easier treatment and what is from the thin is of more difficult treatment.
The intestine which is called the Jejunum does not receive treatment from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, that it is from many veins, and their greatness, and because of the thinness of its body, and because of the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
If what proceeds from the wound is feces, and you catch it fresh: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce intestines equally.
If indeed it has passed beyond the space, and already it has become green or black: then it is necessary that you constrict it with a thread above the place which has become discolored from it, so that there does not occur a flow of blood. For in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligature, and put two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so that the pulling of it may be alleviated by you, and the extraction of it in case of intestine, and the emission of pus of the wound.
The treatment of a wound which occurs in the Intestine.
When there occurs a disruption in the Intestine and it is small: then it is possible that it be restored in some men: because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound became chronic, and a fistula was formed, and there came out from it a discharge and gas.
I applied therefore the treatment, until I was not confident in its healing: nor did I cease to treat it subtly, until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
After I saw the place already consolidated, I feared for the weak, that which would happen to the weak would befall a disease in its stomach: and there did not befall it from that a befalling disease. And it remained in its better dispositions, eating and drinking, and blowing, and it entered a bath, and was exercised in its diets.
And now certain experimenters have said, that when a wound happens in the intestine and is small: then it should be tied according to this method. And it is, that you take the poultices of large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and put one poultice among those that have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When it has seized upon them, and closed its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not loosened.
Then put another poultice near the first, and do not cease to do that with a poultice after a poultice according to the quantity of the whole wound.
Then reduce it itself, and its own wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine, until the intestine is healed and cured, and no harm befalls the weak.
And now it is possible that the intestine be tied with a subtle thread: which is taken from the intestine of an animal, and attached to it after it has been thrust into a needle.
And it is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and much flesh comes out. Then tie at its end a subtle flaxen thread wound around. Then thrust that thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine with it. Then reduce it itself to a push.
And this method of sewing with poultices and intestine is not but according to the way of trust and hope.
One knows a wound that is great and large, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no ingenuity except subtlety, and there is not its healing at all.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Know that every wound or abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and becomes an ulcer, and does not heal, and always discharges pus, and does not close: then it is universally called a fistula in whichever member it may be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula is indeed a hard, white, calloused and blocked nodulation, with which there is no pain, to which is similar the hollow of a bird's feather: and because of that some people call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And it is in certain hours wet, which discharges pus. And perhaps the moisture is discharged at certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and is little: and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already stated in the division, then when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor is born in it flesh, is not that except on account of one of nine causes.
One of which is, or on account of the smallness of blood in the body: or on account of its malice: or because between it and above its lips there is hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is much filth and foulness: or because the ulcer in itself is rotten, and the matter which is applied to it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inconvenient for its cure: or because corruption falling in the region is a type of pestilence, or by property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: in which difficult digestion of fevers occurs, and delayed healing of abscesses by nature: or because in it there is one mouth, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their cures with medicines in the division; and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore, that Fistula occurs in all members of the body. For some of them are Fistulas that pass to the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs: or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the composite joints: such as the hand, and foot: and some of them are which approach nearness of the principal member, and similar things.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is in this manner, is from diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and the occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
What if it is from the Fistulas any of whose depth does not penetrate to these places which I said: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and you use to penetrate to the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of brass, or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and inquire into it with it.
If however in the Fistula there is crookedness, then investigate it with a probe of refined lead. For lead, with gentleness of its body, enters and bends around the crookedness.
What if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to investigate about it with a probe. Therefore stop up one of its openings from its own openings.
For the moisture that you stop it with, goes towards the other openings, and flows out from them.
Then carefully and precisely inquire according to which method it is possible for you: to know what that is a hole, or a nerve, and is the long or short concavity of the Fistula: or is one Fistula with many openings, and stand on all that, with the greatest strength of yours: with your questioning, with which you question the weak, and the discovery of pain upon compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes occurring in the examination.
When you stand upright over all those stations of urine, then proceed to cure according to confidence: and it is, as you consider then, if there is a fistula appearing nearby or in a healthy place far from the joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places that I told you: then cut the fistula according to what was previously mentioned in my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which grows in its opening from flesh, or thelul, and similar things: and cure it, until it is healed.
If the fistula is of deep and distant depth, and is according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it as deeply as is possible for you. Then cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply unbroken bandages in sharp medicines: and insert them up to the concavity of the fistula which you grasped with the iron: do that repeatedly, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remained in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal by means of that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
When the cause of the fistula is an opening, and it is confirmed by you: then investigate it, and cut it according to what I have narrated to you: if nothing prohibits you from the vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
When the opening is detected by you, and there is in it something of corruption, and blackness: then scrape it, until all its corruption is removed. Then cure it with what makes flesh grow on it, until it is healed.
What if it does not heal, and discharges pus as it was doing: then know that you did not attain the complete eradication of the corruption.
Cut down on that second, and make a careful incision of it, and cleansing of the same with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If then it is healed, it is good: and if not, then you should know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which you have not reached. There is therefore no ingenuity for you in it, except to entrust it to nature.
What is corrupted of the small mouth, and it is possible for you, draw it out with subtle forceps that convene to it.
If however there are many bones, then make a careful pulling of all of them, and do not leave any of them behind with your strength.
If indeed something from the humidity makes an obstacle for you, and there is no fear of incision or error: then cut those humidities and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed you are not prepared to remove the bones from the hour of your treatment, then apply on the wound what will putrefy it: and leave it, until it putrefies what is around those bones of flesh and humidity.
And guard the wound so that it does not consolidate. And let the section which you cut in your operation be bound with a bandage. Below put on it, if you wish, cotton submerged in sulphur beaten with oil: or cotton submerged in Egyptian ointment, or some of the green ointments.
For when those humidities putrefy, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of them will be facilitated, and their attraction.
If however there is one large bone, such as the bone of the thigh, or the hip bone, and similar to these, and a large part of it is corrupted: then scrape it with a final scraping, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If the bone which is in it has become corrupted, and is a large part, and the corruption has already affected the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and to cut it entirely up to the place where the corruption penetrates: then treat it, until it consolidates.
And I will tell you a story about a man who had an injury on his thigh: so that you may take it as an example and aid to your operation.
There was a man of youthful age, about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, from a cause which moved upon it within the body, that is, from the interior, until the materials reached the thigh and it became an aposteme, a large aposteme: and there was not an external cause for him.
The time passed with it until the error of the doctors, until the aposteme opened, and many materials flowed out with it. And the treatment of it was put off, until the thigh became fistulous, and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus, and the bodily fluids.
A multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, and there was no one skilled in the art among them, until I was called, and I saw his thigh, and the materials which flowed out from those openings with a great flow: also the whole body of the man had already wasted away, and its color was citrine.
I then inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached to the bone.
Then I thoroughly examined all the openings: and I found that they connected to a sinus coming from all parts of the thigh.
I cut around one of those openings, until I exposed a piece of bone: and I found it corrupted, which had already been gnawed away, and was blackened, and putrid, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I will scrape off what has been detected by me and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I scraped off what was not in the bone except that corruption which I cut away and scraped. And I will now eradicate it.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines for a long time. And it is not consolidated.
Then I felt and probed on the bone a second time above the first detection, and I found continuous corruption with the bone, and I scraped off what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
I probed then on it again, and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and to attempt its restoration: and it was not restored, until I cut out about one palm from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed: and this iteration in the operation of it, and its section, would not have been necessary, except because of the disposition of debility and infirmity, and the smallness of its tolerance, and my fear concerning it of death: for it happened to him in every hour from an excess of evacuating bad syncopy.
He was healed therefore by a complete healing: and hard flesh was born in the place of the bone, and good disposition was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he changed in his dispositions: and walking did not cause him any harm at all.
If the bone is prominent in the place of the body and already broken, then it is necessary to scrape it, according to this method: and it is that you take a ligature, and tie it on the extremity of the prominent bone: and tell someone to pull it upwards: and put another ligature made from coarse wool over the first ligature. Then tie it above the flesh that is under the bone and stretch out the extremity so that you pull the flesh to the lower parts and you cut the flesh above the place you want to saw, so that the saw does not wound the flesh.
Put a stick or a board under the lower bone decently: because when you do that, it is not prevented from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawing be above the corrupted place for a little while, so that the corruption is not in the concavity of the bone, and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and compels to saw itself instead of another.
Which if the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, namely the continuous part of it with a part: and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it: then cut the flesh from all parts entirely. Then put a stick below.
Afterwards saw it from the first part, where the corruption is, until the sawing continues from the other part: and let the sawing be according to the length from the corruption for a little while, according to what we said.
Which if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no ingenuity in it except for scraping.
Which if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or in the sole of the foot: then the matter in it is very difficult. It is necessary that you investigate how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever ingenuity is straightened for you: when the vein or nerve does not make a contradiction for you.
And know that the incisions and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Wherefore it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations signify to you above the species of an instrument which you need when there is lengthy study with you. And the knowledge of the modes of this art is a testimony of the modes of diseases: then indeed you will find by yourself that which suits it from instruments for every weakness.
And I will establish for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you will pose as examples on which you will stumble, and a test by which you will experience regarding others.
The shape of another saw.
The shape of a razor for joints. Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key: and its points be according to the shape of the points of a lancet.
And it does not fit, unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with it, when they are corroded, or the mouth is wide and large.
The shape of a larger razor.
The shape of a broad razor.
The shape of a razor in which there is a cavity.
The shape of another subtle razor.
The shape of a razor with a curved end.
The shape of a small razor, of subtle handling.
This is similar to a file, and the extremities are like a saw: it is shown in many places from the rasping of bones.
The form of a rasp that suits the rasping of that which is perforated by bones.
Its extremities are triangular, and it is sharp at the extremities.
It is made from Indian steel. And it is similarly necessary that all the things we have spoken of be made from rasps, and incisors, and saws.
Of the cutting of extremities, and the sawing of bones.
The extremities rot, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When therefore you have treated that corruption with medical cures, and the cure is not effective: and you see the corruption falling upon a member, which nothing has struck: then it is necessary that you cut into that member as far as the corruption has reached, so that the weak man may be freed from death, or from an evil which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign to which this happens is that the member becomes blackened, until it rots: as if fire has consumed it, or it has rotten after the blackening: until the rottenness is cut into, as far as that which follows the member, and creeps into the whole body.
It is suitable therefore with the cutting of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain poisonous things: such as the sea scorpion, and viper, and weasel, and similar things.
If therefore the corruption or sting is in the extremity of a finger, then cut into the finger, and do not give space to the corruption, so that it may not proceed as far as the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it out from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption, until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if it invades into it, then cut the arm at the elbow at its joint.
If on the other hand corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow then there is death of the weak limb. And to administer beyond that from the cure, is a quantity of virtues.
And do similarly for the foot, when corruption invades into the toe, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it takes hold in the body of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. If however it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
What if corruption has already gone beyond the knee, then there is no ingenuity in it, except to let go and abandon the weak one to death.
And the method of cutting a limb or sawing it is to tie a ligature below where you want to cut, and tie another ligature above the place. And let one assistant stretch one ligature downwards to the lower parts and let another assistant stretch the upper ligature upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures with a broad spatula until the whole flesh is laid bare. Then let it be cut or sawed.
And it is fitting that you put a linen cloth on all parts, and the saw does not touch the healthy place: and an injury added to the weak one, and a hot abscess.
If however there is an issue of a flow of blood internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put on it certain powders that stop the blood. Then return to your medication until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage suitable for it, and take care of it, until it is healed.
And I tell you what happened to a man with his foot, the same thing that I am telling you.
What is it, that a blackness occurs on its foot with a burning which is similar to the burning of fire and that corruption first occurs on its toe until it affects the whole foot.
It put out a man from itself, after it had seen the corruption befalling the limb with its swelling, which it found from the pain and burning of it, and it befalls at the joint and it was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, that same corruption occurred to him on the index finger of his hand.
He came to me and I attempted to cure that excess with what I applied on the hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body, and the excess did not push back, and it began to enter into another finger until the corruption began in the hand.
He called for me to cut his hand and I was unwilling to do it, hoping for a pushing back of that excess from me, and I also feared death for him in the cutting of his hand. For the man's strength was on the case.
After he had given up hope in me, he returned to his land, and he came back to me because of that, which he had done hastily, and he cut his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I did not add this account except as an aid for that which falls from the type of this disease and as a signification which is signified and according to which it is acted.
On the treatment of abscesses, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it makes a collection of pus: then it breaks or is perforated, and what is in it of pus comes out, and the empty place remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is over it like cloth that has already been worn thin: and it does not reach to the end in its corruption, nor does it press on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be called an abscess: and it is not called a Fistula: nevertheless if its space extends until the corruption presses on any of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or a false passage.
And the treatment of it is that you cut the entire wound as it was previously turned out, and especially when it has been subtly divided and made like a cloth, and you are confident because it will not adhere to the place due to its own corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and it does not follow from it the last corruption of the union, and if there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with a clyster, and it is so that you should consider regarding the sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it is of foul odor, then clysterize it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and ginger, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vase, and decocted over fire, until the medicine turns red, and comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need, and dissolve it with water and honey, and clysterize the sinus with it, and constrict its opening, and put the medicine into it for the quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: do this for as many days as until the sinus is cleaned and the foul odor is removed.
And when you clysterize with water of ash, when this medicine is not present to you, and it is that you take the ash of grapevines or the ash of holm oak trees, and cast water upon it. Then mix it and clysterize with it, until you are confident that the sinus has already been washed out.
What if the weak one is not able to tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor water of ash, then clysterize it with water and honey, in which something has already been mixed from crushed ginger. Or clysterize it with honey and wine mixed together, since it is a property of honey that it cleanses and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and astringency in the wine.
When you do that several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has already been removed: then put a suppository on it along with what makes flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take from the plaster dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine, or put a suppository on it with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
What if the orifice of the sinus is constricted, in which the cannula of the clyster does not fit: then widen it with iron for a little while: or put a pledget soaked in Egyptian ointment or in royal ointment on it, until it is widened.
And similarly if the orifice is also too wide, then bring its lips together with a suture: and reduce from it the quantity in which the clyster can enter without obstruction.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus runs is elevated upwards: then make an incision in the lower place that is in it, so that the pus may run out downwards: for when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
What if it is not possible for you to make an incision in the sinus around its lower part according to what you want: then try to prepare a membrane with a preparation so that pus may run out of it with ease according to what you have prepared. Try that nothing of the pus remains in it at all: and take consolidating medicines which are put on the wound, suitable for what you want. And spread them on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it makes contact with the whole sinus. Then cut with forceps directly at the orifice of the sinus a hole, slightly larger than the orifice of the sinus. Then spread from mild ointments on another cloth, according to the size of the hole: and put it over the orifice, positioned lengthwise away from the orifice of the sinus, so that the exit of pus from it is eased: and do not remove the large cloth, except after a few days, once.
That one, however, which is above the orifice of the sinus, is that which you remove at every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may exit: and so that you know, whether that which flows out from it is a lot, or a little: or digested, or undigested.
And with this again consider the location of the sinus itself, whether the master of it feels pain in it, or there is not pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or there is not an abscess in it.
When therefore your medication is thus extended, and you see the material which exits above the orifice of the sinus, then know that the sinus already adheres, or approaches adherence: then therefore loosen it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you loosen the wound, then change the dressing to another, and renew the ointment.
If however there exits from the sinus after a long space subtle pus, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is approaching, since there are men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act to the contrary of that.
If however there exits from the sinus after many days undigested pus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adherence of the sinus is delayed, and its condition is prolonged: then add to the desiccation of medicines, true ones which doctors make, so that they are medicines in their own humid substance, and in their own dry virtue: such as the ointment dyafinicon, when there is added to it an excess of addition from zegi.
And of the greatest last thing by which it is cured, is that you take the ointment dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil, and apply upon it old equal wine in its own substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now perform a similar action to this, when you do not have the ointment of dyafinicon present, melt the honey, when you have decocted it, until it becomes thick and anoint with it. Take myrrh and aloe and benzoin: grind all together, and pulverize it over the honey while it is over the fire. Then smear over it a cloth, and bind it over the wound: and anoint it with honey which you have decocted, until it has thickened: and pulverize the spices over it, and put over it a cloth, and bind them.
And when the treatment is administered there is aristolochia longa, and roots of celestial lily, and it is lily: and flour of the herb, and centaury. Use them simple, or mixed, grind them, and sieve them: and pulverize over the honey which I have described, and use it.
If the matter of the wound should be prolonged, and it is not healed by this treatment: then know that there is a corruption in its depth: or now it makes an impression on the bones, or on the remaining hard members, or on the ligaments: then treat it with the treatment of Fistulas, according to what has been previously stated.
Of the treatment of a panaritium and a worn away nail, and an incised toe, and a cut.
A panaritium is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot: and perhaps it grows on the other toes.
When it is prolonged and the treatment of it is neglected, and it becomes an abscess with a hot abscess: or it becomes rotten, and it emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it entirely rots it, and perhaps the corruption reaches to the bone, until it has a foul smell: and the extremity of the toe becomes large, and its color becomes dark.
When you raise your treatment with what we said in the division, and your treatment does not work: then it is necessary to cut with iron all the excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cauterization is a strong remedy.
If indeed the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of empty nail now press on the flesh inside, and begin to pierce it, and wound it: then it is necessary that you put a fine pumice under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut that flesh with ease, and put on top of what remains of the flesh from medicinally caustic and corrosive remedies, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If however the corruption has already made an impression on the bone, then it is necessary that you cut out that bone, and extract it: for it will not be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains in it.
What if you see corrosion and corruption entering into the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to which a previous mention has been made. Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however a bruise of the nail or a blow occurs, and there is severe pain in it, then it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the weak part first. Then cut the nail with a sharp razor from top to bottom across.
And beware, lest the cut penetrate to the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause through that a severe pain on the weak part, and it will be a cause for the growth of extra flesh in the location.
Then treat the place with what soothes pains.
The finger which is added to the birth in some hands of men is perhaps entirely fleshy and perhaps there are bones in some of them and perhaps there is a nail in it and some of them are born at the root of the joint or they are born in some nodes of the finger. That one which is born at some nodes of the finger does not move and that one which is born at the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
The cutting of that one which of them is fleshy is easy. That is, you cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The treatment of that one whose birth is at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore abstain from cutting it.
In that one which is born on the finger at the last node, then it is necessary to cut the flesh first with a round incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for that purpose. Then treat it until it is healed.
The joining together which occurs to the fingers, often happens either from the birth of the man, that is, it is born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from the burning of fire, and similar things.
It is necessary therefore to cut away that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then put between them lint or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate them, or put between them a subtle sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if there occurs a joining to some fingers with the palm, then cut away that joining according to what prepares and suits the shape of the member.
On the Incision of a Varicose Vein.
There are varicose veins, which are enlarged, and full of melancholic superfluities, which occur in many parts of the body: and they most often happen in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers.
It is necessary therefore to administer a strong purging of the body from black bile by repeated strong purging.
Then perform bloodletting on the patient in that vein which is called basilica.
The treatment of them with an iron instrument is according to two methods. One of them is, that they should be cut and black blood extracted. And the other method is, that the vein should be lifted up, and entirely extracted.
The cutting of it is according to this method. First immerse the leg in warm water abundantly, until the gross and foul blood is dissolved. Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of its thigh to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then lift, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and from above it is necessary that you should perform bloodletting on the weak one first. Then cut the vein to the lower part until a quantity of blood comes out which you see is sufficient and which the strength of the weak one can tolerate.
Afterwards bind it, and instruct him to abstain from foods which generate black bile, and also evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and that harms the weak one.
The lifting of it is according to this method. Scrape the weak leg, if there are many hairs on it. Then insert it into a bath, or soak it in its sheath with hot water until it becomes red and the veins become swollen, or let it be exercised with strong exercise if a bath is not available to it until the limb becomes warm.
Then cut the skin in the direction of the vein's section along its length, or at its end near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and clear the vein from every part until it becomes apparent to sensation, and at its appearance, that which you see is a decline from redness to blackness. When it emerges from the skin, you see it as a white thread, as if it were a tendon.
Then insert the needle under it, until when it is raised and comes out of the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook, gently.
Then cut another section near that section, three fingers apart. Then clear the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it becomes apparent. Then raise it with the needles as you have done, and suspend it with another hook, as you have done at first.
Then cut another section, or several sections, if it is necessary for that purpose. Then raise and cut it at the last section near the heel.
Then pull it out to the section which is above it.
And do that until you pull it out from the section which is higher, or higher than all sections, until when the whole comes out: then cut it.
If it does not obey you to be pulled out and raised: then insert a needle with a strong thread double, and tie it, and pull it out: or insert the needle under it: and move your hand to every part, until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and from it an injury will occur to the weak part.
When you have extracted it entirely, then apply to the wound a wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, and treat it until it is healed.
What if the vein is contracted, having a twisted condition with an involvement of parts, and it is not as we have said according to rectitude: then it is necessary that you find on it for all the part of its twisting, and the place of its involvement.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you elevate it entirely: and beware at your dissection above it lest you cut the vein, or wound: for it will be difficult for you to elevate, or extract it. Preserve therefore your caution.
The shape of the incision by which a vein is healed.
The shape of a blind hook.
It does not have curvature like the rest of the hooks, nor is it of sharp extremity, so that it does not wound the vein: and it is of thick flexibility, gentle: for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein with its subtlety: indeed let it be superfluous grossness, as we have said.
On the extraction of the saphena vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as Alizegi, and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands of little tenderness, that is, in which no herb or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, as occur in bodies of serpents and worms, ascarids, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the inception of this vein is a severe inflammation which occurs in the thigh. Then the place should be warmed. Then the vein begins to come out from the place of that warming, as if it were a root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore the extremity of it appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead, whose weight is one or two drachms, and tie it, and let the suspended lead hang from the thigh.
Whenever therefore something comes out from it to the outside, wrap that in lead, and tie it. What if it is prolonged a great deal, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it at the root until the whole thing has come out. For if you cut it, it contracts and returns into the flesh: and causes an aposteme to form, and decay in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Wherefore it should be treated gently and extracted gradually, until it comes out entirely from its end, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this vein comes out in some men what is five palms long. And now it has happened to me that a man came out with it twenty palms long.
If however it is cut during the time of your treatment: then introduce the needle into its opening, and perforate it with a long needle, with a thread, until everything that is in it of material comes out: and administer putrefaction to the place with medicines for some days. Then treat it with the cure for apostemes.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle of the foot, or in the foot itself: and there are many openings to it, and a branch comes out from each opening.
Treat it itself, as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned beforehand.
On the excision of worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called bovine disease in a certain land among us: therefore, because it often happens to cattle, and there is a small worm which is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it wanders throughout the whole body, going up and down: and it is shown to the sense during its movement from limb to limb, until it breaks out wherever it breaks out on the skin, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. As worms and snakes happen, that is, intestinal worms, and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared on account of its wickedness. For when it wanders in the body, and rises to the head, and reaches the place: then perhaps it opens in it, and emerges, and destroys the eye: and this happens many times.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and extract it, then it is not done unless during its movement, and the appearance of it to the senses.
It is necessary therefore, that you tie what is above it, and what is below it with a strong constricting bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
If it is deep in the flesh, and you do not find it: then put a cauterization with fire on the place, until it dies.
And what is feared most, is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then tie beneath it the eyebrow with a good tight bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
And it is fitting that the weak person should use a cleansing of his body with medicines that dissolve rotten and foul humors.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
Of the cutting upon the disease of Nakir.
This disease is called in our land Nakir, and it is a pain which occurs in certain members, then it changes from member to member.
And I indeed have already seen it, according to what I relate to you. I was called to a weak woman in certain villages. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm's cord.
And after I remained for one hour, I saw a swelling enter with the tendon, as the worm enters, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than it can be, so that it is like living silver, when it runs from place to place.
The pain therefore receded from that place and became fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran into the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it wandered throughout her whole body, according to what I saw.
I was amazed therefore at the swiftness of its change from member to member. And I indeed had not seen this disease before with my eyes in this manner. However I saw many who find the pain changing from member to member, and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is anything but because she was one of those who are from villages with a body dried out by detected veins, hence the changed condition appears to the sense.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this method in those who are delicate and have humid bodies of hidden veins.
When you apply the treatment and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye, as we have said, then tie above it and below it quickly: and cut above it, until that constricted windiness comes out: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with purging of the body, and with that which expels windiness, and cleanses them with foul-smelling pills, and pills of serapion, and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are differentiated according to their own kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is this: that among them are those which have large and small heads, and are concave, and obverse. And among them are those which have three angles. And among them are those which have barbs. And among them are those which have stars or studs.
Those however which are according to the limbs in which they fall, are according to two modes. For either the limbs are from the principal hollow members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and their likes. When therefore it falls into any of these members, and death signs appear to you, which I will tell you afterwards, then it is necessary that you should hasten the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in most cases. And when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it, and penetrates the bone, and exits through the siphac which is above the brain, are: because there occur from that swelling of the brain, and dizziness, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of the intellect, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood exits from the nostrils, or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed. And a white humidity similar to poultice exits from the place of the wound. And there exits from it something similar to the washing of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from cure, and extract the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast: and he feels with it as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in a hollow thing. And perhaps the arrow has a motion similar to the motion of a pulse: and black blood runs out from the wound. And it is followed by coldness of the extremities, and a cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore, that death descends without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung, is the exit of foamy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck become swollen, and the color of the weak person changes. And he exhales a great, high breath: and seeks an attraction of cold air.
For if the arrow falls into the membrane, which is in the breast: then it is near the short ribs: and there is made a great panting with vehement pain, with sighing: and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps it will come out of the wound with some undigested food.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and is fixed in it, something of dung will come out of the wound, or a piece of the intestine, or the gut which has already been torn. There is therefore no hope in its cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
What if an arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the weaker parts, then you should know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder, and arm, and spine of the back, and elbow, and hip, and leg, and their likes among the limbs are saved according to various dispositions: when the arrow does not find an artery or a nerve: and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I relate to you what I have seen concerning the removal of these arrows, so that you may understand through it about your cure.
Which is, because to a certain man an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye below his lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not take out more of it except a small end, with which it adhered to its wooden shaft: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there were no notches.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no bad accident happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and this is that which has barbs. I cut on the same thing between two fingers, and now it was submerged in his throat. I was careful with it, until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from the man into whom it had fallen in his belly, and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed for him, and nothing of his condition had changed, I cut above the arrow, and I probed above it, and I extracted it, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated above it. Afterwards it was after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was consolidated above it, and the arrow remained inside her, and nothing of her condition was changed, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen into his face, and the wound was consolidated, and it remained, not finding much pain for him, and many things similar to these.
And I extracted an arrow from one of the king's nobles, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and it had declined to the right side a little, and the arrow was totally hidden.
I was called then to his treatment after the accident of the arrow for three days. I found the wound of the arrow constricted strongly.
I examined it with a subtle probe, and I did not feel it, and he himself found puncture and pain under his right armpit. The spear was removed, therefore that puncture was from the extremity of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the spot with a plaster in which there was an attractive and digestive virtue, trusting with me that it would bring forth the place and the sign of the arrow would appear to me so I could cut above it, and no accident happened in the place indicating that the arrow had contaminated the spot.
I treated it diligently with a plaster for many days, and no accident occurred, and the wound was consolidated meanwhile; and he remained weak from the extraction of that space for some days, until he felt the arrow on a certain day inside his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I applied therefore to that wound a sharp medicine, corroding for many days, until it was opened: and when I probed it, I felt the extremity of the arrow subtle which adhered to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine, until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us: and he stayed with me for a space of time around four months.
After the wound had been enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and to move it, and it did not obey for exit: then I did not cease to subtly contrive, and to ingeniously work on it with modes of ingenuity, until I began on it one day with well-made forceps, according to which the shape of them will come in the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And physicians indeed judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. I restored it therefore, and the wound was consolidated, and the weak one was healed with complete health; and nothing at all harmed him.
And I will tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows: so that you put that rule and meaning on that which I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood with narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and the skilled artisan compares a little with a lot: and with what is present, above that which is absent: and finds a new operation, and a new instrument in the descent of extraneous things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed, except in two ways. Or by traction from the place into which it entered. Or by the opposite part of another.
And that which comes out from where it entered, is an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place: and is drawn, and comes out.
For if it does not obey to exit at the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you leave it for some days, until the flesh which is around it putrefies: and its attraction is alleviated, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone, and does not obey you to exit, then leave it also for some days: and move it with attraction and motion every day, until it comes out.
For if it does not obey you to exit after days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in the bone on every side with a subtle drill, until the arrows are freed. Then draw it out, and extract it.
If the arrow has already been concealed in a location of the body, and is hidden and concealed from sensation: then investigate it with probing. If you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
If you cannot reach it, on account of the constriction of the wound, and on account of the length of the arrow in the depth: and there is not there a bone, nor a nerve, nor a vein: then probe above it, until the wound is enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
What if there are to it nerves that hold it, then free the flesh fixed in them from every side, with every device that you can, and devices, if it cannot overcome the protrusion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears, and the twisting of them, until it comes out.
And you when you administer the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then use twisting of your hand, with forceps on all parts, until you make it come out: and manipulate with ultimate subtlety, so that the arrow is not fractured, and its attraction and extraction are not made difficult for you.
What if you cannot overcome it in one hour, then leave it for some days, until those things that are around it putrefy. Then repeat it: for the tunic will be loosened, indeed if a flow of blood makes a contrary condition for you, then administer what we have said from the cure in its chapter: and keep your strength away from the incision of the vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer the ingenuity in every way that is possible to you for the removal of the arrowhead: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have narrated to you.
And it is necessary, that you do when you pull out the arrow, that the weak part be according to the figure, according to which it was in the case of the arrow in itself. For it is a greater help. If however it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The arrow which comes out from the opposite part of another, or already proceeds from it something to the exterior: or makes a gibbosity of the extremity of the arrow by sensation from the upper part of the adjacent skin, and you see it prominent: cut therefore over it, and let the section be according to the quantity that the forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull out the arrow: for it itself becomes easy to exit.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarges itself: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for some days: then repeat it, until it comes out.
What if the wood of the arrow is in it, then push it with that.
If however the wood has fallen, and you want to administer a push: then introduce to it a concave instrument, so that its concavity enters into the tail of the arrow: then push it with that.
If however the arrowhead is barbed, then push it with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow is alleviated through that.
Which if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary, that the barbed flesh, in which is the poison, be cut out: if it is possible for you. Then treat it with what is suitable for that.
Which if the arrow falls in the breast, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and is near to that which you touch with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see, and treat it, until it is healed.
And this is the method of forceps, with which arrows are extracted.
Let there be similar extensions like a bird's beak, which are made like iron: when they grasp above the arrow, they do not release it.
And they are made of them in many forms, large and small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
The shape of a pushing barb.
And the shape of a pushing saw.
This is the extremity of the saw, like a radius, so that its entrance is alleviated into the barbed arrow, and it is pushed with it.
Of the cutting of veins.
The veins to be cut, the confluence of which has become customary in the body, are thirty.
Of these there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins which are behind the ears, called the two Herbae; and two arteries which are visible on both temples; and two veins which are in the tear ducts of both eyes, called the Aspicientes; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose. And two Guidegi, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins which are to be cut for bloodletting in the arms, are five veins in each arm.
One of the veins of the arms is the Cephalica, and it is on the left side: and the common people call it the vein of the head. And the Fusca. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica: and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilica, and it is placed on the right side: and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the cord of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow: and it is that in which bloodletting is performed, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a visible appearance.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger: and there are two branches of it.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is the one which is under the curvature of the knee on the left side. And the second is the Saphena, and its location is at the heel on the inner side. And the third is the Vena Nesse, and its location is at the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three similar veins.
On the bloodletting of two veins behind the Ears.
Bloodletting of the two veins which are behind the Ears is a remedy for chronic catarrh, and hemicrania, and sahafati, and old bad head ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting it is according to what I relate. And it is, that the head of the weak person should be rubbed: and his occiput should be frictioned at the place of the two veins with a rough cloth and good friction. Then the weak person should bind their neck with a ribbon, until the two veins appear. And the places of them are behind the Ears in two depressed areas of the head. Seek them therefore with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark there with a cautery.
Then take the lancet, and it is that which is called the Incisor. Then insert it under the vein in the skin, until the lancet reaches the mouth of the vein. Then raise your hand with the vein and the skin upwards, and cut the vein with the skin by a cutting incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or around that, and make come out from blood as much as you wish.
Then bind it with poultices, and leave it, until it heals.
And now the incision of them and their cauterization has been mentioned at the beginning of the book.
Of the two arteries which are in the two temples the bloodletting is a remedy for old migraine and for chronic headache and for constant visual disturbance and for acute outflow of superfluities to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting them is according to what I relate to you. Let the weak person press his neck strongly, until two veins appear with a clear visible sensation: and the pulse of them is shown under your finger. Then indeed mark with cauterization.
Next raise the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the lancet from underneath, and raise the vein upwards. And cut it, as you did with the two other veins, and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then release the tightening of the weak person, and place your finger on the vein for one hour. Afterwards put a bandage and poultices on it, and tie it above with strong constriction: and leave it, until it is healed.
And now the remembrance of them has gone before, and their cutting, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The remedy of bloodletting the vein of the forehead is after the bloodletting of the head, for old facial pains: and for migraine, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its bloodletting is according to what I relate to you. Let the weak person tighten his neck with a bandage, until the vein appears. Next take the instrument that is called the Fossorium.
Place a prominent point that is on the head of the Fossorii above the vein itself, and strike it with a pectoral, or something else in its manner, and let blood flow according to the quantity that you want. Then loosen the weak perforation, and constrict it until it is healed.
And when it is opened with a broad lancet. Truly, it is not suitable that the lancet should be of acute extremity, as are the other lancets, but rather of broad extremity. And let the lancet be according to the transfusion, since the mouth is nearby, and perhaps the lancet will break when it is subtle.
The treatment of the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, is for an eye with itch and redness, and dirt in the eye, and facial pains.
And the quality of bloodletting of them is, that the weak neck constricts with a thread. Then lancet them, and you should stand above its head.
And let the bloodletting be according to the transfusion for a small length, with a small lancet, broad for a short time, for there is no flesh in the location. For if the lancet is of subtle extremity, perhaps it will break.
Then cause the blood to flow as much as is necessary for you. And put a plaster on them, and constrict them for one night, and then loosen them.
The bloodletting of the veins of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent sneezing and facial pains, such as half-headache and redness which occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of its bloodletting is that it constricts the weak part of the neck. Then hold its nose with your left hand, and take a subtle and long bleeding instrument, and fix it in the middle of its lip, between that which distinguishes the nose according to straightness. Since a vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you withdraw your hand with the bleeding instrument for a little while, and let the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it on the same night. For it is restored quickly.
The instrument of Guidegi's bloodletting is for the constriction of asthma, and the interception of leprosy, and melancholic diseases, and bad ulcers, and corroding, that is, itching eruptions.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that it constricts the weak part under both with a ligature on its neck, and let the artisan stand over the head of the weak one, and the weak one sits on a seat.
Then let the bloodletting instrument be applied to the length of the vein for a while according to the width of the bloodletting. Then extract from the blood a tempered quantity, or according to that which you see is necessary for it. Then do likewise with another vein.
Afterwards loosen the ligature, and constrict the two veins in the middle strictly: so that the weak one is not suffocated. And leave it until morning. For the wound will heal.
On the bloodletting of the veins according to Algeberich. The instrument of Algeberich's bloodletting of the veins is because it brings together to the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad ulcers: and cracks of the lips, and bad ulcers, also which are in the nose, and in its surroundings.
And the quality of bloodletting of the veins is that you should make the weak sit in front of you and tighten the neck with a band. Then uncover the lip of it, and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right of the lip, and the second on its left: and the indication of both is through the blackness of the gums. And that vein is because around the edges of them there are small, black veins. Cut therefore both with an oblique incision.
If however there is doubt about you, and you do not know which of them it is: then intend to cut the larger one, and the more obvious one.
And do similarly concerning the two veins which are in the upper lip: and mostly indeed habit is accustomed to it: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Of bloodletting of the vein under the tongue, after the bloodletting of the head. The benefit of bloodletting of the two veins which are under the tongue is that the bloodletting of the head is for the obstructions which are in the throat, and for ulcers of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of letting blood from them is that the weak should sit between your hands facing the sun: and lift up his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side of it one vein, and on its other side a vein: and the color of both is inclined to blackness.
Bloodlet therefore both: and beware, lest your last hand be in bloodletting them. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it happens that there is a flow of blood from those arteries.
The three veins which are bloodlet in the elbow, are those in which bloodletting has become a habit for all men.
And bloodletting of the ears is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad myrtle-shaped bloodletter, or with a razor to subtlety declined, or by cutting with a knife-shaped bloodletter, and it is Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from them are broad and subtle kinds according to the abundance of veins and their constriction The form of the myrtle-shaped bloodletter is broad, as you see. And it suits for opening concave, full, protruding, visible, thick veins, and those which contain gross, turbid blood.
And this bloodletter is of lesser width, and of more subtle extremity.
And it suits for bloodletting of subtle veins, which contain subtle citrine blood.
However, the basilisk which is one of these three veins is for bloodletting a youthful remedy. For it extracts blood from illnesses which are under the throat and neck, because of that which follows the chest and stomach: and it suits the bloodletter to bloodlet with it, so that he may beware, and be above fear of it, for beneath it is an artery. If therefore he errs, and adds to the puncture of the bloodletter, he will wound that artery, and there will occur a flow of blood. Wherefore it is necessary, that the bloodletter does not bloodlet with a puncturing bloodletter: but rather cuts with an Alnesil.
For if the basilisk does not appear with a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you displace it, and change to another, or that you seek some branch of it: or in place of bloodletting, a ligature of the arm. It is itself evident, and cut it with a scalpel called an escalaparius, as we have said.
But if you are going to perform venesection on the same, then it is necessary before tightening of the arm, that you touch the place until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark on the place with a cautery, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave section using a scalpel called Alnesil, as we have said. And let the incision not be deep so that the blow falls through the space to the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, an inflation in the place which you marked with a cautery, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: avoid it therefore.
For if you see blood at the venesection jumping out, like a child's urine, and it is subtle, red blood: then know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then press closely, and put your finger on it with a long pressure, afterwards remove your finger. If the blood is therefore cut off (for it is often cut off), then tighten the arm, and release it: and let the weak one beware of its motion: and let him be above its fear.
And do not move it for some days, until it is healed.
But if the blood does not stop, and overcomes you: and your medicine is not present at the moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For the extremities of it contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the cortex of a mat and bind it: take one middle piece, and tighten it over the place of the vein with a decent stricture, with a ligature and poultices until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat it with what preceded, recalling from the place powdered abscesses the flow of blood: and the cutting off of its blood is not difficult in many conditions, because of the smallness of the wound's location, and the possibility of ligation from the arm.
The bloodletting of the dark vein is beneficial, which draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of the Basilic branch and the Cephalic branch, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the bloodletter to be careful with it, so that he is above fear from its bloodletting, for beneath it is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the puncture of the bloodletting, and finds the nerve, there occurs on it numbness, and the healing of it becomes difficult, and perhaps it is not healed completely.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. If however it is hidden in some men, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then it is necessary that you place your bloodletting where you will bloodlet with a cut with Alnesil, and divert the nerve with your strength.
For if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.
Of the Cephalic vein. The bloodletting of the Cephalic vein is beneficial, because it draws blood from the head and helps against diseases of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein especially, if you wish, to bloodlet it by pricking with an olive or myrtle phlebotome: because it is a savior of all veins, because there is not beneath it an artery, nor a nerve.
Truly it is fitting for you at bloodletting, to divert with the bloodletting the head of the arm as much, and to seek a more tender place: and it does not harm it, if it is not found with the first prick, to repeat over it with bloodletting several times.
A true abscess sometimes forms in certain men when not bloodletting on the first percussion, but that abscess does not harm him in any way.
On the usefulness of Bloodletting, and precautions to be observed in it. The quality of Bloodletting, however, and its accidents from it, in whose correction you ought to consider.
First therefore it is of what you ought to know, that bloodletting is not administered, except in the conservation of health, and its preservation, and caution against the approach of illnesses.
And that bloodletting is performed on one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, and the Fusca, and the Basilic. And that bloodletting is done at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, and in summer, and autumn, and winter after digestion, when signs of repletion appear.
And bloodletting is done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed from the day.
Bloodletting which is administered in illnesses, does not have a determined hour: but when convenience and necessity demand it, at night, or day, and every hour, and every time.
And it is not fitting that children be bled, until they have fourteen years upon them. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, except from the fourth month to the seventh. Nor should the aged be bled, who have already passed sixty years.
When anyone wants to be bled for any reason: it is necessary, that he cleanse his intestines before bloodletting with a mild clyster, if there is much retained dung in them: so that the veins do not attract from the intestines during bloodletting putrid and harmful superfluities to the principal members.
Nor should blood be let from a patient who is suffering from nausea, that is, satiety; nor one who is drunken, nor one who is vomiting from intoxication, until that is removed from them. Nor the weak with dropsy.
And let bloodletting be performed again after a colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the belly, and multiplication of coitus, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and everything that dissolves virtue from the bodily or animal.
Then consider in subtlety of humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him.
Then let a bath be taken, if nothing prohibits it: or let exercise be undertaken with some exercise, so that the blood may be made subtle.
And let bloodletting be applied to his chest, around the third day, as we have said: and take care, that his chest may be emptied on that day from all bad animal accidents: such as anguish, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and punishment, and excessive coitus, and things similar.
And let him have present the things with which usage has created a habit in men from aromaticity, and fragrance, and rejoicing and similar things to them according to quantity of possibility.
Then let the bloodletter sit on a cushion, which is higher than the cushion of the one being bled: afterwards let him draw out his arm, and let the bloodletter rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then let him tie the bandage with a binding, and wrap it twice.
And let the binding be tempered, because the binding when it is unequal, or by excess in binding, then prohibits the flow of blood: or in loosening, then also prohibits the flow of blood.
Then after tightening it is suitable that the hand of the bloodletter is rubbed together meanwhile until the veins become swollen and are revealed to the sense.
Then the bloodletter wipes the bloodletting instrument with a little oil, his own old one.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand on the vein beneath the place where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein does not flee and the puncture is made. For there is a vein which you do not find like a fleeing cord during bloodletting: and of them is one that is full of wind: and when you place the bloodletting instrument on it, it contracts beneath the instrument, and the bloodletter is deceived, and the instrument does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is constricted: therefore it is necessary that the bloodletter be steady, and be solicitous in all these things.
Then he puts down the bloodletting instrument. If then the vein is opened with one stroke, then it is good. And if not, then strike it another time in the same place, or above it with speed, if the location is not discolored.
What if it becomes discolored, or the skin becomes weak, then leave it for a day, or two days: and do not tie the bandage. Perhaps the warm discoloration will attract. Nor should he enter a bath.
Then let blood again, if it is loved.
What if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly: and so that not more blood comes out than you want: then strike the bloodletting instrument again in the same opening, according to what is right, and add a little to the operation.
And do it with speed, before the location becomes discolored, for a discolored location is in many men during a small operation.
If then you see that it is already an aposteme, then you do not repeat anything on it, for it does not excuse anything with you. And put something on it from the dregs of oil, because it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your bloodletting, which you perform on veins to prohibit the flow of blood: and they make that the Tyrus and Alfarach, and Sagzenea, when it is put from one of them on the place.
For the blood is refined and resolved when it is thick.
What if it happens in the place of bloodletting a large aposteme, for it often happens, especially to him who is not accustomed to bloodletting unless by chance or is opening a small vein, then apply and put on the place a sponge soaked in hot water and salt, warmed a little: and bind it for one hour: because it will be resolved.
And it is necessary that you do that after the blood has come out from the same vein, when its flow is complete, or from another vein.
What if something of blackness or greenness remains in the place after days, it does not harm: and if you wish, put on it some aloe, or a solvent of myrrh: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamentum or something similar.
And often indeed apostemes and swellings occur with bloodletting of the Basilica.
Therefore put your hand on it, then if you find softness upon compressing it, then that swelling is bad. Beware therefore, that you put on it something of what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from the artery.
But make for him a plaster with that in which there is a styptic, so that the place may be induced. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you extract from a man all the blood according to the quantity of his virtue. And that which appears from the color conquering over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out, until it becomes red: and similarly if you see it thick: then let it go out, until it becomes subtle: and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs the extraction of blood twice, that phlebotomy of the vein be increased, and the phlebotomist be large: and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary that he extract it in the veins, and that the opening be narrow: and better what is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is, that it be a cross-section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of a nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And to whom it is customary to faint at phlebotomy of the syncopis, it is necessary that he eat before phlebotomy a moderate bread infused in water of granated myrobalan: or secaniabin, if he is warm: and extract from him blood in three veins, or four.
And if he is of a frigid complexation, then let him receive before phlebotomy bread infused in syrup of myrrh, or in syrup of honey aromatized with spices, or in syrup aromatized with perfume.
If that should happen with syncope during phlebotomy, and is the cause of much blood exiting: then it is necessary to take in a drink of meat water, and subtle odoriferous syrup: and to use aromatics with galia, and to bind its chest with them: and to use the remainder which we said in the division on the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
Whoever wants to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for him, for whom phlebotomy is on account of much evacuation, and whose strength is weak, to release the blood little by little according to the quantity of his strength over continuous days.
Who indeed wants to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time, and his body is strong: then let him do that after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite part to which it inclines: it is necessary that he be evacuated on the second day, or on the third.
In whose body there is much blood already heated and sharpened, and it causes fever to happen: it is necessary that blood go out from it at once, and a large quantity be extracted from it: and the opening be widened until syncope happens: after which you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy: and that you put your hand on his pulse during the flow of blood, so that death does not happen in place of syncope. For it often happens, when the phlebotomist is ignorant, and negligence occurs.
And it is not necessary when the use is to release the arm and release the blood a second time, since the opening of the vein has already been closed, and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, so that pressure be applied on it with vehemence, and the curved part be extended quickly. For that is a disease of the vein, or it diminishes itself, until it is bloodlessly cut with a knife.
Or remove it with the sharpness of a knife the blood clot that has formed in the mouth of the vein, and put on top of it something salty dissolved in water. And put on top of it some tyrical of alfaroch, or sassenea, and apply it with a gentle compression, until the blood comes out.
If then the vein has already become an abscess, then cut it, and do not cauterize it, until the abscess has settled.
What if necessity demands to release the blood with a knife, and there is no excuse, then either perform venesection on it above that place, or on another arm in another vein.
The veins of the arm are cut at the place of the axilla and basilic, when they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its venesection is that the weak hand should be inserted into warm water, until it becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
Then let it be tied above it with a moderate constraining bandage. Then perform the venesection across, little by little, not in width, nor along the length, and let it be a wide opening, and your venesection should be where you are going to tie above the joint of the hand for a little while.
What if the flow of blood is blocked, then put the hand again in warm water, and let the blood run in the water, until you achieve your need.
If however you are in summer days, then you should be excused from putting the hand again in warm water. And the flow of blood is put into warm water mostly in winter time.
And phlebotomy of this vein is beneficial for all veins, since there is not beneath it a pulsating vein, nor a nerve.
Phlebotomy of the right hand vein is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that you bind the arm with a string or your hand, after you have inserted it in warm water until the vein becomes inflated and is demonstrated to sensation strongly. Then let the blood flow across by being cut. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm it in anything.
And be careful, lest you injure your hand with the lancet. For beneath it are bare nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then return the hand to warm water, and let the blood flow out into it. For if you do not return it in warm water, the blood coagulates in the opening of the vein and is prohibited from flowing.
When you have extracted a quantity of blood as needed, then put oil and salt on the vein, so that it does not close quickly.
And similarly it is necessary to do with every constricted branch.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen, and do similarly in its phlebotomy as you did in the right hand equally.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the saphena vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and thighs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the weak person inserts their foot into warm water, and makes a friction on it until the veins are filled, and binds above the joint of the foot with a cord. And the vein that is near the heel appears above the thumb and many branches spread from it on the face of the foot.
I perform a venesection on it in its thicker branch or at the heel in its gathering, because it is better and healthier.
If you perform a venesection on it on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it under the face of the foot.
And place your venesection where you perform it from a transverse direction, as if you wish to cut it, and let the venesection be with a needle.
If on the other hand the flow of blood is stopped, then immerse that foot in warm water, and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the one performing the venesection misses the vein at first, then repeat the venesection towards the upper parts for a little while, for the location is healthy, and you will not be harmed by it when you beware of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the other foot's saphenous vein equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is near the heel on the wooded or forest side.
And the indication for venesection of it is, for pain of the hip, when it is on account of hot blood.
And the quality of its venesection is, that the weak enter the bath and be bound, and let the leg be constricted on the side of the hip up to above the heel with four fingers, with a thin thread, for it does not appear except on account of that.
When it appears, then perform venesection on it according to whatever ingenuity is possible for you, or with a transverse direction, and it is better, either to cut it with an incision, or to sever it with a section. The location of it is a savior, and it itself is hidden in many men with strength.
The location of it is a savior, and it itself is hidden in many men with strength. What if you do not find it, and it does not appear to the sense at all: then phlebotomize some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, and the one turned towards the ear: and beware of the nerves, and make to flow from the blood a quantity which you wish.
Then loosen the tightness, and put a poultice on the place of phlebotomy, and bind the place. For it will heal quickly.
On Purging, and the quality of its use.
Purges are made from hORNs, and from copper, and from glass.
And purging is done in two ways. With scarification, and extraction of blood: and the other is purging without scarification.
And this purging which is without scarification, is according to two methods. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the purges which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is the purging of Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the purges of Alhagdahim, and they are two sides of the neck on both sides together: and the purges of the chin, and it is under the jaw in the lower mouth: and the purges of the two shoulders: and the purges of Alachosos above the end of the tail: and the purges of the two elbows, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and the purges of the two thighs: and the purges of the two haunches.
And the venesection which does not extract blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that the virtue does not fall out from them, as is the case with it from bloodletting. And it is not necessary that venesection be administered with or without fire for any of the ailments which occur due to overfilling, until the whole body is evacuated.
What if necessity calls for venesection from an ailment, or because of habit, we administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
What is it, for there is a man in whom when blood is multiplied in him to the point that he needs its extraction by venesection, he finds in his head heaviness and dizziness.
And there is one of them who finds overfilling and redness in his face, his head, and his neck. And there is one of them who finds itching in his face and his forehead and darkness and dimness in his eyes.
And there is one of them who scratches the place of his venesection. And there is one of them whose laughter is multiplied. And there is one of them who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or he spits up blood from his tongue, and spews out blood. And there is one of them whose sleep is multiplied. And there is one of them who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and wounds, and blows, and things that are similar to those.
When therefore we see something of those things, and it is specifically during the third quarter of the month: we prescribe then that venesection be done, after two or three hours have passed from the day.
The indication of venesection of the neck is: because it helps against heaviness in the head, and what flows down to the eyes. And it is necessary, that it be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed is a substitute for the place of bloodletting on the head.
And it is not permitted that it be used by one who is of a cold complexion or in whom there is a catarrh. For it does great harm to him.
And because of that it is not fitting that the old use it, and in whose head there are cold diseases.
He who is excessive on it, generates upon himself forgetfulness.
And because of that it is necessary that you instruct the one performing the enema, to put his hand with the enema for a little while at the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Enema or Alkehel is in the place of bloodletting of the dark vein and the royal vein, and because of that it alleviates asthma, and constriction of the breath, and splitting of the instrument of the breath, and coughing, and fullness.
And it is necessary that the enema Alkehel be administered for a little while, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
The enema of the cluster, alleviates accidental pains in the head and diseases of the eyes and half headache and perforation and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is in the place of royal bloodletting.
And it is necessary that you instruct the one performing the enema, not to press his hand with the scarification, so that he does not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
The enema under the chin alleviates ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gum and similar things from diseases which are in the mouth: and it stands in the place of bloodletting of the two lips.
The enema of the spatula alleviates to relaxation, which is caused by retention and heat.
The interior dissection of the two parts of the inner ventosation constricts the juice of the phlebotomy of the three veins, the Basilica, the Fusca, and the Cephalica: because it itself draws blood from all those tiny veins that are in the flesh: and those tiny veins draw from other thicker veins, until the drawing reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary that you instruct the Ventosator not to proceed too far in the scarification, because the area is bare of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa that is ventosed on the alchausos constricts the hemorrhoids of the anus and the lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you instruct the Ventosator, that the ventosa should be large and made of copper: because the area requires strong suction, and perhaps delicate ventosas would break: and let the scarification be made with a large scarification.
The ventosas of the legs diminish with a clear decrease: because they draw blood from the whole body, and relieve ancient pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus: they provoke menstruation, and relieve bothor and amenorrhea: and they take the place of phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins, and the alhorcobeni.
However, they greatly weaken the body, and cause syncope to occur in many men.
And the benefit of the alhorcobeni ventosas is similar to the benefit of the ventosas of the two legs.
The quality of the positioning of the ventosas is that you should place a ventosa in a vacuum at first, and apply suction with tempered pressure: and do not prolong the positioning of the ventosas, but place them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the place of equal arrival: and do not cease to repeat this and continue it, until you see the area already red and inflamed, and the appearance of a blood rash: then scarify, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For he who is of tender flesh among men, of rare pores, it is necessary to make an incision once, no more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
And instruct the one who performs the operation to enlarge the incision and make it a little deeper, and to moderate the suction with ease, speed, and his own movement.
What if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to make an incision twice. In the first instance, the way is opened for the subtlety of the blood and its thinness, and in the second instance, for the scrutiny of the exquisite extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very foul indeed, then let a third incision be made, so that it attains the ultimate.
And in the end, when we wish to extract blood gradually, or a little at a time, one incision is sufficient for us. What if we wish for multiple extractions of blood, we make multiple incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make a deep incision, and the limit of equality in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What is it that should be administered from oils for the positioning of the cupping glasses, and what the one who applies the cups should beware.
In that case, for one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are constricted, it is necessary to anoint the locations of cupping with opened, gentle, resolving oils: if it is in summer, such as oil of alkiri, or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cucumber seed.
And if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or sarsaparilla, and similar ones.
If the ulcer is gross and cold, then let the oil be myrtle or balm oil or almond oil or pine oil, and similar to these.
If the ulcer is of open sores, of tender flesh: then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and it is necessary that these sores be washed after application with rose water, or cold water, or solvent water, or gourd water, or purslane water: and similar to these.
He whose blood is of much humidity, should wash the sores with vinegar, or myrtle water, and sumach: and similar to these.
Whose ulcers are gross, should wash their sores with old wine, or with water of senna, or a decoction of catmint, or chamomile: and similar to these.
And it is necessary that the application be applied in a bath, or in a heated room of a bath, and it is necessary that it be administered after exiting the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary that someone sleep after the application.
What is it that should be regulated for a person with an ulcer, or one who will be bled, before the application.
And after that it is necessary to consider first: then if the person with an ulcer, or one who will be bled, is bilious, and there are acute and inflamed blood: then it is necessary that he take cooling things, such as cold granules: and also an enema with vinegar and lettuce, and wormwood, and buckthorn: and similar to these.
And let his foods be gentle, and the flesh of boiled sheep, and seasoned dishes with verjuice: and similar to these.
And he whose complexion is cold, should take in a drink syrup of honey, or of almond, or wormwood made from seeds: and take fragrant wine, which is between old and new: and it is prescribed that he use a small amount of food. And put its food, which is cane sugar, and pease, that is, small peas, and the flesh of pigeons.
And it is suitable, that the drink of venesection and bloodletting should be more than food: and it is suitable, that there should be given in a drink to certain men in hours of tyriaca alfaroch, or medicine of musk, that is, muscat, or alesselite before venesection, and before bloodletting, or after: so that the principal members are comforted, and the blood is thinned. And it is not suitable, that they should take it in a hot drink.
Of Venesection without scarification. Venesections without scarification are those that are applied to the liver, and spleen, and gout, and to the abdomen, navel, and kidney area, and armpit: because these members do not suffer scarification upon them.
And it is not sought through them, unless there is an attraction of blood from one member to another member: as we apply Venesection to the breasts in illness of flow of nasal blood. And we use them, to release from the member a cold and congealed venesection in the member: as we apply venesection to the abdomen, and navel. For it rarefies the member, and warms it, and removes pain for that reason, because it resolves that venesection.
And it is also applied to the kidneys, when there occurs in them a stoppage or stone. For by the virtue of its attraction, it perhaps opens up the blockage, or eradicates the stone from its place.
And it does similarly when it is applied to the liver and spleen for a third venesection in both of them.
And these ventoses are administered with a poultice for so long as there is a wound. And they are administered with fire.
And they are administered full of warm water for illnesses of the pleura and that is so that the ventose is filled and it is large with hot water alone or with water in which have been decocted herbs which are suitable.
The form of a ventosa administered with fire.
The width of its opening is two fingers wide, according to what we have formed: and its quantity in depth is half a palm: and there is on its side in the place which is around the middle of it, a small hole, according to the quantity that an needle enters it: let it be made from bronze or citrine, with thick edges, smooth, equal, polished: so that it does not harm the member at its position above it: and let there be in its middle a transverse rod of bronze or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.
And now this large ventosa is made, larger than the one we described, and a little smaller than that one, according to the illnesses and age of the one who uses it.
For the ventoses of children, and of thin people are different, than the ventoses of men, and of those with large bodies.
The quality of placing this ventosa with fire on the member, is that you light a flax with fire from a linen thread, or a small candle made of tallow: and place it above the middle of the transverse rod which is in the middle of the ventosa: so that the fire is lit around the lower part of the ventosa, so that the body of the infirm person does not get burned.
Then let it be placed on the member: and a finger is on the hole which I mentioned, until when we hold the ventosa: while we press, we remove the finger, and vapor will go out above that hole, and the ventosa will come loose at once.
Then apply a second dressing to it according to its size, and change it, if you need to.
In the case of a poultice that is administered for a sickness of the pleura with water, there is no rod across, nor an opening: and it is not administered unless to fill with water, and is placed on the member.
And this is its form.
And the larger this poultice is, so that it can hold a lot of water, the better it is.
Of the suspension of bloodletting.
Bloodletting is not administered to many, unless in those members in which it is not possible to apply poultices, because of their smallness, such as the lip and the gums, and similar things. Or in a member bare of flesh, such as the finger and the nose, and similar things.
And the quality of using them is: that they should be veins from bloodlettings which are in sweet waters, clean from rottenness.
Then they should be left for a day and night in sweet water, until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their belly. Then the body should be treated first with bloodletting, and with poultices. Then wipe the weak member until it becomes red. Afterwards, something is placed on it.
When therefore they fill and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with a poultice, then it is almost the last in treatment: and if not, then wipe the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and rub, and squeeze out.
What if the flow of blood is prolonged after the operation of bloodletting, and it is that which flows back: then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on top, until the flowing back is stopped.
What if the blood is multiplied, then powderize over it astringent powders, or gall, and similar things from styptics: until the blood is wiped away.
Or let half roasted broad beans be placed over the place and left until they stick to the spot, for the blood is wiped away.
And it is necessary if iteration of bloodletting is required, when it is possible, to change them.
If the bloodlettings are prohibited from suspension, then let the place be wiped with fresh blood. Or apply a fig or a needle to the places, until something comes out of the blood. Then they should be placed, for as soon as they feel something from the blood, they stick at once.
When therefore you wish that they fall, powderize over them something from ground aloes, or salt, or ashes: and they will fall at once.
This chapter is also many times necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures, and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know, O sons, that the foolish medical men and the common people who have not inspected any ancient book, nor read a letter from it, throw themselves at this chapter.
And for this reason it happens that this method is deprived of the sciences in our land. And I have not found in it anything good at all, and I have not acquired from it that which I have acquired except because of the length of reading ancient books, and study over the understanding of them, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
Then to adhere to experimentation and study for the length of my life.
And now I have described to you from that in this Chapter all that my knowledge contains; and on which my experimentation was based, after I had shortened it for you, and freed it from the occupation of length, and shortened it by means of abbreviation, and showed it by means of declension: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, since it is from the addition of declension, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is fitting that we say in the prologue of this Chapter, the sum of the discourse, and chapters, for whose understanding the artisan is first compelled to station himself upon their truth: namely so that you, and those who are prompt, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or fall happens to someone, then it is fitting that you should first hasten to phlebotomize him, and to solve it, or both at the same time: if nothing prohibits it, such as weakness of strength: or if he to whom it happened is a boy, or an old decrepit man: or if it is a time of vehement heat, or of strong cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold poultices, and flesh of birds, and of fish: and prohibit wine, and fat meats, and fill him with foods and every food which fills the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from the hot abscess, and do not fear the effusion of matter to the member: then let the weak person return to his first regime with which his habit was accustomed.
When a fractured bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the food be weak and nutritious, with much nourishment, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and innards of birds, and eggs, and fresh fish: and coarse wine, and similar things to these. For with this regimen the clotting of the fracture will occur more quickly and better.
And know that fractured bones, when they are in men who are in early old age and decrepit, it is not possible that they knit and consolidate according to their natural ability always, on account of the dryness of their membranes: and they do consolidate and knit which are from them at the end of leniency, such as the bones of small boys.
However nature does attach to the fractured bone from every part something similar to glue, in which there is thickness, with which it adheres and binds itself, until they are knit together and bound together, until it comes to an end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until something does not hinder it from its operations: and on account of this cause it is necessary that you put weak nourishing food, in which there are heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of members: for the fracture of the thigh is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head: and the fracture of the bone of the chest is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the back: and similarly all the remaining members exist as diverse one from another: and I come with remembrance of every species of fracture exhibited in its distinct Chapter, separate from another. And the species of bone fractures are also differentiated among themselves.
Because its fracture becomes bent, besides which stars are affected in it. And when a fracture of it occurs along the length of the bone: and its fractures are jagged, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as they are in a reed, when it is adapted to a knife for writing. And not proceeding: and it is a fracture with a wound and a disruption in the head: and it is a fracture, a small split.
And every species has a device, or its own proper instrument for its restoration, according to which comes the recollection of it, distinguished in their own places.
And from that by which the fracture of the bone is recognized, is its crookedness and its own projections: and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore the crookedness does not appear in its place, nor the sound at your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does the weak one find great pain: then there is no fracture there, yet it is possible that there be a crookedness or a small split: therefore it is not necessary to move it with the hand and compression entirely, but rather put on top of it from the medicines, whose recollection comes after the moment that suits the place: then let the dressing be tightly bound.
And know that the place when it is bent and split into two, besides which stars occur in it, nevertheless every part is moved from its comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to the rectification of it, equaling it before a hot apostem occurs to it.
If however a hot apostem occurs to it, then leave it for some days, until the apostem subsides. Then equal it according to whatever method is possible from gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it, and its equalization, is easier than of a bone, in which stars occur.
Then tie it, secondly what will help you is the recollection of it.
If there are wounds in the bone, then extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, if it is the hand or foot: or with your hand, if the member is small: or with two cloths, or with a cloth and hand.
And let your position be where you put the member on an equal place, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, that you make those additions return with all ingenuity, and in any manner you can in their places: and beware according to your strength, that pain or injury does not happen to the weak part through your operation: and try according to your strength, that you apply one of the two bones with its fellow, according to the best forms.
And it is necessary at that time, that you feel and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the quantity of your ability.
And beware of violent extension and strong compression, as many of the foolish do. For they often cause a warm aposteme or contraction in the member to happen through their operation: as we have already seen that from their operations many times.
Then connect afterwards equality and decent operation, and the tightening of that member, and rest, and tranquility: and warn the weak one about it. And make him beware, that he not move it during his hours of watching and his sleep, and his turning, and his agitation, and at his evacuation, and all his movements with his utmost care. And that he beware, lest the position of the member be a position which follows with pain. That is, because when he feels pain or injury in the disposition of the member's position: then it is necessary, that he changes it to another disposition from that with which he does not feel pain.
And let it heal with that, so that its position is equal and straight, so that no distortion occurs in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the stricture of a fractured member is, according to which I will narrate.
Know that fractured members differ in their smallness and largeness, and their shape.
Which therefore of them are small, such as the arm, and finger, and elbow, and things similar to them, then it is fitting that there should be a wrapping of soft cloth, fine. Which however of them are thick, such as the hip and leg, it is fitting that there should be a wrapping on them of broad, hard cloth.
For a broad bandage connects a large member and binds it on every side with an equal constriction, so that it does not press into it a bruise.
Then begin after your reduction to put on a plaster suitable for it, in a gentle poultice over the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap a bandage over the place of the fracture itself with three or four wraps, according to what the member deserves: and bind your hand for a little while with the bandage.
Then go with it to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and bind less than your constriction was, with which you bound the fractured place. Then stretch yourself with the wrapping from the place of the fracture for a little while, and gradually soften the constriction, until you take away from the sound place a large thing.
Then take another cloth, and wrap it again over the fractured place with wraps. Afterwards go with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in constricting and wrapping, and softening of it, according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
Then put among the dressings a sponge or a cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture will be straightened if there is crookedness in it and if not do not put anything on it.
Then dress over it another cloth. Afterwards put equal stars of plaster made to measure immediately over these dressings, if there is not in the place an inflammation, nor a hot aposteme.
If however there is in it an inflammation or an aposteme: then put over it what will appease that aposteme and take away the inflammation: and leave it for some days. Then bind over it then stars.
And let the stars be from halves of a reed cane shaved formed wisely: or let them be from wood from which are made cribs, which are made from pine or jerid, that is, branches of palm tree, or calamus: and let the width of all star be according to this form and the same figure.
Truly it is necessary that the star which is put over the dressing be thicker and wider for a little while than the other stars: and the length of the star be according to what is permitted by the member from its size and smallness.
Then bind over the stars with another cloth, according to the first dressing, the same. Then tie above with threads properly, according to what we have said about the dressing: and it is that your dressing be over the place of the fracture more: and as much as it is further from the fracture, the dressing will be smaller.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and be of soft flax.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of stupid men who put their threads from cords of flax twisted, it is a great mistake: because the dressing falls with them beyond the quality.
And the thin threads do not meet again because you will not achieve with them that which is desired through tightening.
And it is not suitable for it to be less between the star and the star than a finger.
That which if a weak place is injured through the ends of the stars after tightening on healthy places: then put under them from lint or woolen cloth, until nothing is injured from it.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and a disruption occurs in the skin, I come with the reminder of it in the second chapter according to its singularity.
And know that not every broken member needs to be tied with stars from the first day. Which is, that when a member is large, it is not suitable to put stars on it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters, with which the ancients restored, which are put on a fracture and dislocation.
The method of a common plaster abbreviated, restoring a fracture, suiting many complexions, especially for women and children: because it is from that on which neither heat nor cold prevails.
And it is, that you take from the powder of a mill, and it is the marrow of flour which hangs on the walls of a mill at the movement of the millstone: and you mix it as it is, except that you sift it with the white of an egg: and you put its confection not thick, nor subtle. Then use it.
The method of another plaster, for restoring a fracture, and a dislocation, and a twisting. Take madder, and lavender, and acacia, and elecampane, and mugwort: and juice, of each a similar amount, myrrh and aloe of each a similar amount, and of the remainder twenty: and sift all, and mix with water of the remainder: or with the white of an egg, if the complexation of the weak person is heated. Then apply this plaster. For it is of good composition, quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Another mode of plaster, which also benefits fractures and sprains. Take mugwort and mess, and white altea, of each a dram, myrrh and aloes of each half a dram, acacia six drams, Armenian bolus twenty drams, let all be rubbed down well, and crushed, and mixed with water or the whites of eggs: and administer.
A mode of plaster for joints, and bones displaced from their places: and it calms the accidental pain to them, and the cutting of bone, and the fracture. Let linen cloth be soaked and submerged in vinegar and decocted oil: and applied to the place.
And this plaster has not the virtue of restoration, but is good for soothing a hot abscess: and it properly expels pains.
A mode of plaster, which restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig tree and the leaves of the wild papaver: and rub all together, and make a plaster from both.
A mode of short plaster, administered for the restoration of a fractured bone: and when you wish to resolve the remainder of an abscess. Take the root of marsh marigold, and chamomile, and the flowers of violet, and the flour of the herb, all of one part: let all be rubbed and mixed with wine, if the member is not inflamed.
If the member is indeed inflamed, then mix it with water of moist coriander, or with water, and apply it.
A mode of another stronger plaster for resolution, than this first one, when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of a member. Recipe of the root of altea, and seed of linum, and balaustium, and mellilot, and samsuch, and flower of uiolarum, and camomilla, all alike, a single part, let all be mixed, and let them be made with water of willow, or with fresh water, or with wine. All that according to the warmth of the member, and the quietness of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a broken member for its restoration, except a cerate made from wax and oil: none other: and he described it as being a mean between thickness and fineness.
To Galen indeed it seemed, that things which have an exciting of heat should be placed on a broken member for its restoration, such as myrrh, and aloe, and olibanum, and similar to these from those which we described.
The method of an emplaster that is applied for a lesion and pain. Take mugath, and cicer, and cut human hair, or bird's wing, and altea, and salt in equal parts: let them be ground, and sifted, and made: and let an emplaster be made from it.
The quantity, however, according to which it is proper that the dressing remains, and then is dissolved, is such that you should consider at that time, if no pain happens to the infirm, nor itching, nor the broken bone moves from its place: then you do not dissolve it for many days. If it happens to him in the place a vehement itching, or an annoying pain, or inflammation: then dissolve it immediately, and remove the emplaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft marine sponge, humid: and submerge it in tepid water, and wash the place with it, until the itching is quieted, and the pain is assuaged.
If it happens to him in the place a vehement itching, or an annoying pain, or inflammation: then dissolve it immediately, and remove the emplaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft marine sponge, humid: and submerge it in tepid water, and wash the place with it, until the itching is quieted, and the pain is assuaged. Then leave the limb to rest for one hour. Then put on it a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bind it on for one night, until you are secure from the hot aposteme, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is removed.
Then repeat the subtle dressing and a small plaster, and do not bind it with your first constriction, but bind it subtly, until it is healed.
Which if you see that the aposteme, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all the accidents have been removed entirely, then repeat the plaster and dressing as you did at first equally.
Which if none of the things we have spoken of happen to the limb, then do not unravel it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is left for twenty days, all that which appears to you from the solution of the limb, as we have said, until when the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of the flesh approaches over it: then also add to the dressing more than your entire first dressing: and also add in the thickening of the weak plaster, according to what the remembrance of it has preceded.
If however you see the place of the fracture already becoming dry and thinner than it should be: then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Moisten it therefore with warm water at every place where you unravel it, and let it be for three days, and alleviate the dressing a little.
Through this operation therefore nourishment runs to the limb, and it is healed quickly.
What foolish restorers do from a fracture of the limb, instead of other things, when it is not restored at first as it ought to be, and is restored according to twisting, is an error of their operation and great fear: and if it were correct, the ancients would have said it in their books, and would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of them in all that, and it is better that it does not happen.
On the making of an accident in the head.
The species of fractures are diverse, and its figures are many: and the causes of it are distinct.
For there is a fracture which occurs from a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the bone as far as it reaches to the siphac, which is beneath the bone, just as an axe does in wood: and on account of that this species of fracture is named Axial.
Or the sword strikes a part of the bone, and cuts its surface, and the cut does not penetrate to the end of it: and this species of fracture is called Kalan, that is, Absolute Removal.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is a crushing or an attrition: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which approaches the periosteum, which is beneath the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and there is a wound of these two fractures also, either small or large.
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone to the thinness of a hair: and it is a small fissure, and on account of that this species of fracture is called Capillary.
And there is a fracture which occurs from a fall or a blow of a stone, and similar things, which cause the lamina of the bone to enter inward, and a concavity is made in its place: just as it happens to cauldrons of copper, when a blow occurs to them, and a part of them enters inward.
And that often happens in the heads of humid bones, such as are the heads of children.
And there are for all these species of fractures separated dislocations, and I apply a vein with recollection of that entire thing in its place.
And we recognize all these species of fracture by detection on them, and inquiry of them with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh that is on them.
The species of hairline fracture is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone, and wiped, and anointed on it with a plaster: for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, consider first the accidents of weakness: then if you see from the accidents what signifies a manifest sign of fear, such as vomiting of bile, and stretching, and loss of intellect, and cutting off of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar things to these from accidents in many dispositions, without doubt it will not be cured: and if you see accidents not terrifying you, and you hope for health: then begin the cure of it.
What is, if the wounded comes to you immediately after being wounded: and it is in winter days, then it is necessary that you should strive for removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in summer days, then it is necessary that you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before it becomes corrupted what is under the bone from the pad, and those accidents occur which we have narrated.
What if the fracture of the bone has already come to the pannicle touching the brain, and it is with bruising, and attraction: then it is necessary that you should cut the part that is bruised and attracted, according to what I relate to you.
And it is, that you shave the head of the wounded: and you detect on the bone according to whatever mode is possible for you: and according to the figure of the wound, and what is least burdensome over the weak part.
What if it happens to you upon detection of a bone with a flow of blood, or a hot abscess: then apply to it what is appropriate. And it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and you make the wound rest, until the abscess has settled, and you are secure from a flow of blood. Then begin with the cure of the bone, and its removal.
And that will be done according to one of two methods.
One method indeed is, that you cut the bone with a strict incising instrument: and this is its form.
Then administer another incising instrument wider than the previous one for a little while: and this is its form.
Then administer also another incising instrument even wider also than the second.
And the second method is, that you have a number of diverse incising instruments: some of which are wider than others, and some of them shorter than others: and let them be sharpened to the end of their extremities, and let them be made from iron or steel: and use facility in striking on the incising instrument, so that it does not strike the head, and wound it.
If the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary that you perforate around it, before you administer the incising instruments, with Awls which are called non-penetrating Awls: and they are not so called unless because they themselves do not penetrate to the end of the fleshy bone beyond what is behind it: on account of that an Awl has a round extremity above what is under its sharp head, similar to a margin, and a small circle prevents sinking and penetrating the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to receive from these Awls a large number, each of which fits the quantity of thickness of the bone, until there is present to you an Awl for every cranium: whose sharp extremity in length and width is according to the quantity of thickness of that cranium.
And this is the shape of three types of trephines, or chisels.
The quality of perforating around the fractured bone is: that you put the trephine on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone has been penetrated. Then change the trephine to another place and put what is around every hole the quantity of the thickness of the radius, or around it.
Then cut with the incisors what is around every hole in the bone: and make it thinner than you can on that side of fineness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, either with your hand or with some other one of the instruments which you have prepared for it: such as small files and subtle forceps.
And it is necessary that you proceed with every caution, lest the trephine or incisor touch anything of the brain.
When you have gone around the bone perforating, and it has been separated from the brain, if it was continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary that you scrape, and equal the extremity of what remains in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor. Truly, it is necessary that it be thin and more subtle than other incisors.
What remains of the small bones, and the fragments: then take them with ease, with that which is with you of instruments. Then cure the wound after that with bandages and ointments which we have said.
And the method of another operation is easy, far from fear: which Galen said, and praised it with great praise: and this is his statement. It is necessary for you first to begin to detect the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest: until when you have detected that part, and you have placed under it the extremity of this incisor, which has this shape.
And the lens-like part, nothing of the lens is cut away: and its pointed part on both sides presses in length, as you see: so that the lens-like part rests against the cataract, with its pointed surface pressing into the bone.
Then strike above the incisor on one side with a small hammer, until you cut through the whole bone with ease, as it becomes visible: and you will be safe from the cloth, which does not happen to it by chance, what you fear will happen.
And if the physician were not more stupid than men, and more ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it away from it with the tip of the lens-like incisor, and would free it from it with ease. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the cloth, and what is cut away from the bone is its surface, and remaining in it are roughness and subtle projections: then it is necessary that you scrape away that roughness, and remove those projections with subtle rasps which you have prepared in different quantities, so that it is possible for you to administer from them in every place the most suitable and straightest of them, according to what the operation leads you to, and the bone itself, broken, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer in your scraping, which you use to scrape the bone first, wider than those of the other scrapers. Then use after it a still finer one.
And it is necessary that you administer in your scraping, which you use to scrape the bone first, wider than those of the other scrapers. Then use after it a still finer one. And do not stop doing that according to continuity, until you reach administering the thinnest and subtlest of all.
In each of the remaining small fissures and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care, according to what leads to its rectification.
And it is a thing which is not hidden from everyone, to whom in this art there is whatever study, and it stands upon that which we have written, and we show in great fractures.
If indeed the flap is detected and retained, when you extract the bone: then it is necessary, that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and put it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled, and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and put it over the first cloth: and make that as easily as you can over that, so that it does not press on the spleen.
Then administer over it a broad ligament: and do not bind it, except by the quantity that the wound holds so much: and leave it with this care for one day, or two days, until you are secure from a hot abscess. Then undo it, and administer after that medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as the roots of lily, and flour of herb, and powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and it is, that you make from these medicines a powder, which is powdered over the wound as are the dry.
And universally administer to it every medicine of the property of which is that it cleanses and does not bite. And take care according to your virtue, that the wound in your cure is clear: and is not in it filth of ointment, nor foulness.
And take care according to your virtue, that the wound in your cure is clear: and is not in it filth of ointment, nor foulness. And do not allow pus to gather in it at all: for when pus gathers on the brain's flap, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and great evil befalls the weak after that: and now it befalls the spleen of the head, when the bone is cleaned by it, especially when the care of it is neglected, blackness on its surface.
Consider then, if weaknesses that we have mentioned befall, you should know what is harmful without doubt.
And if blackening does not occur, except from the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine, that it causes that blackening: then you should take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and bind them with a cloth. Then place it on the wound: afterwards treat it with species of cure that are suitable, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
You should know that the nose does not break except in its two upper parts at the same time, or one of them: because it itself has two bones: since the lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break, and there happens to it only attrition, and twistedness, and curvature.
If one of its two parts breaks, then you should put a small finger into the nasal passage, and straighten that fracture with your index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and this is done with skill. And beware, lest pain occurs during your operation on the weak area.
What if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it: then you should straighten it with the end of a rod, on which there is a small knob.
If indeed the fracture is in both parts, then do similarly to it: and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, during the rest of a warm poultice.
Then insert into the end of the nose a bandage from linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two bandages if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be in the bandage a thickness of such quantity that it fills the nasal passage.
And certain of the ancient restorers said that they should pour the linctuses into butter and change them every day. That indeed does not seem to me, but rather it is necessary, that a linctus be poured into the whites of eggs, mixed with powder of toasted wheat. Then apply the linctus until the bone becomes firm and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And when a linctus is introduced into the nostril, a feather of a goose is placed in its stead, after which a soft cloth is wrapped over it: and this is done so that it may strongly hold the fracture of the nose, and so that the weak one is not prevented from breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you want, do that: and if you want, make linctuses.
Which if it happens to the nose again while you are operating with a hot apostume, plaster the nose with cerate, or with a plaster infused in rose oil, or with a little of diacalendine.
If however the hot apostume does not happen, then it is necessary that you plaster it with flour of fava and powder of frankincense mixed with the whites of eggs. Then put a soft swab over it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture, or are crushed, then it is necessary that you cut above them and extract them with instruments which are suited to them. Then sew up the wound, and cure it with that which brings flesh and consolidates from plasters suited to it, or from ointments.
Which if a wound happens to the nose, then it is necessary that you cure it with linctuses: and administer a pipe of lead, until it is healed.
Of the restoration of the lower jaw, when it is broken apart.
When the lower jaw is dislocated and its fracture is not with a wound, consider then if its fracture is only a defect and does not break into two, and curves inward, then its treatment is easy.
It is necessary therefore, if the fracture is in the right part, that you insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the weak person, similarly if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand, and push with it the curvature of the fracture from within with ease to the exterior with your other hand from the interior part of the bone, and straighten it with that.
What if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary that you administer extension from both parts, according to straightness, until its equality is possible.
If indeed a shaking or disruption has already occurred in the teeth, then tie them with a thread of gold, or silver, or silk. Then put a plaster on the fractured jaw. Then put over it a double-folded cloth, and put over the cloth a large strap made from the center, or a piece of leather sole, equal in length to the jaw.
Then tie it from above, according to what the dressing of it prepares for you, and its application is suitable, until it is not destroyed: and order the weak person to rest and quiet: and give its food gentle sips.
If indeed you think that something of the figure has already changed in some way, then hasten and release it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and apply a plaster made from flour of wheat, with the white of egg, or with flour of barley, after you have removed the plaster: and put over the plaster a gentle wool.
Therefore let that plaster remain over it and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it, do not disturb it, until it heals: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is bound many times in three weeks.
What if meanwhile a hot abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in its treatment, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider it. For now a fragment is separated from the bone, or by sawing: then be subtle in this, that you remove those fragments of sawing with what suits you in the removal of them from instruments.
If indeed the opening of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then when you have removed those sawings, and none of them remain, or then the opening of the wound, if it is wide: and if not, put over it from plasters that suit for that, and flesh will grow on it, until it heals.
On the restoration of the Jaw, when it is fractured.
The Jaw is indeed fractured most often from the front part of the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is broken and separated into two, besides which occur in that sawing: and it is easier to restore.
Or it occurs with a bone sawing: and it is more difficult to restore.
Or it is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation in it when the fracture is without a wound, is that you make two attendants be present, so that one of them holds the aid that follows the fractured Jaw, and the other stretches the neck towards the opposite side.
Then you should reduce the fracture with your fingers until its shape is restored, according to what is suitable, and it should not be prominent or sunken.
What you squeeze in excess by extension, then it is suitable that you place under the bandage a sphere of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need: and extend and elevate the splint, and bind the sphere with your hand, until it is equal to the fracture, according to what is suitable.
What if you cannot draw the extremity of the splint to the outside: because it penetrates to the depth: then it is suitable that the weak one should rest upon his neck: and you place under his shoulder a middle-sized pillow, and your servant presses his shoulder downwards, until the bone of the splint which is in the depth rises upwards: and then you straighten the fracture, and reduce it with your fingers.
If you feel a false movement from the splint, and it moves: then it is suitable that you bind above it, and extract the same false movement with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then make an incision of it with one of the incisors that you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed under the splint a tool that holds the flesh: and this tool is made of wood or of iron. And this is its shape.
It becomes similar to an ear which does not have a hollow.
And its width should be according to that which you judge suitable for it from the size of the bone and its thinness. Its length also according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And it should have two extremities, as you see: and one extremity should be broad, and the other narrow.
If the disruption of the wound which you cut when you extracted the false movement of the bone is broad, and you are concerned about a hot abscess: then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or a hot abscess forms: then fill the wound with cotton pads, and poultices according to the quantity of the discharge of the wound.
What if a hot abscess forms, then soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it over the top.
Inflammation of a bone when it is without a wound, and without a cut, is treated by applying to the bone a plaster made from milled flour with egg white. And put a linen dressing on top of it. Then apply a ball under the nipple, if you suspect it. Then take a hemiatem, that is, a rod which the Saracens hold, which should be long and of the width of one palm, or about that. Then put a double poultice on top of the dressing and plaster. Then take a little rod from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the rod in place of the hemiatem, which falls on the fracture and the location. Then put the hemiatem on the fracture as it is wrapped, and wrap it around the neck, and under the healthy nipple, and under the weak nipple: and bind it all over, and however you see that the bandage holds the fracture in place decently: and it is such that it should not be hidden from you, and altogether, so that the rod does not move off the broken bone. And for this reason, it is necessary to look at the weak side every day. As often as the bandage becomes loosened, and you see the rod already moving: then straighten it, and tighten the bandage.
Then put the bandage of the weak person on his back, and put under his armpit near his bandage a small pillow at night, so that with it the aid of it may be elevated from his side. The fracture of the shoulder is elevated therefore through elevation of the arm.
Or tie his arm to his neck: and do not untie the bandage, unless an accident occurs from itching, or from an abscess, until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see the surface of it towards that. And add to the tightening, and leave it, until it is restored and knit together.
And the fracture of the shoulder is tightened and comforted according to the most part in twenty days: and sometimes it happens in certain men in less than that.
On the restoration of the fracture of the Shoulder blade.
The shoulder blade is rarely broken, and in the wide place of it: and they are not broken from it except its edges.
When therefore the place is broken from it, and it breaks in the middle of it, and it is not recognized except by touch: then according to what is the figure of the fracture, prepare its preparation. And reduce it to its natural figure in every way of skill, that is possible for you.
Then put on the place powder of rose with egg white, and a soft cloth, and put over it a small pillow from folded cloth. Then put on it a broad strap from thin wood according to the quantity of the whole shoulder blade, or a little more than that.
If indeed under the strap there is a hollow in some place of the shoulder blade, then equal that hollow with a soft cloth, until the strap descends according to equality.
Then with the thread from above with a long needle and moderate constriction and firmness of the star, so that it is not removed from its place.
And consider the ligament in every direction. As often as the ligament is softened, tighten it with a thread, and equal to the star if it is removed from its place: and let the weak one lie on his healthy side.
And a spatula of some sort is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When therefore the number is completed, then untie the ligament: and you will be in safety. For it is one of the bones whose fracture is not feared, nor their separation.
If a piece proceeds from the bone and pierces under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said in the fracture of the furcula from the sediment of a hot aposteme, if anything happens from it.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the Breast.
The breast is rarely fractured in its middle, and that rarely happens to it. Its extremities are most often fractured and broken from its accidents.
When its middle is fractured, which declines to the lower parts, and there happens to it a severe pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps it vomits blood, and it is declared that there is a fracture in the bone, and it is not hidden from sensation, The restoration of it is, so that the weak one lies on his back: and put between his Spatulas a pillow.
Then press his shoulders, and gather the ribs from both sides or the sides with the hands: and adjust in its equality, according to every mode that is possible for it and is convenient, until the figure of the bone returns, according to what is necessary.
Then put on top of it a plaster and a dressing, and put above it a splint made from a thin board of willow or hazel, and similar things for lightness, after you have wrapped it in a cloth. Then bind it tightly around the fractured bone, so that it is not moved: and take care with the bandage according to the roundness of the back, and tighten it with a suitable strap.
Then consider the bandage every hour, and as often as it becomes loose, tighten it: and if necessity demands its removal on account of itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or abscess: then hasten, and remove it, and scrape away the plaster, and correct what happens with the method of its cure.
Then put back the plaster, if you see it is beneficial for that face: and apply a bandage to it, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the ribs, when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur, except in thick places which follow the back, and from the ends of them on the front side. And damage does not happen to them, except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling on examination with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way, that you straighten the fracture with your fingers according to what is possible, until it takes on the shape, according to what is necessary. Then apply a plaster, and bind the fractured bone with a splint, if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined to the inside: then there happens to the patient a severe pain and puncture, like the puncture that happens to one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and also there happens to him difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And already the ancients have devised in it with many devices: and among them are those who say, that you should apply foods to the weak which generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflamed, and distended, and the fracture driven outward.
We indeed disapprove, that it not become a quick cause for making a hot abscess, if it does not happen. If however it has already happened, then he adds to it.
And some of them have said: let something be placed on the windy place, then let it be sucked with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. Truly however it is feared, that the windiness may attract superfluities to the place, on account of the disposition of weakness.
And some of them have said: it is fitting that the place be covered with wool which has already been soaked in hot oil: and little cotton balls shall be placed between the ribs, until it is full: so that there may be an even bandage when you wrap it around according to its roundness.
Then let the weak person be treated with a treatment for pleurisy from food and medicine.
That if the constraining thing harms the weak person, which it does not tolerate, and the mouth is pierced by a sharp pointed instrument, and we fear for the weak person: then it is necessary, that we cut above the place, and uncover the broken rib. Then let us put on it an instrument that preserves the health, whose reputation has preceded: and let us cut the mouth with ease, and let us cut it.
Then let us bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and let us treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
That if a hot abscess happens meanwhile, then apply quickly, and pour in cotton balls soaked in rose oil, and put on the place: and let the weak person be treated with what is suitable for an abscess.
Meanwhile, it should also be bandaged over the side on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
When a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens to them with a bruise, and similarly for the vertebrae of the back. When then this happens to someone, and you want to know, whether it will heal or not, consider this. For if you see his hands already having become soft and numb and dead, and he cannot move them or stretch them or clench them, and when you clench them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it and does not feel pain in them, then know that it will not heal, and in most cases it is mortal.
But if he moves them and feels the constriction with the fingers and the puncture in them, then know that the marrow of the bone is safe, and that the weak man will be healed with treatment.
But if it happens to the vertebrae of the back in a similar way, and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider his feet, then if you see that they are softened and it happens to them what happened to the hands, and when he lies on his back, gas and flatulence come out without his will, and when he is turned onto his stomach, vomiting comes out without his will, and when he is turned onto his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then know that it is mortal. Do not then labor in its cure.
If indeed nothing of that has happened to him, the matter is easier.
And the treatment for what has happened to him is to prepare a warm poultice of the extract: so that you put on the affected vertebra rose oil alone, or with cooked egg yolks.
Place over it that same thing several times a day, until when the hot aposteme is seated: then place over the spot one of the comforting, drying, and constricting plasters, and tie it over with a ligature: and instruct the infirm to use quiet and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the side on which he feels pain, until it is healed.
What if it happens with the friction of a rough bone, or something that is already separated from it: then it is necessary to cut over the skin, and to remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then treat it with some incarnation, from ointments, until it is healed.
If the last part of the bone of the hyoid breaks, and is at the end of the tail: then it is necessary that you insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and straighten the broken bone with the other hand, according to what is possible, and a secondary adjustment.
Then put over it, and remove it: and treat the wound with the treatment that preceded, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the Ankle.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the ankle are rarely fractured. What if they are fractured, then the fracture of them is not, unless it is a crushing in their extremities: and they split along the length, and bend inwardly: and there happens to the infirm a pain in the place, and a puncture: and the leg which is fractured becomes numb.
And the restoration of it is, that you extend your hand over it, until you stand on the fracture in whatever way is its figure.
What if the fracture is only in its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from the straightening, until it is made similar to its natural figure.
If the fracture is longitudinal, or it has already begun to displace inwardly: then make the weak part lie on its abdomen, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have made it even, put a plaster on it: then put on it a splint of wood or of leather: and bind it tightly with a bandage which you do not fear to move the fracture, nor remove the splint.
And make the concavity of those parts equal with what fills it, until the bandage takes it according to equality: and order the weak person, to sleep on its back, or on its healthy side.
If a hot abscess happens to it: then cease from the extension of it, and its restoration, until the hot abscess has settled: and put on it what settles it, according to what has preceded, then return to its restoration: and bind it as is necessary.
If indeed an incision occurs in the fractured bone, or it becomes comminuted, extract.
On the restoration of the fracture of helpers.
A helper is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder blade.
If it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: that you take a wooden board of moderate thickness, according to the shape that follows.
And two bands are bound on the two extremities.
Then it is suspended from a raised place: and the weak person sits on a seat. Then he throws his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches to its elbow, on which the middle of the wood is attached the curvature.
Then suspend from above something heavy, so that it extends it downwards to the assistant. Then the doctor adjusts the fracture with his hands at the same time until the fracture returns to its place according to what is suitable.
And another method is that the weak one is placed on his own neck and his hand is suspended from his neck with a bandage. Then instruct two assistants, one of them to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold below it, and each of them to pull to his own side.
And if force is needed, so that the extension is stronger, then bind below the fracture with a bandage and above it with another bandage: and each of the two assistants pulls to his own two sides.
If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, then it is necessary that one bandage be placed under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary that a bandage be placed above that place and above the elbow itself.
Then adjust the fracture with ease without effort, until when the fracture is adjusted according to what is necessary, and a good application is applied: then bind it, if not a hot abscess occurs.
If indeed a hot abscess occurs, then loosen the binding until the seventh day. And put on it a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until when the abscess subsides: then bind it: and the method of binding it is that you put a plaster on the fracture.
Then put a dressing made from new cloth over the plaster. Then bring the arm up to the shoulder itself, and put his open hand on his own shoulder.
And put on a cloth, and bind it around the arm at the shoulder, so that the arm stands in its place, if nothing prevents you from doing so, nor is anything altered by you concerning the fractured bone.
What if something is altered on top of you from a broken bone, then use an astellis: and it is, that you put on the fracture itself an astellis which is wider and stronger than other astellis. And you put between the entire width of an astellis a finger's breadth, and let the length of the astellis be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers from each side.
Then bind over the astellis a bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is, that your bandage be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the more the fracture stretches, the tighter the bandage should be less.
If you see the astellis and the bandage as we have said, at the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do it: and if you apply a warm poultice, then remove the bandage and the astellis until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the bandage for all three days, so that there does not occur at the spot itching, or swelling, or is prevented the reaching of food to the limb, on account of the constriction from the excess of the bandage. Correct the whole thing accordingly as we have said.
If you are above confidence, that nothing happens from it: then do not loosen the bandage, unless after three days, or more.
And let the weak person sleep on their back, and their hands on their stomach: and put under for support a mattress full of wool equally.
And consider every hour of the night or day, that the shape of the broken limb is not disarranged, nor the bandage loosened. Correct the whole thing with your virtue.
And give food to the weak person according to the order which we previously mentioned, so that it is subtle food at first, until the mouth begins to close: then it is necessary, that you thicken their food.
For it is customary for the aid of the thigh to be bound for forty days, then it is necessary that it be loosened and a bath administered and medicine applied with ointments which rectify it.
If the fracture is foul or bruised, then you should not loosen the bandage from it and keep it on for fifty days, and up to two months.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two forked bones.
Of which one is small, and it is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is the one that is placed under the small one from the lower side.
Perhaps then the larger forked bone alone will break, or the smaller one, and perhaps they will both break together.
When therefore the upper small forked bone breaks, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower forked bone breaks, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones break at the same time.
If therefore the bone that breaks is the upper small forked bone, then it is fitting for the doctor in its restoration to apply a small extension with ease until it becomes equal.
If indeed the large forked bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply a stronger bandage.
And it is necessary to shape the hand for its restoration and to extend its extension on a pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers, and let the joint be lower than all the fingers or the rest, and let the weak one sit square on himself, and let the pillow be before him, or in his direction, in height, so that the weak one does not incur labor.
Then the assistant should extend the arm from the lower part, either with his hand or with a bandage. And another assistant should extend it similarly from above.
Then the physician should adjust the bone until he reduces it to the best shape that he can.
What if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce every fragment into its place with your strength.
If indeed a separated splinter appears in it, and it punctures the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then sew over it, and remove it according to the method which we mentioned in the things that were previously said.
If the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a special chapter about that, so take the treatment from there.
What if a hot abscess happens at the beginning of your restoration, then cover it with a cloth made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be a medium between thickness and thinness: and bind the cloth over it with a subtle bandage, until when the abscess settles: then remove the wax, and put on an prepared plaster made from powdered flour with egg whites. Then put on splints, and let the splint that is put over the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most arrangements: whether the fracture is in one forearm or in two forearms at the same time.
Then put your bandage over the place of the fracture stronger and more violent, and a little more with the bandage to the upper or lower parts of the fracture: or put on a softer bandage for a while, according to what was previously remembered at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture be gentle cloths, moist: and not hard, rough. And let there be a thread by which it is tightened from linen properly, middle between subtle and coarse, as we have described.
And consider the member and ligament after days. What if something happens whose correction is necessary, such as an itch which happens to a member: then it is proper, that you bathe the member with warm water, until that itch quiets, and release the member not constricted, until it quiets, then repeat the constriction.
What if the constriction is already softened, and the wound already healed, and things similar to these: then correct that entirely with your skill, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member, on account of the excess of constriction, then it is proper, that you soften it for a while, and release it for some days, until nourishment runs to it, then constrict it.
If however nothing happens to the weak one of those things which we have spoken, then it is not proper, that it be loosed, unless after twenty days, or around these.
Then let the hand of the weak one be suspended at its neck. And let its neck be equal, and let it be guarded by its strength from agitated movements. And make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of that is according to the dispositions of complexions, and the dispositions of strength.
Of the restoration of fractures of the Hand.
Know that fracture rarely happens to the breast of the hand and the joints of the fingers. And it does not happen to them, unless from repeated pulling.
When therefore a fracture or pulling happens to the sole, then it is proper that the weak one sits squarely: and in front of him let there be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand on the extended one.
Then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the physician reduces them, until they are joined with a good joint.
Then it is suitable to apply a plaster and a dressing, if not a hot abscess occurs. Then place a bandage over it according to the size of the place, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is near the bottom around the sole of the foot, then make something like a sphere from cloth, and order the patient to press on it with his fractured sole, then it should be tightened with a long cloth.
And let the bandage be of leather, in which there is softness, so that the leather may be applied to the body of the foot, and it should be tightened according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a bandage over it, and another bandage underneath on the sole, and let the hand be open and straight. Then apply a binding, as the hand turns, and extend between the toes with a ligature.
What if a fracture occurs to one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be reduced according to what is necessary. Then let it be tightened with the sole, and if you love him, place a straight small bandage on it, so that the fracture may be elevated and not moved.
If the fracture is of the remaining fingers, such as the middle, and index, or ring, and little finger, then let it be reduced, and bound with the healthy finger that follows it, or let all be bound together in a row, and this is better. Or place a small bandage over it, as we have said regarding the thumb.
And consider your restoration, and after the arrangement of a hot abscess, and oppose with what is necessary, when something happens from it, according to which the account of it is repeated.
On the restoration of a fracture of the hip.
The hip bone is often fractured and this is revealed by sensation, because it turns to the inner and back part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that one ligament is tied above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And a splint is applied over its surface.
Then every ministering ligament extends to its own part according to equality: and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let the ligament be on the side of the chest, so that the extension falls upwards: and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let the ligament be near the knee, so that the extension is to the lower parts.
Then the physician makes the bone equal with both his hands, until he reduces it according to the similarity of its natural figure: and the bone is joined with a good conjunction.
Then it is fitting that you apply a plaster and a bandage, if an abscess does not occur on the limb. For if it happens that an abscess occurs on it: then leave it for some days, until the hot abscess settles, and then return to your treatment.
And the bandage of it should be thus. It is fitting that you wrap around the fracture a hard binding, that is, a bandage: and fold it twice or three times: and let excess remain from it. Then wrap the leg, until the heel reaches the root of the buttocks.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come out from the upper part of the two parts. Then scrape off what is excessive from the hip and the thigh from the aliment.
Then put on the hip in place of the fracture itself a plaster, and put among them one plaster upon the bone of the thigh.
Then fill the vacancies between the thigh and hip with soft cloths, so that it equals the bandage.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle above the place of the fracture, three or four turns. And the more you stretch with a bandage away from the place of the fracture, the less and softer and more gentle should be your bandage.
Then tie to both extremities a string, which you have inserted between the hip and thigh. Tie therefore with each of them three plasters that are above. Then tie with the two extremities of the string downwards until you reach the heel of the foot. And with each also tie the extremities of the plasters from the other part, so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Then leave the bandage upon it, while it remains, so that there does not occur to the limb corrosion, nor aposteme, nor inflammation, and similar things. What if anything of that should happen. Treat it therefore with a solution for it, and correct what has happened from that entirely, according to what we have said many times.
If indeed in the bone there is a fragment of bone which causes pain: then it is necessary that you should reduce it, if it is possible for you. And if not, bind over it, and remove that, and treat with what was mentioned previously, until it is healed.
And when this fracture of the hip is bandaged, besides what plasters are added to it, as we said for the shoulder and arm.
In the restoration of such a fracture no feeble limping occurs. And if it is restored alone, apart from applying the other leg to it, then it is necessary that he whose it is, always limps.
And know that the hip is constricted in fifty days, or a little added or diminished: all that is according to the diversity of complexions and the rest of the dispositions.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the knee.
Know that the kneecap of the knee rarely suffers a fracture, but it often suffers an injury.
If indeed a fracture occurs to it, then it is not except for a crack or a hole in its parts. And it is with a wound, and without a wound. And the whole thing stands on that with feeling.
And its restoration is thus, that what has been disrupted from its parts is adjusted with the fingers, until it aggregates and is joined according to what is possible from equality and facility, and construction.
Then apply a plaster made from flour of fennel, or millet, with the white of an egg: and place on top of it a round bandage, if you desire that: and bind above a tight dressing fitting to it.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have narrated in the other fractures: such as a warm poultice and similar things: so that you oppose every accident with what is suitable to it, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shin.
Know that the shins are two bones, of which one is thick and is named by the name shin: and the other subtle, and is named Fibula.
And it happens to both types of fracture what happened to the two bones of the arm: and because of that the restoration of it is made, just like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken at the same time, the leg becomes crooked in all its parts.
And if a bone is broken finely, the leg becomes crooked to the front part.
And if a bone is broken thickly, you find it below: and it is one of those things which are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and straightening, and binding of the stars according to that equally.
Truly it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a foul fracture, having many sores: that the extension should be smaller, and your alleviation more gentle.
And in the leg there is something from the operation over the arm: and it is, when you equal the stars, and complete all your operation, then take two splints of pine wood, which is administered in the making of sandals, which is put under the planks: and they are made from palm spatulas: and choose from them those which have small thickness, and are not from the smallest: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap over each one a cloth with two wraps according to its length. And put one part of the leg on one side, and the other part on the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the bottom of the foot.
Then bind two splints in three places, at both extremes and the middle. For when binding is prohibited, the leg declines to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now let a board of wood be administered according to the length of the leg, and let the leg be put on it, so that it may keep it from movement.
And it is especially necessary that you do this for a fracture when there is a wound proper to it.
Then consider the leg every day, and examine it with utmost care for any abscess, or inflammation, or other remaining things. If therefore anything happens from these, then apply to it what is appropriate, until it is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
A fracture does not occur in the heel itself.
The bones of the foot sometimes suffer a fracture, and the toes also suffer a fracture to some extent; and this does not happen to them except through injury in many instances.
If a fracture happens to the bones of the foot and you see those bones being displaced on top of each other, then let the weak one place his foot on the ground prepared, as when walking.
Then stand and put your foot on what is elevated from those bones: afterwards press, or tread on it: and make it even, until it returns to its places.
Then put a plaster, and a dressing on top: and place under the sole of the foot a small plate, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it with the foot a decent tightness, after which you wrap it with cloths and other things that it needs.
When therefore three days or four have passed for it, then untie the bandage. For you will find the bones even, whether they were fractured or dislocated. The operation therefore concerning these is as you see.
If some of the toes are broken, then restore them and make them even according to what I told you regarding the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then put a splint on the toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly wider than it: then place under the foot this plate that I told you about, and bind it with a decent tightness.
If indeed what is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then put a splint on each toe of its own quantity, wrapped in linen cloth: and bind the plate under the foot: and let it stand on one end of the plate outside the sole of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you, that you do not forget, that you consider all that I have told you regarding other fractures from accidents that we have mentioned: and oppose each accident with what is appropriate.
Of the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the bone of the pubis, and the rod of a man.
When the vulva of a woman is fractured, then make her sit cross-legged. Then lean her forward towards the same back part for a little while, and let it be held from behind.
Then let the midwife fill her vulva with a cushion, until she fills it: and let it become in the vulva like a sphere.
Then let the woman be shaken, and her back be elevated little by little. For that cushion comes out, until it becomes before the entrance of the vulva like a sphere, and the fractured bone returns.
Then put a pillow on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the cushion with ease, then she urinates: and reduce it according to the manner, in which you first introduced it: then let her return to her first pillow.
Let her do that for seven days, or around, for the bone is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a goat, and tie above its opening a reed canal, and insert the entire bladder into her vulva. Then blow into the canal with force, until the bladder is inflated inside the vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then let it be filled with a cushion, and let her stand for some days, according to what we have narrated, until she is healed.
And when the bone of the pubis of a man or a woman is fractured, then administer in its restoration and its adjustment that which we have narrated regarding the bone of the ankle.
And the rectum is not hidden in these nearby fractures which touch a little, especially to one who has something of study or usage.
And understand my book is this much, that the fracture itself signifies to you in many dispositions the right way for restoration of itself and its suture: understand therefore.
When a twig of a branch breaks, take the throat of a goose and insert the twig into it. Then put on it a dressing made from cloth, and it will be dressed, and let it be for three days or around that time, and it will heal, if God wills it.
On the restoration of fractures of bones, when there is a wound with it.
It is suitable for one to whom a fracture with a wound happens, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or the helper bone or similar to those, that you should perform bloodletting on him immediately: if the conditions of bloodletting are suitable for him, as we have mentioned before.
If the wound flows with blood, then it is necessary that you proceed to cutting it, so that you powder on it zeolite ground: if you do not have another thing at hand.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day: and do not postpone it, if there is no occurrence of an aposteme.
If a hot aposteme occurs, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the aposteme settles. And do not approach him on the third and fourth day at all, for you will cause bad accidents to happen to him.
If the broken bone is prominent above the skin, then it is necessary that you try to reduce it, and equalize it with your hands with ease and a little extension.
If the extension of it and its equalization with your hands does not prepare it, then reduce it with this instrument. It is an instrument made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And because of that it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four according to the quantity which he needs for that cure in every type of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be in it a small thickness, so that it is not doubled upon compression on it during the hour of operation: and let it be of sharp extremity, which has an edge at its extremities. And let its upper part be in thickness from the middle of it down to the lower parts.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that the pointed extremity of it be placed curved over the extremity of the prominent bone: and drive it with that by one force, until when the bone returns and is equalized by a certain equalization.
Try therefore to make the extremities of the fracture equal to each other.
Which if the extremity of that fracture is subtle, and does not receive it with a good reception, then it is necessary to cut the extremity of that bone, until the instrument has power over it.
If indeed you cannot reduce them with what we have narrated altogether, then cut it with what is convenient for the incisions that we have said: or saw it with one of the saws in whatever mode is possible for you.
Then scrape what remains in the bone from roughness and small cortexes.
When therefore the bone is reduced, and after its reduction it finds a weak intense pain, then know that the bone did not return to its natural place.
Do that. For you confer on the weak one great help, when your restoration which you do for the bone is completed.
Then submerge the cloth in astringent vinegar, black. And this is especially so in summer. And do not apply a cerate over the wound, nor anything in which there is oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption in it.
Then administer asterions at the hour of completion of your restoration of the bone. And split the detected wound: so that you cut with a fork into the openings of the bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware with all caution, lest you constrict the wound with a fracture. For many foolish physicians have done this: and they have caused to happen to their weak patients either death or corruption or ichor, that is, sanies. And let your dressing be soft, gentle, a dressing diverse for the fractures and remaining things.
For if the wound is bad, or it is a great wound, and you find certain evil accidents upon it which we have narrated, and you find pain in the suspended place: then it is not suitable to apply asterions upon it. And make for them bandages of hard cloth in the place of asterions, and constrict it with these.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound already beginning to generate pus: then remove from above it the cloth which you placed upon it with wine. Then administer plasters and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds, such as the four-dragon ointment, and similar things.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every day, morning and evening, until it is consolidated and healed.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way, that pus runs out of it to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass over the wound and it does not consolidate, nor is the pus separated from it: then you should know that there are small pieces of bone in that place. It is necessary that you examine the wound with a probe. Whatever of those small pieces of bone are separated, remove them, and extract them. And those of them that are not separated, and pierce the membrane, and cause pain, try to cut around them, and remove them in any way that is possible for you.
If there happens to the wound an obstruction, or a swelling, that is, an ecchymosis, or another species of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary that you oppose each one of them with what suits it from the cure, whose narration preceded in its chapter.
And in that which it is necessary for my speech to stand, and to which you should turn your attention when a bone is broken, and protrudes beyond the membrane, such as the hip bone, and the shoulders, and similar ones of the large members, it is that you should not attempt its traction, for many times death occurs from that, but rather leave it alone until it becomes putrid.
For perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then cure the wound, if it seems to you, and if not, leave it alone.
On the cure of knotting in the healing of a fracture.
This knotting often occurs during the healing of a fracture. Especially, which is near the joints: and it forms from that a deformed figure of the member. And perhaps it prevents the member from its natural operation.
Consider then, if the knotting is recent: administer to it medicines which have astringency, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar ones.
Take from these some or all and mix them with styptic wine, or with egg whites, or with vinegar: and put them on the swelling in a poultice, and bind them tightly around it with a good bandage.
And tighten the binding, and do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another, until the swelling is reduced.
Or bind over it a plate of lead that has been hammered thin. For lead has the property of removing all inflammation from the limbs.
If the swelling has already turned to stone and is constricted, and necessity urgently demands its removal: then make an incision above it on its upper part, and cut away the prominent excess: or shave it with certain scrapers, until it is removed: and treat it, until it is healed.
On the treatment when restoration occurs, and a member remains after that in a subtle state, not according to its own nature.
When a fracture of a bone is restored, and the member remains after that in a subtle, weak state: then this does not happen except for many reasons. Of which one is the multitude of the solution of the ligament and its ligation not according to what is proper: or on account of the excess tightening of the ligaments, until the nourishment is prevented from running to the member: or on account of the multitude of excessive embrocation at an improper time: or on account of the scarcity of blood in the weak body, and its debility.
And the treatment for it is to feed the weak person, and to make his body tender, until the blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And bring joy and gladness to him.
Then put pitch on the member: so that it may attract much nourishment to itself. And let it be constantly moistened with warm water until nourishment grows and it returns to its natural shape.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they are restored to their twisted state.
When a member that has already been restored after its healing becomes twisted and the bone which was fractured becomes prominent or knotted, and is deformed so that the shape of the member is spoiled, yet the member is not prevented from performing its natural operation: then it is not necessary to take the advice of one who thinks that the member should be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed greatly to be censured, leading to death, or great fear, so that it is as if it were mortal.
But if the lameness and knot are recent, then it is necessary to moisten with warm water, in which have been decocted softening herbs, such as the leaves of marshmallow, and its root, and melilot, and similar things. And let a plaster be made for it with a softening plaster, such as a well-made diachylon plaster.
Or let the juice of the root of marshmallow be taken and mixed with the fat of a hen or iris oil, and plastered on with it.
Or let the fat figs be taken and pounded with dove's dung and other things that are named among medicines diminishing consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is loosened with gentle, prolonged, and repeated rubbing, which is done with moist hands. And movement of the member should be administered to every part at all hours.
But if the twisting has already preceded and become strong and turned into a callus, and necessity to treat it with iron has been provoked: then it is necessary to cut above it, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and what is in excess from the knot or bone be cut away with subtle incisions: and facility should be administered in that with solicitude and study.
On speech regarding dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of any joint from its place. Because it is prevented from its motion, and the shape of the limb is deformed. And it causes pains to occur on the weak part, and vehement injuries.
When therefore a dislocation occurs to someone, then it is necessary to hasten to the restoration of it, and not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes calloused, and perhaps with that the reduction of the dislocation becomes more difficult.
On account of that, therefore it is not proper to move it, nor to extend it during the hour of its callous formation. Since it often causes spasms to occur, and painful injuries.
But when that occurs, then it is necessary that you hasten to the bloodletting of the weak part. Then let it be left until the callous formation subsides.
Then let the limb be anointed with warm water and oil. Then let it be reduced with ease.
And let every limb be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, and also according to what preceded concerning fractures, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated except in part.
And the dislocation of both occurs according to one of two methods. For they are moved from their places by slight movements and made slightly soft. Or they are dislocated by a complete dislocation, until they become soft towards the chest, until the saliva of the weak part runs, and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and its tongue is involved with speech.
When however the dislocation of it is small, then it returns in many dispositions by itself with paucity.
If indeed the dislocation is complete and entire: then it is necessary that the reduction of it be administered quickly, and not delayed at all: and it is, that the assistant holds the head of the weak person: and the physician inserts the thumb of one of his hands into the root of the jaw of the dislocation between its mouth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he inserts both his thumbs at the same time, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the rest of the fingers of his hands are outside, with which he balances.
And instruct the weak person, that they cleanse their jaws, and release them for chewing to every side. And the physician balances the jaw, and drives the jaw, until it returns to its place.
What if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are at the same time: then administer a fumigation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy: nor do you delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When therefore they return and are balanced, and the mouth of the weak person is closed, and not loosened: then put over them little cotton pads, with cerate that is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then it is tied with ease with soft ligaments.
And let the weak person sleep on their back: and their head be steady between two pillows, so that they do not move it to the right or left: nor is it forced, or does it force itself to chew anything: but instead a gentle enema is applied to their food, until when the pains are relieved, and the jaw is knotted: then let them eat what they want, and administer it with ease.
Let them not labor over the operation of their mouth with eating and drinking, and spitting, until the jaw is knotted and healed.
What if the reduction of two mandibles becomes difficult, when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their place, then often fevers and constant sweating occur, and perhaps the weak belly is loosened, and perhaps pure bile is vomited.
When you see that, then know that it is a loss, and often he to whom that happens dies in ten days.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the elbow and the extremity of the shoulder.
The elbow indeed is not dislocated from the inner side, on account of its continuity with the chest. And it is dislocated whenever to the outer sides, and that is made clear by sensation.
And its restoration is, that the weak person lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then bind the place with your palm, with a strong binding, for it will return by itself.
Then put on it a plaster, and poultices, and bind it.
The extremities which follow the elbow and continue with it are not dislocated, except rarely. What if it is dislocated for some day: then it is necessary that it be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said, and what has been prepared for you.
Then put on it a plaster, and poultices, and a binding. And instruct the weak person to adhere to stillness and quiet, until he is healed.
And with this same cure, the extremity of the shoulder is reduced, when it is also separated from its place.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated, except in three ways.
One of them is such that it becomes displaced towards the lower part of the nipple. The second is such that it becomes displaced towards the part of the breast. And perhaps it becomes displaced to the upper part of the shoulder, and this happens rarely.
And it does not become displaced to the back, because of the blade. And it does not become displaced to the front, because of the nerve.
And most often it becomes displaced and protrudes downwards towards the nipple, especially in those whose flesh is scant. For it protrudes quickly in them and enters quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, namely that it protrudes with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men a blow or a fall, and the shoulder becomes affected with a hot abscess, and it is thought on account of that, that it has already become displaced.
You should therefore try it, until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its cure.
And the displacement is recognized when it is towards the lower part near the nipple, and you distinguish between a displaced shoulder and a healthy one. For you find between them a clear difference, and you find at the head of the shoulder a concavity, and under the nipple upon feeling the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg, and the affected person cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it becomes displaced towards the breast or upwards, then you find a palpable feeling, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this displacement is easy, when it is recent, or the patient is a child.
And its reduction is that the assistant lifts his hand to the upper part. Then put your thumbs under his eyelid, and lift the joint with strength upwards to its place: and let the servant lift his hand, and stretch it upwards. Then he should put it downwards, for it returns quickly by itself.
If however it does not return by what we have said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary that the weak person should be bathed in warm water, and an embrocation which softens and soothes should be administered, such as if the roots of alteae, and foenugraecum, and mellilotum are decocted in water, and administered.
Then the weak person should be placed on his back: and a sphere and wool should be put under his eyelid, which is equal between softness and tightness.
Then the physician should put his heel on the sphere, and lift the head of the shoulder with strength, and pull the hand of the weak person downwards.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: and it is that you make the strong man present who is taller than the weak person, and stand at his side, and insert his shoulder under the eyelid of the weak person: and lift his eyelid upwards, until the weak person is suspended in the air. And another servant should pull the hand of the weak person to the lower part of his belly. If however the weak person is lightweight: then it is necessary that something else be suspended with him, so that it weighs him down: for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method: and it is that a long stick be fixed in the ground, whose head is round in shape: like a mortar's handle: which is neither thick nor subtle. Then it should be placed under the weak part after they are placed on top of the head with wooden splints and bandages: and the weak part should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side, and his body should be extended from the other side with force: for the joint returns to its place with speed.
What if the reduction of it is difficult through all that we have said, then use this treatment: and it is to take a wooden piece whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: which has a rounded head, so that its entrance may be alleviated into the deep wound, according to this form.
Then bandages of cloth should be tied over the rounded head, so that it does not harm the weak part.
Then it should be placed under the weak wound, so that the hand or arm is extended over the wooden piece to the lower parts: and the wood is tied on top with a bandage and arm and extremity of the hand.
Then the arm should be placed on the step of a ladder for width, and the hand extended to the lower parts, and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side. For the joint enters into place immediately.
When therefore its entrance is completed according to whichever mode is possible: then it should be placed under the wound a ball equal in quantity made of wool. Then place a plaster prepared from powder of milled material with oliban and albumen of egg on the whole shoulder, as it turns out above.
Then tie under the wound a bandage of suitable material: and roll a ligature over the plaster above: and attach his hand to its neck, and let it be, nor move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that food of little nourishment should be given to the weak person, until the member is comforted: for it is swift to its healing.
Then a larger dressing is applied after seven days, or five, and it is exercised with movement. If then it becomes firm and is not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint becomes dislocated many times, because of the moisture that happens to it, or because of another cause: then it is necessary that a cautery with three openings be administered to it, according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
What if all this is done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not confirmed, and the plaster and bandage are applied over it several times, and it does not become firm, and it falls, and it cannot be lifted to the upper parts: then know that the nerves which are at the head of the shoulder have already been cut, or stretched, or softened: and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
But a dislocation which occurs towards the breast and nipple, or to the back, is reduced with an impulse and extension with the hands: until it returns, and the remaining bandage and care are administered to it, until it heals.
What if after healing heaviness occurs in the limb, and slowness in its movement, then let the weak one use a bath many times, until that heaviness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
On the cure of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty also: and it dislocates to all parts, and especially to the front or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: since it is evident to sight and touch, according to whatever figure it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, that is shown to you manifestly. For the joint is injured, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch with it its shoulder.
And it is necessary that you should reduce the dislocation immediately, before there comes to it a hot aposteme.
For if a hot aposteme comes to it, its reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it will not be healed at all, especially when it is to the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocation, and more vehement pain is to them: and many times death comes with it.
And the restoration of it, when it is among those things which are possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands: and its arm should be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor should be above the elbow and below it, and he himself should push the joint with his thumbs or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or indeed the dislocation is to the front: then it returns thus, that he bends his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
What if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer a strong and forceful extension: and it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and two ministers should also hold it, so that it does not move at the extension.
Then let the arm be turned to every part, after which a doubled and long cloth is wrapped over its hand, or a broad bandage.
And when the doctor touches with his hand the joint, let him anoint it with oil: that it may be among those things which help in the lubricity of the joint with facility. Then he pushes the joint with a strong push, until it returns.
And after its reduction, it is necessary that there be put upon it a plaster, in which there is styptic and excitation with the white of egg: and let it be bound with a moderate bandage. And let the arm hang from the neck of the weak person, and let it be for some days.
Then let it be undone. If then the joint is strengthened in its place, then undo the bandage from it, and let it be.
And if you see the joint not being well bound, then apply a plaster again, and a bandage, and let it be for some days, until it is bound. Then undo it.
If however a heaviness occurs to it after the reduction of the joint, and the arrangement is in motion: then administer a moistening in bathing, and subtle rubbing, and compression, until it is alleviated, or put on the joint a plaster of fat, that is, the grease of the spleen. Then let it be bound, and let it be upon it for a day and a night. Then remove it, and put it into a bath. When it sweats, then rub the joint with a moderate friction. Then repeat over it the application of ointment one time, and a second, and a third with the entrance into the bath, until it is alleviated.
And if you wish, put on it a cow's dung, moist, warmed with butter, and bind over it.
Do that several times. It itself is alleviated, and returns to its own arrangement.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow of the hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. On the contrary, of the rest of the joints. Truly however it is necessary, that there be speed in the reduction of its dislocation in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place becomes calloused: or else a warm callous forms on it.
And the reduction of dislocation in it is, that you put the weak hand of Mahassem on the table, and the assistant extends his hand; and the physician puts his palm on the prominence of the joint, and drives it, until it returns.
It is nevertheless necessary that it be considered, if the palm has already receded to the ventral side of the hand: then the weak one puts the back of his hand on the table at the extension and reduction: and if the dislocation proceeds to the dorsal side of the hand, then let the position of the hand be inward on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand be put on the table, so that the hand of the physician falls on the same prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a plaster, having applied an apostema: and leave it, nor repeat it.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you over its reduction, after the days have passed, nevertheless the joint remains according to its curvature: and nothing harms the weak one, except that the hand becomes soft, and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut or bruised.
There is therefore no ingenuity in it, except that it be bound with a cauterization near its fracture. And perhaps it does not bind at all.
When therefore Almahassem does not return, then put on it the plaster that we have described. Then let it be bound and left for five days: afterwards let it be unbound and exercised, and the hand moved.
But if its motion is hindered, and something heavy happens to it: then soften it with warm water and rubbing several times, until it is softened.
On the cure of dislocations of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated to any side, or a finger to the back of the palm, or its front: then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and hang it to the upper part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang it, and extend it, until it becomes straight on that day of its own.
When night arrives, bind it according to the narration itself: and do not cease to loosen it during the day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Do this for several days, until it becomes tight.
And do similarly with it, if it is dislocated to the joint of the hand: and bind it to the same part, and perform your first operation with it, until it is healed.
And do likewise with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When there occurs to someone a dislocation of the vertebrae of the back, or a complete dislocation of the neck, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death quickly follows the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the bowel movement of the sick person goes out without control, and he cannot hold it: and often some of his limbs become paralyzed, or both thighs, or both arms of the same, or one of them: or one vertebra is displaced from its place.
For often it happens that there is a displacement, which often results in the displacement to four parts.
That which is displaced to the back is called Gibbosity.
The cure of it is, that you should consider then, if the gibbosity occurs from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor is there any healing from it.
In that which occurs from a fall, or a blow, or similar things to these, the ancients have already spoken of the methods of cure in lengthy discourse. Whose profit is not returned with advantage.
I indeed have already abbreviated from that, whose little is excused by much of it due to my proximity to the intention: and my exposition which I expounded on it, and formed its instrument in a different way than that which they showed it, and expounded it.
I say therefore, that in the humpness which happens on the front side, there is no ingenuity, nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which is done on the two sides also.
And it is not cured from them, except that which happens on the back properly, with what I relate: and it is, that the weak one is extended on his face on a level platform near the wall: and a wet cloth is spread under him, so that his chest is not injured.
Then a straight stick is placed fixed in a hole in the ground, at the edge of the platform, around his head: and another stick around his feet at the other edge of the platform: and an assistant holds the stick, and it is not firmly set in the hole. And another assistant holds the other one.
Then tie over the head of the weak one, and under his armpits a soft bandage, firm: and extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is by his head: and tie it on that.
Then tie another bandage above his hips, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bandages, and tie them on the other stick that is by his feet.
Then every assistant extends to the part of the stick a bandage, and the two sticks are not removed from their places where they are fixed: nevertheless they are not made firm, as we have said.
And the physician puts his palms on the spine with force, until it returns: or he puts a board on it. Then he should tie his feet above the table, until he returns.
If however he does not return through this treatment, then take a tablet whose length is about three cubits. And let the place on the side of which we have spoken, which is near the weak part, be where the end of the tablet enters. Then put the middle of the tablet on the vertebra. And let the doctor place his feet on the other end. And let him pull firmly, until the vertebra is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a turnkey that turns with your hand: and it is, as you fix in the ground by the head of the weak person at the end of the bed two sticks, whose length is one cubit: and by its head at the end of the bed two sticks.
And let the length that is between each stick be one palm: and now a hole has been made in every place where the turnkey runs: and let each stick be firmly fixed in the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And let a round stick be inserted: and it is a turnkey on which a rope turns in the two holes of the two sticks.
And on its end is a hole, in which the stick is fixed, whose length is a palm and that which turns: and in two other sticks there is similarly one of them.
Then pull the ropes that you have pulled on the chest of the weak person with the turnkey that is at his head: and the ropes that you have pulled on its legs with the turnkey that is at its feet.
Then a servant stands at each turnkey, who turns his hand with a rope, with which the turnkey turns: and the doctor adjusts the vertebra, according to what we have said.
This is the shape of the turn, which follows.
Then after the spondilis returns and the location is evened, then it is opportune to apply an excitatory plaster with egg white. Then a swab. Afterwards put on top of the plaster a bar from a board, the width of which is three fingers, or about that. And its length such quantity as to cover the place of the gibbosity and over the healthy part of the spondilis.
Then let it be bound with a bandage which we have mentioned. And let the weak person use subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
What if something of the swelling remains in the place at the end of the healing: then it is opportune to administer medicines which soften and soothe, with the administration of the bar which we have described for a long time. And now let it be applied on that plate of lead.
And when there occurs a swelling at the last of the spine of the back, and it is thought that there is a dislocation because of it, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Wherefore it is not opportune to prescribe for him with this medicine: perhaps indeed it will cause death.
Of the cure of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and the joints of the shoulder do not undergo anything except dislocation only: nor does there occur to them what occurs to the other joints from a slight removal and concussion.
And indeed the joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four parts. Which is, that it is dislocated to the front and to the back.
And mostly indeed it is dislocated to the inside: and a little is dislocated to the front and to the back.
And the treatment of its dislocation inward is that when you join the weak leg with the weak one, it is longer and its knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the weak one cannot bend its foot at the groin: and there is a place that follows the groin which is affected by a warm apostem, because the head of the hip has already reached there.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation outward happens is that they are accidents contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation forward happens is that it stretches the healthy leg according to its complement: nevertheless it does not bend it without pain which is in the knee: and if it tries to walk, it cannot step on it forward: and its urine is retained, and its groin becomes affected by a collection of pus, and upon walking its foot is stepped on at the heel.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation backward happens is that it does not stretch the knee, nor can it bend before it bends the groin: and its leg is also shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is that you should consider then if the dislocation is old, which has already become chronic with the person having it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its disposition: then there is no treatment for it at all. Therefore, it is not suitable that a complete reduction be attempted on it.
In the case, however, where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocation: then it is proper to do this, that you should move the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left: for perhaps it returns, and does not need other treatment.
If however it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you should prepare a strong assistant, and let him extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands, or with a bandage, which is tied above his leg over the knee: and another assistant extends his hand from above, so that he inserts his hands under his armpits. Then he should tie it with a linen bandage over the hip joint, and hold the end of another bandage.
And let its extension be either from the front part of the groin to the region of the armpit, or from the back to the region of the spine.
And let the extension of all of them be in place of one, until the weak one is lifted with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this indeed is a type of extension which is a common type among four types.
If the displacement then returns with what we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for every type to that which I shall speak of concerning its own cure.
In the reduction of it indeed, when the displacement is inward, it is necessary that the weak one be placed on his healthy side. Then a bandage should be placed over the hip joint, on what is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then extend the bandage upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the region of the armpit.
Then another strong servant should take his arms, and hold the thick part of the weak hip, and pull it to the outside with a vigorous extension. For it has now returned to its place.
And this type is easier than the other types of cure, by which this limb is reduced.
If however it projects above you, and does not submit to the entrance with this type of cure at all: then it is necessary that the two weak feet be bound together with a strong, linen bandage, over the two heels and over the two knees: and let the length of each be from its fellow as much as four fingers: and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the weak one should be suspended over the head of a wooden beam, which is in the house: and its length from the ground should be the quantity of two arms.
Then order a strong youth to support the hip so that it protects the head of the thigh, and let one weak youth suspend it, and let another youth push it, supporting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
In the reduction of it however to its proper place, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lies on a platform, according to what we have described for the one having a hump. And let a ligament be tied above his shin, weak in its proper place, and above his breast.
Then two sticks are placed, one at his feet, and the other at his head. Then a stick is placed added in the middle of the platform, fixed well: on which are wrapped wet cloths, so that it does not harm the weak one: and let the stick be between his hips, so that it is not drawn to the lower parts at extension.
Then every assistant stretches to his own part, and the physician effects the reduction with his hand.
If therefore it obeys to the reduction, it will be good.
And if not, put on it a board, and press on it, as we have said in the case of a hump, equally. Truly however it is necessary, that the weak one lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weak leg be extended quickly: and it is according to this same narration on the platform: and the physician puts the palm of his right hand on the weak groin. Then he tightens it with his other hand, and with that tightening he puts it extended downwards to the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the weak one be extended downwards, and let it be elevated above the ground: indeed it is necessary that it be placed on a hard object, as it is necessary, which is also done if his hip dislocates outward, according to what we have said about its placement on two hips: and it is on its face, and the ligaments are extended: according to what we have said above.
And it is necessary that compression with a pad be administered over the place from which the joint protrudes, when the reduction is completed according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is that you stretch out the two legs of the weak one; and when you see them equal, and the weak one draws in its leg and stretches it out without effort: then you know that the limb has already returned according to what is necessary: then join the two hips, and put on a plaster, and tie with a bandage, that is, a wheel: so that it does not move to any part: and let the weak one adhere quietly for three days, or four.
Then untie the bandage and plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in condition, then know that the dislocation is already stabilized: therefore let the weak one walk.
And if you see something relaxed: then reduce and plaster it, and tie it according to your first tightness: and leave it also for three days.
Then untie it and make it walk slowly on both for some days, until it is well comforted.
On the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee dislocates in three ways. It dislocates outward, inward, and downward, namely to the back.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will make the weak one apply his leg to his hip. If it does not stick to the hip: then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is, that you make the weak one sit upright, so that he already stretches his leg if he can over it, and you stick your back to his face: and put his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee adhere to your palms and straighten them between your fingers on his knee. Then apply your palm to both sides of his knee with force. And let another assistant stretch his foot until his knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the leg adheres to the thigh gently, not with difficulty.
Then plaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four. Then untie them.
And the weak person should not use walking for some days until he is healed.
If however the reduction of it is refused to you, then administer a strong extension with bandages, whose explanation has preceded in the cure of hernia, until it returns.
On the cure of dislocation of the heel bone.
The heel bone is sometimes moved by a small displacement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely. And its dislocation occurs either to the inside or to the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel bone swollen and protruding on the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its displacement is easy reduction: and it is that it should be extended with ease by the hands and straightened until it returns.
In the cure of it when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary that you make the weak person sit upright and a strong assistant hold him firmly from behind on the middle of his back.
Then hold with your right hand his foot from the upper part of it and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the place of the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the left two veins.
Then stretch with the left, and strike the chest of the foot with the right turned calf without effort.
Do that twice, as we have described.
Then strike the chest of the foot to the leg in a third vein, and you will draw out the vein.
If then it returns in one vein, or in two according to this method, and you see the foot equalized, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on it: for it will return.
If however the reduction of it is prohibited to you with what we have described: then make the weak one throw itself on its back on the ground, and fix a strong stake in the earth firmly, so that it falls between its thighs: and you have already wrapped a cloth around it, so that it does not harm the weak one.
Then let the assistant take its thigh: afterwards the assistant will stretch the other foot, either with his hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the neck of the foot. Then let every assistant stretch against the stretching of its companion: and the stake stand between the two thighs of the weak one, retaining it, so that its body is not drawn to the lower parts at the stretching.
Then the physician equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg below. For the dislocation returns with swiftness.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and the health of its return is declared to you: then put on a plaster and a dressing, and bind it with strong bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you beware or avoid the nerves which are above the posterior heel, so that the bandage is not pressing on them and harms them.
Then leave it for two days, or three. What if the ligament is softened, bind it tightly: then loosen it on the third or fourth day: and prohibit the weak from walking for forty days. If a wound is bothered to walk before that time, there will not be safety unless a dislocation is dissolved upon it, and it becomes rotten, and it does not receive a cure after that.
What if a hot aposteme happens to it: then it is necessary that you administer to its sedation what our narration previously mentioned in another place concerning the cure, and an embrocation, until it is removed.
On the dislocation of the toes and their treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated among them should be reduced with a little extension without labor: and that indeed is not difficult, indeed it is easy.
If the dislocation is in certain nodes of the foot's back: then it is necessary that the weak person make his foot sit on an equal place with the ground, or on a board: and he stands as one walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then tread on it with your foot with strength, until it returns, and you see that it is now equal, and the prominence does not appear in the place.
Then put under the arch of his foot a board that can hold the whole foot, which has two ends. Then bind it tightly for three days with a suitable dressing. Then loosen it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is bound and secured from the dislocation.
On the species of dislocations with a wound or fracture.
When something of that kind happens, and you consider its cure and restoration, death often follows: and because of this it is not necessary that one should presume to treat it, unless he who is prudent in the art through long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not daring, nor presumptuous: and that he use in apprehension medicines which calm hot apostems: and commit the weak to divine judgment. Unless you wait, or hope for salvation from destruction with gentleness of sickness, and in which appears something of the hope. I therefore consider reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the thing, before there occurs a warm aposteme.
If therefore the limb returns, according to which you wish, then administer the regime that calms the aposteme: and treat the wound with that which suits it from dried plasters.
What if the dislocation is with a fracture, and they occur in a separated bone of the breastplate, then consider removal of them, and do in that which we said in simple sicknesses from what preceded in their places.
And beware according to your virtue, and guard yourself from entrance into the way of fear: according to what my preaching preceded to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more healthy to your body with them in your time.
