After I completed for you, oh sons, this book, which is the last of the science of medicine with its complement, and I reached the end in it, from its explanations and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery by hand.
Since the operation by hand has been neglected in our region and time, and has been completely abandoned; until perhaps its science has perished and its track has been cut off; and there have not remained of it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which hands have altered; and error and hesitation occurred to them, until its intentions were closed and its use was prolonged: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the organization of this Treatise in it, according to the method of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and that I should come with the forms of iron instruments of cauterization, and other instruments of work; with the addition of declarations, and with the preparation of what is necessary.
The reason for which a good practitioner of it with his hand is not found in our time, is: that the art of medicine is long, and its author must exercise beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen described, until he knows the functions of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their outgoing, and the veins' pulses, and quietness, and the places of their exits.
And because of that, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken of that at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy, will not be cautious, and will already fall into error, by which men are harmed: as I have seen many of them, who boast about this science, and speak of it without knowledge, and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a physician make an incision into a scrofulous aposteme on a woman's neck and he cut some arteries in the neck, from which the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead at his hands.
And I saw another physician who presumed he would extract a stone from a man which had grown inside him over time, and the stone was large. He therefore approached him, and extracted it with a piece of the bladder. For the man died on the third day.
And I had already been called to extract it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the weakness of the man that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving a stipend from a certain Duke of our land because of medicine: and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him that he got a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the physician acted with his ignorance, and pressed the fracture above the wound with poultices, and applied a tight bandage, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he treated him according to his desires. Afterwards he left him for some days and ordered him not to undo the bandage: and it stayed like that until his leg became apostematic and his foot, and it came to destruction.
I was therefore called to him: and I hastened to undo the bandage: and calmness followed, and he was freed from his pains.
But indeed the corruption had already been established in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
Then the corruption ceased to spread through the limb until it died.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it became an ulcer after some days, until the evil of it became great with its owner.
What is, that when it is pure cancer from melancholic humor, then it is not suitable to be pierced with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that all of it can be cut away.
And on account of that, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation to which health is associated, and an operation in which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already excited in every place of this book, in which comes the operation, in which there is terror and fear.
For it is necessary for you to beware of that, and dismiss it: so that the stupid ones do not find a way to speak and to disown.
Receive therefore the measure with solicitude and protection, and your infirm ones with facility and firmness, and use the better way leading by the grace of God to salvation and praiseworthy succession: and dismiss dreadful anxieties of difficult healing: and lift your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation enters into your faith and your commodity.
For it is more remaining to your glory, and sublime in this world, and afterwards to your quantities.
For Galen has already said in certain of his warnings. Do not call the evil sickness medicine: nor name the bad physician.
Now, however, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
The first Chapter.
Of the cauterization with fire, and sharp medicine cauterization, chapter and ordained from head to feet, and forms of instruments, and ironments of cauterization: and all that which is necessary in the operation.
The second Chapter.
Of cutting and piercing, bloodletting and puncture, and wounds: and the removal of arrows, and similar things to that: and the entire chapter, ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter.
Of restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twisting, and similar things to that: a chapter, ordered from head to foot, and in the forms of instruments.
But before which thing it is necessary to recall the quality of its cauterizations and brandings: and in what complexions they are exhibited.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of cauterization and branding is a profound and subtle science, and a hidden secret.
And many wise men have spoken on it, and disagreed about it: and for myself it is enough to take a little from their discourses, fearing a prolonged discussion.
I say therefore, that cauterization is suitable for every complexion, which is with material and without material: excepting two complexions, which are a hot complexion without material, and a dry complexion without material.
But in the hot and dry complexions with material they disagree. For some have said that cauterization is suitable for it. And others have said the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable for a disease which is from heat and dryness: since the nature of fire is heat: and it is unsuitable to cure a hot and dry disease with something hot and dry.
And he said, the one who says the opposite of that: that which is treated by cauterization becomes a remedy in every hot and dry ailment that occurs in the bodies of men: for when you compare the body of a man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I indeed say through his speech: that the experiment has already revealed that to me many times.
But it is not fitting that one should come upon that, unless he has already been proven and exercised in the chapter of Cauterization's final exercise, and knows the diversity of the complexions of men, and the disposition of ailments in themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the space of time of them.
From the remaining complexions, however, there is not above the use fear: and especially in cold and humid ailments. For all physicians have already agreed upon them, and do not disagree with the remedy of Cauterization in them.
And know, my sons, that from the secret of cure by Cauterization with fire, and its goodness over Cauterization with burning medicine is: for fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized: and does not harm another member joined to it, except with a little injury.
The action of burning medicine penetrates to that which extends from the members: and perhaps makes occur in a member an ailment of difficult healing, and perhaps kills.
Fire, however, on account of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it overflows.
Now that has become known to us through experiment, on account of the length of service and study with art, and position upon the truth of things: and because of that I will excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not, I would not be allowed to reveal to you in my book a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies of expulsion, which expels diseases, demonstrated by philosophical speech, which will be keen in your minds.
And you should know, sons, that they themselves disagree on the time in which it is suitable to apply a cauterization, and they put the best time in the spring.
And I say that a cauterization is suitable at any time, because the harm that occurs on account of the time is outweighed by the benefit that is drawn with the cauterization. And especially if a cauterization is on account of pains from necessary pains, strong, urgent ones, which do not tolerate delay: because what is feared from them is that a greater evil will occur, which is worse than the small harm that occurs on account of the time.
And let it not fall into your minds, O sons, that which they do not consider, except the common and stupid physicians, namely that the diseases which are healed by a cauterization, do not always return: and they think that this is a consequence, and the thing is not as they think: because a cauterization is not, unless in place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and evacuates the humors which are the causes, for which pains occur.
However, a cauterization surpasses medicine by the swiftness of its health, and the virtue of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion: and it is possible that the disease may return at some hour of time according to the complexion of the weak person, and the location of his disease, and its virtue: and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in it: and what pervades into it in acquiring them from foods, and similar things from causes, unless a disease is made, in which a cauterization is administered.
A subtle inflammation in a member with little superfluity of blood and humidity, such as a cauterization of the tooth, because of pain, and similar to it, is possible that the pain does not return in it. But that happens in few.
And I speak to the common people again, that cauterization is the last of medicine, is a straight speech: not according to what they themselves intend in it: since they believe that there is no cure which agrees with medicine, nor with another thing after the application of the cauterization.
The thing is contrary to that, and the intention, that cauterization is the last of medicine, is not, except that when we administer modes of cure in some disease, and those medicines do not agree: then we administer in the end of the thing cauterization, and it agrees: therefore it falls, that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish medical men understand.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say that except because of the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its substance: and they said that it does not produce pus in the place of the cauterization. But it is not true absolutely: since I have already proved that, and found that it does not do that in certain bodies without others.
And cauterization with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said. Truly however when you ignite the cauterization fire from gold, it is not declared to you, when it is ignited according to the quantity that you use, because of the rubedo of the gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire, and turns into sheets.
Wherefore the artisan falls from that in work: and because of that cauterization with iron is made by us more swiftly and nearer to the truth for the operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization, following the chapters, and I have arranged them from head to feet, so that they provide to the inquirer what he wants from it.
Head II or Chapter II, Head
This cauterization is beneficial for the domination of humidity and cold over the brain: which two are causes of heaviness, and an abundance of flux of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and pain in the teeth, and pain in the throat: and universally all sickness which occurs due to cold, such as palsy, and heaviness, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar to those diseases.
The method of cauterization is that you should precede the weak with a purging medicine to clean the head for three nights, or four, according to what the strength of the weak person requires, and their age, and their habit.
Then instruct them to shave their head with a razor. Then make them sit between your hands in a square shape, so that they have already placed their hands on their chest.
Then place the root of the palm of your hand on the root of their nose between their eyes. Wherever your middle finger touches, mark that place with an incision.
Then prepare the olive cautery for ignition, whose shape is this.
Then place it on the marked location with an incision, and lower it, by which your hand is contracted little by little, and you turn it. Then lift your hand quickly, and inspect the place.
If you see that it has already drawn out from the bone a quantity of head alkali, or a quantity of zeherb, then lift your hand. And if not, you will strike your hand with the iron itself or with another from it if it becomes chilled: until the bones which I mentioned to you are visible.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the cotton in it, and put it on the place: and leave it for three days.
Then put on it a cotton soaked in butter, and leave it on the place, until the eschar is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with the ointment Tetrapharmacon, until it is healed.
Now they have said, that the more a wound remains open, the more it emits pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have said, that the skin should be cauterized to the bone: and that the cauterization should be held, until there is a thickness like that of bone.
Then scrape away what has been burned from the bone, then treat it.
And others say that it is necessary to perforate with a cauterization iron to the extreme, until it makes an impression on the bone for a mold, so that the bone falls, which is made like a form of a comb: or the instrument that women use to insert a letter of the alphabet: and they extract, what vapors of the head expire from this place, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then treat it, until it becomes consolidated.
To me, however, these two kinds of cauterization do not seem suitable except in certain men according to the way of fear.
And to leave it, is better with me for the health of itself.
For the head is weakened from the solution of its natural continuity: as we have testified in the other members: and especially when the head is weak and feeble by nature: and a certain kind of cauterization is more salvatory and better with me, and I use it: therefore operate with it for health.
Chapter Three.
When there is chronic pain throughout the whole head: and it is prolonged in the sick person, and they are treated with henna, and cohchia, and head purges, and oils, and plasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with a single cauterization, which we have described, and none of those things are of benefit to it: then consider. For if the head of the sick person is of strong natural constitution, and it is not weak, and it meets with vehement cold: then cauterize with another cauterization under that a little. Then cauterize it on the entire horn of its head with a cauterization, so that it does not penetrate too deeply through the skin, and a quantity is discovered from the bone, which we have described. And cauterize it with a single cauterization on the back of its head, in the place which is called the "uas": and it is a place where the ventose is applied: and elevate your target in this, and you will not discover bone. For the sick person meets with vehement and diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
And I will call this Cauterization in its proper place: and it is necessary that there be a cauterization, with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and its occiput more subtly than the cauterization with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter Four.
When there is pain and inflammation in one part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and the rest of the treatment which I mentioned in the divisions of diseases is administered, and none of those things are of benefit: then cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with medicated cauteries that burn: or with iron.
Cauterization with acute burning medicine is such that you take one tooth of a gear, and strip it, and cut off its extremities on both sides. Then cut the place of pain at the time with a broad scalpel, until a place under the skin is made, in which the dense part is captured.
Insert it therefore under the skin, until it is hidden: then bind above it with a bandage of decent constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours; then undo it, and extract the tooth, and leave the wound two days, or three: afterwards put on it a plaster submerged in butter, until the place makes pus: then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to make it with certain burning medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on Medicines for burning.
Cauterization of it with iron is according to this method. Fire cauterization, whose form is this.
And it is called a Clavulus: because the form of its head is like the form of a nail, in which there is something curved, and in the middle of it is a certain small prominence.
Then put it on the place, and hold your hand: and you withdraw the iron little by little with speed: and let the quantity that is burned be from the thickness of the skin, as its middle. And lift your hand, so that the artery which is below is not burned, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then soak the plaster in salt water, and put it on the place, and leave it for three days: then put a plaster with butter: afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize this half of the skull with the edge of a second cauterizing knife. And beware of the incision of an artery in this half of the skull, not being old is a special property.
On the method of cauterizing in the old half of the skull.
When you treat the half of the skull, with what we have said from the preceding cure, and what we have said in the divisions of ailments, and the treatment is not effective: and you see from the ailment that what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire does not suffice for it, then it is necessary to make an igneous cauterization, until it becomes white after you apply a sign above the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or about that: and put your hand in place of one, and press it until you cut the artery, and penetrate up to the mouth.
Truly it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jaw, which moves during mastication, lest the side or nerve which moves it be burned, whence spasms occur.
And let this be above caution and beware of the flow of blood from the artery that has been cut. For in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for him who is ignorant of what he does, and is not careful, nor experienced: and he undertakes the operation with this from the beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the regulation of the flow of blood that occurs from an artery according to its own method, and in the place proper to this book.
What if you see from the ailment that this cauterization is not sufficient for it, and you see the body of the weak one enduring a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cauterizer having two knives. For cauterization is better than this and more beneficial.
On the method of cauterizing for earache.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold and it is treated with solutions and the rest of the treatment that we mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then cauterization by fire: and this is what is called a puncture, whose shape is this.
Then puncture it with that after its ignition all around the entire ear, as it is rotated: or around both, if pain is in both. And stretch yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear for a little while, after you have marked the places with ink, and let the quantity of the cautery be ten punctures on the entire ear, or about that.
Then treat the places until they heal.
On the method of cauterizing for Colic.
Chapter Seven.
Colic that is treated with cauterization is not except for the types which occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of illnesses.
And it requires cauterization of the type that occurs from dryness and spasm of a nerve.
When you treat this type of colic with hiera and purgings and gargling and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the weak area with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below the temple, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And put your cauterization on the opposite side from the weak part. For softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterium directly on the extremity of the ear above, under the horn of the head a little, and another on the temple: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And put your hand with a cautery until the quantity of the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of a Cautery, and it is a type of knife, whose form has been described above: nevertheless it is not more refined than that little, as you see: and it should be a knife with a bit of excessive thickness.
Then treat the place, with what has preceded, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in old Apoplexy.
When the Apoplexy has become old, and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication is not effective, and the weak person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cauterization on the back of the head, according to what has preceded: and the method of the cauterization should be according to what has preceded.
And also it is cauterized with a Cautery over the bone of the stomach: and this is the most extreme method.
Then let it be treated with what has preceded.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that at first the weak person should be given a drink of great hysteria, and purging pills to cleanse the brain.
Then shave the entire head of the weak person, and put on its back an emplaster of snail as described in the treatment of emplasters: and apply it several times.
This indeed is the method of Cautery: and do that according to the same order which I mentioned there.
If therefore he is healed by it, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back of his head, which should extend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and put between each cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cauterization, together with what has preceded.
If however you use an application, and he is weak and unable to tolerate it: then apply a cauterization in the middle. What if you use an application: then cauterize it on top of the two horns.
Then treat it, until it is healed: and let the cauterization be according to the form that has been described beforehand.
On the method of cauterizing for paralysis, and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with care, and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the weak person: afterwards cauterize it with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and with a cauterization on top of every horn of the head, and with a cauterization on its back, and with three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you are afflicted with a disease of softening of the body in many places, and he is weak and unable to tolerate it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cauterization, until much of its skin is burned, and lift your hand. Then treat it, until it is healed: and thus the cauterization of an olive.
On the method of cauterizing for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, unless it is he whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary therefore that you cleanse his brain first with care, and with the rest of the treatment which we have said in the division: when he is greatly weak, or is unable to tolerate the acceptance of medicines.
If however he is a boy, who does not tolerate medicines, then administer a gargle, and cleansing mastications for the brain, before that for many days with improvement of foods.
Then shave the head of it, afterwards cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle of the head, according to what has preceded in manner: and cauterize another on the occiput and over every horn of its head with a cauterization. What if it is weak and strong and has been tolerating, then cauterize it with the cauterizations that I mentioned in one having paralysis and a softening of the body over the spondiles of the neck and the spondiles of the back: and let the Cauterium be olive oil according to the method which has preceded.
If however it is a weak child, then put a subtle cauterization, according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humours and gross phlegm, then cauterize it with the Cauterizations that we mentioned in one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluity inclined to melancholy, and it is a body of an infirm person humidified, then give to it in a drink what will cleanse its brain, according to that which has preceded in the division: afterwards shave the head of the infirm person, and make then a little roll made from linen, as a circle.
Then put it in the middle of the head: and let the infirm person sitting squarely be held from every side.
Then present an ointment or plaster. And it is worthy made from old butter of ewe's milk. And warm it over a fire with a tempered measure of heating, which the finger can tolerate, when it is inserted into it. Then apply it on the middle of its head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do that to the infirm person every week once, with the rest of its good regimen, until it is cured.
Or if you use it, cauterize it by making many small points, in addition to which you should apply the cautery with a gentle hand while smelling it.
This type of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then put on it a cushion soaked in butter, or hen's fat.
On the method of cauterizing with water descending to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the beginning of the water in the eye is declared to you by signs, which I mentioned in the division, then begin and drink the weak one, with that which cleanses its head.
And guard it from all moistures, and make it sit in a bath, in fasting for some days.
Then command it to shave its head, and cauterize it in the middle of its head. Then cauterize it above the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a simultaneous descent of water in both eyes; or on one side, if there is a descent of water in one eye: and cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width of the temples: and cauterize to stop the flow of blood.
What if you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them, and caution from the flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized on the neck, under the two bones, with two cauteries which are produced to the utmost.
On the method of cauterizing old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent: and they are above the veins, and arteries which are on the manifest exterior head, it is verified that this is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities: then cauterize with the same cautery that I mentioned in the descent of water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries on the neck under the two bones. And if you notice an increase, then cauterize it on every side with a cautious eye, above the eyebrow with a small cauterizer.
On the method of cauterizing in the nasal polyp.
When you treat it with what we said in the division and the treatment is not effective then prepare and give a drink of weak cohosh for three nights afterwards shave his head and cauterize it with a moderate cautery iron with an olive oil cautery. Then cauterize it with a cautery of the neck, with two cauteries, above the two eyebrows under the hair a little.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery of the neck.
On the method of cauterizing for softening of the Eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye becomes softened from illness or moisture then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every side and they will be stretched for two times and let the length of every cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow and do not move your hand with the cautery unless according to the quantity that is burned the third of the eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when inverted eyelashes prick the eye.
The cautery for this is according to two methods: either a cautery with fire or a cautery with burning medicine.
For the cautery with fire, instruct the weak one beforehand that he release his eyelashes if he is of those who clean them until they stretch and become even. If however they prick it at its base: then bind its eyes with a thread, so that they do not move, until they heal.
When therefore the healing and equalizing occur, then put the head of the weak one in your bosom: afterwards apply a mark above the eyelid of its eyes with encaustic, a mark which is according to the figure of the myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then put a piece of cloth soaked in egg white on the eye: or in a mucilage of psyllium above the eye.
Then apply cautery with a branding iron, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the figure that you marked little by little on many places, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, appearing entirely as its own.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hair lifted up at the puncture of the eye.
Lift your hand then: and leave it for three days.
Then put on it a piece of cloth with butter, until the scab is eradicated. Then treat it with ointment, until it heals.
If some of the hair returns after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then apply cautery again on that place, as you did at first.
If however the hair is on the underside: then cauterize it, until it lifts up to its natural place: and equals out so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is that you instruct the weak one to let the hairs go, until they grow out and equalize. Make from a piece of cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap, and from unabsorbed lime one ounce or about that; then rub them together with good friction, and make it with haste, so that it does not get cold. Then spread from it over the cloth which you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyelid of one eye, or two. And put under the eye a piece of cloth imbued with egg white: and let the head of the sick person be in your lap.
And put your index finger on the medicine, and press it for a little while. And you move it as often as the sick person feels the biting of the medicine: for its biting penetrates like fire.
While therefore it perseveres that which it has found, the biting, then let go of the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting subsides, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid lifted, as it is lifted with contraction from fire, or with incision, it is good: and if not, then apply again upon it of the medicine on the place, where the medicine does not impress, and does not denigrate, until your operation is equal, and the eye is contracted.
Then put over it a cloth with butter, until the burned skin is eradicated. Then treat it with the ointment called diaphenicum, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation, to guard with utmost care, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
What if the eyelid becomes soft after some days, and something from the hair pushes into the eye, then apply again the medicine on that place which becomes soft from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then treat it, until it heals.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness. Therefore your consideration should be this: and the way of rectitude will not be hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in a tear duct fistula.
When you treat a fistula, with what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment is not effective: then, it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Order the weak person to place his head on your lap, and let your assistant hold his head between their hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated with his head.
Then put a cotton swab under the conjunctiva of the eye, or in the mucus of the eyelid above his eye: then apply the cauterizing iron, whose shape is this.
Let it be hollow, in the shape of a quill pen from one end, with which the cauterization is made: and if you want it to penetrate up to the other end, and if you want it raised thus.
However this hollow one is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and extract the sanies from it, and clean it: and if it is not open, then open it, and extract its pus.
Then put on it the cauterizing iron, which is made very hot.
And hold your hand for a little while on the cauterizing iron near the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand is not burned, or the weak person is disturbed: and you put the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and consume it.
If I cauterize at the beginning up to the mouth, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cauterization once or twice, if you judge that necessary: and diminish it for three days.
Then put a plaster with butter, and treat it with an excoriating ointment, until it is healed.
What if forty days pass and it is not healed: then put on it a sharp corroding medicine, until the mouth is laid bare: and scrape it according to what is described in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some of the first ones have described. Direct it to the place of the fistula, and probe it: then put into the same fissure a thin rod, that is, a subtle little tube, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of lead melted from a drachm, and hold your hand with the cane in good retention, and do not move the weak one at all, so that the melted lead does not run or penetrate to its eye.
And it is necessary that you put on the weak eye a plaster under white of egg, or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a wonderful healing.
What if the fistula is healed, with what we have said about cauterization, and cure, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the opening of the nose, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what comes to its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing in the fissures of the lips.
Fissures often occur in the lip, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures with what we have said in the division of diseases and the treatment does not work, then apply a small cautery to the knife, according to this method.
And let it be shaped according to the fineness of the knife.
Then put the ignited thing quickly into the fissures until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with a plaster, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in a fistula of the mouth.
When an apostema occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and ruptures: afterwards it becomes chronic and the pus flows out and a fistula forms: then you treat it and if the treatment does not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity that the fistula can hold. Then insert the ignited thing into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand, until the ignited iron penetrates to its depth and bottom: do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we have said concerning treatment, until it is cured.
If therefore the sanies is cut off and healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to probe the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what is found in its head.
On the method of cauterizing the gums and softened teeth.
When the gum is softened because of humidity and the teeth are loose and you treat it with medicines and it does not work: then put the head of the weak one in your lap.
Then apply a cautery, of which the form will be shown after this, so that you put a tube over the tooth: and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the weak one feels the heat of the fire has already penetrated to the root of the tooth.
And lift up your hand; then repeat the cauterization several times, according to what you need.
Then let the weak bone fill itself with salt water, and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For a dense movement is strengthened, and the gum softened is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
On the method of cauterizing in toothache.
When the toothache is due to cold, or there is cold or worm in it, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cauterization in it is according to two methods: either cauterization with butter, or cauterization with fire.
The cauterization of it with butter is, that you take the butter of a cow, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a metal vessel. Then take the scab, and apply it to the extremity of the aching tooth. Then submerge it in the boiling butter: and apply it quickly to the aching tooth, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge a thread, or a scab in cold butter, and apply it to the aching tooth: and put on top of it a heated iron, until the fire penetrates to the depth of the hollow of the tooth.
The cauterization of it with fire is, that you direct a bronze or iron tube. And let there be in its body something of thickness, so that the sharpness of the fire does not penetrate to the weak tooth.
Then cauterize with fire, of which the form appears: and apply it to that tooth: and hold your hand, until the cauterization cools.
Do that several times, for the pain will be relieved, either on that same day or on another day.
And it is fitting with the application of that cauterization, that the weak part of his mouth be filled with good butter, and that he hold it for one hour; then he spits it out.
And this is the form of the Cautery.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you use second to that which is possible: and this is the form of the Cannula.
On the method of cauterizing in the tracts.
When the Strophulae are from phlegm and from cold humidities, and they do not obey digestion through medicines, and you use digestion of them quickly: then a cauterization with fire is concave, whose form is this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke can go out at the cauterization from one extremity to the other: and put the ignited thing on the aposteme once, and a second time, if you apply it there, until it reaches the depth of the aposteme.
Which if the aposteme is small: then put the cauterization according to the quantity of the aposteme.
Then leave it for three days, and put on it a plaster under butter, until that which the fire burned is removed.
Then treat it with a dentifrice ointment, until the form of the cannula is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in the roughness called, and the constriction of breathing.
When the humidities overcome the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the weak one be evacuated first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it in the nostril at the root of the throat in the pressed place: and beware, lest you penetrate with the cauterization to the throat, nor to the skin, except a little of it.
Then cauterize it with a cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra, and let the cautery be a moderate one, according to the method which has preceded.
Then treat it with what has preceded, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in diseases of the Lung, and Cough.
When the cough and disease of the lung are from cold humidities, and the weak person has no fever, nor consumption, nor an old disease: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the armpit in depressed, mild, vacant places. And cauterize with another on the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a tube-shaped one according to the form which has preceded.
And if you need to cauterize with a puncturing cautery, which is called a Point, whose form has preceded in the puncturing of ear pain: and let the points be from thirty points up to almost sixty.
Then treat it with what has preceded, until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches, according to this form. Wherefore it is alleviated with that cautery, when you make with it one of the three cauteries.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the arm is dislocated because of humidities, and it does not return to its place from its dislocation within the hour, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it becomes dislocated by a slight movement, which happens as we have already testified, then you should reduce the dislocation first. Then let the weak person lie on his back, or on his healthy side. Then elevate the cut which is inside the Titillici upwards with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint becomes dislocated inwards.
Then have a cauterization iron with two prongs. Whose shape is this.
Then cauterize the cut until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization comes with four cauterizations.
And when a cauterization is made with an iron having three prongs, then the figure of the cauterization is made with six points: and these are according to the subtlety of the undertaking.
And this is the shape of the iron having three prongs.
And when one is added to it in this manner, then there are eight points of cauterization.
Then put on the cauterized area pounded roots with salt. Then make the weakened part adhere to quietness, so that it is not moved for a period of time, until it becomes strong.
And if the dislocation is upwards, and it rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a cauterizing iron, or by making many points.
For the joint becomes firm, and humidity is removed: and the weak part is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
When many colds and humidities occur in the Stomach, so that they extract it from its composition, and multiply the phlegm to it, and assiduous methods of curation, and do not strengthen: then it is necessary for the weak person to lie on their back, and stretch out their legs, and hands. Then cauterize with three cauterizations, one cauterization under the shoulder blade in the quantity of one finger, with a clavicular cauterizer, and two cauterizations below from the two sides of one cauterizer, until the figure of the cauterizations comes triangle-shaped. And let it stretch between both so that they do not join together when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without addition and if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form and let the cautery that makes this cautery be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking him who trembles at this cautery and it is that you mark on the stomach a point according to the quantity that you want with the encaustic then cauterize it with the point cautery then treat it with the treatment which preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the cold liver.
When there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity, or from thick flatulence, until it goes out from its natural passage, and the weak person is treated with what we have said, and it does not profit him: then it is necessary that the weak person respine over his shoulder, and mark with encaustic three cauteries according to this figure, and the same quantity on the lower liver below the hypochondria, where the elbow of the man penetrates: and let the space that is between each cauterium be the thickness of a finger: and let the cauterium be straight along the length of the body: and do not press your hand much with the cauterium.
And let the quantity of what is burned be from the thickness of the skin, the quantity of half of it not added: and let the weak person stand on his feet.
If however he is not standing, then let him be lying, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a knife cautery, when there is subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware, that you do not proceed to the last in cauterization, and the thickness of the whole skin is burned, where the whole body is burned, and it perforates to the intestines: for the skin there is thin, therefore know that.
On the method of cauterizing the apostema of the liver.
When there occurs an eruption, and you want to know, if that apostema is in the flesh of the liver, or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, there enters a weak pain, and heaviness without sharpness: and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is vehement sharpness: and you see now, that it has wearied its physicians with its cure.
It is necessary therefore that the weak man breathes upon his neck. Then figure the place of the apostema with a searing plaster: then ignite a cautery which is similar to a razor. And this is its form. And cauterize with it one cautery, until the whole skin is burned, and it perforates to the siphac, until all the pus comes out: then cure it with the cure of eruptions, until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that this species of cautery be used, except by one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hands these sicknesses run with experimentation many times: then indeed he dares to undertake an operation of this kind.
But truly to leave it, is better for me.
On the method of cauterizing in the Pleura.
The ancients said, a cauterization with the roots of aristolochia for a cold Pleurisy is done in this manner. And it is, that you take from the roots of the dry long aristolochia, one root which is longer than the others, and it should be the size of a finger. Then submerge it in oil: and set it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery in that which is between the connection of the jaw with the neck, and with two small cauteries under the guidance a little sloping towards the part, which is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping towards the back a little: and with one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries to the back: one in that which is between the two shoulder blades: and with two cauteries on the two sides of the chest, below the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be on the obvious skin smelling.
And some of the ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery made from iron like a probe: and they ignite it, and insert it inside between the ribs, until it reaches with it to the same apostema, and the pus comes out: as we have said in the case of Epatis' apostema.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is a fear that either the weak person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place, for which there is no cure.
Chapter XXXII. On the method of cauterizing the Spleen.
When you treat an illness of the spleen, with what we have said concerning curation in the division of illnesses, and your cure does not help, then a cautery on it is done in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of them is to make three or four cauterizations in a line along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the liver's cauterizations, whose figure has preceded.
And let there be between each cauterization an amount in thickness of a finger, or a little more.
And let the method of the cauterization be the one we mentioned for the liver cauterization equally.
And do not press your hand with the cauterization, and let him be weak leaning on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to hold the cauterization iron with two fingers, which we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and raise the skin that is opposite the spleen, where the weak left elbow penetrates: and let your elevation be what you use to raise the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two fiery irons together, until with them you penetrate the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cauterization iron: thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you should cauterize with another cauterization iron having three fingers.
Then take care that the cauterization, after you have applied it, discharges pus for many days: for it is more beneficial than all the other things which have preceded in the cure.
On the method of cauterizing for Dropsy.
The cauterization does not fall in Dropsy, except for hardened ascites.
When you treat a case of Dropsy with the methods of cure that we mentioned in the division, and the cure is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauterizations around the navel, and one cauterization on the stomach, and another cauterization on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two cauterizations on the back between the vertebrae, and one opposite the breast, and another opposite the stomach: and let the depth of the cauterization be near to the thickness of the skin.
Then diminish the open cauterization so that it emits pus over a long time.
And it does not reject the weak from cure after cauterization with it, for which two intentions ought to be applied to it, and healing will hasten to it with the help of God.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be a clamp, according to the shape that has preceded it: and that with which the back is cauterized should be an olive, according to the shape that has preceded its form.
On the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When they have become abscessed in a dropsical person, and are filled with citrine water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocturnal, which is between the ear and the ring finger: and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For the citrine water will flow out, and the cautery should be according to this shape.
Then make on each of the two legs two cauteries, and let the cautery be made with the extremity of a knife-like cautery: and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and another below it, around the middle of the leg: and on all the thigh make two cauteries: and diminish the open cautery without cure for a long time: so that some water flows out from it: then cure it with the rest which we have said.
On the method of cauterizing for relief of the belly.
Chapter 35.
When there is a solution of the belly from cold and humidities, until it debilitates the retentive and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with modes of cure, and not healed: and you see the weak tolerant of cauterization of overflowing virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on its stomach, according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle clamp-like cautery: and a large cautery above the hips, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and the weak tolerance of that, then cauterize it with a cauterizer on the chest and with a cauterizer on all of it; and perhaps you will add two small cauterizations near the great stomach.
It is indeed a advancing treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from gross, cold, or corrupt humors, and they are treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment is not effective: then cauterize with three cauterizations on the lower vertebra of the back under the almeidati for a short time in a triangular shape, and cauterize under the navel almost two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face breaking out in pimples, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cauterizer, according to what has preceded: and cauterize on his liver, and another on his spleen, with a clavicular cauterizer: and apply an open cauterization for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you remove ulcers, then prepare a cauterizer that resembles a razor. Then insert the ignited cauterizer into the ulcer that has been removed: and with your hand, until the cauterizer reaches the opening of the vein, from which blood flows: do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many ulcers, then cauterize each one with a cauterizer according to what we have narrated. Then treat them with that which is beneficial to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cauterization iron on the alkatim, it is more so in the ulceration.
Of the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the weak does not undergo surgical incision and operation that we have described in its proper place, and is frightened by it, perhaps it may be healed with a cauterization.
When therefore a fistula happens to someone, and it becomes chronic, pus runs out of it, and corrupted moistures. It is worthy therefore that which ought to be done, that you should probe it with a subtle sound. Then recognize the quantity of its depth with the sound.
Then apply a cautery iron, which is similar to a probe. Then insert the ignited thing itself into the same fistula and the quantity in which the clamp entered.
And repeat the cauterization over it, until all those corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And beware of the burning of the nerve, if it is there, or of the large vein: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all these places.
And do not do that, unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and you think, that it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it is healed.
If however the place is sealed, and matter is cut off from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then know that it is already completely healed.
And if matter is not cut off from it, then know that it is penetrating, or in its depth there is a corrupted opening, or something like that: whose mention will come in its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or from thick flatulence and it is weakened because of that, then it is necessary to cauterize it above the alumethene over the kidneys themselves, to cauterize each kidney with a cauterizing iron, whose description has preceded.
And perhaps we will cauterize it again on the same alumethene. Three lines appear where it has been applied. Therefore they will be more lasting in the healing.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness occurs in the bladder and softening from cold and humidities, until it does not retain weak urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the back above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and cauterize with one on the right of the back and another on the left of it: and let the length of that cauterization be according to the quantity of a knot of the thumb: and cauterize it with the lower iron of the back, or two irons if you judge it necessary for it: and let it be according to what has preceded, the cauterizing iron.
On the method of cauterizing the uterus.
When cold and humidities occur in the uterus, and it is prevented by that from impregnation, and its menses are corrupted, and the arrival of them is delayed, and pain occurs to it upon their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize with three irons around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and cauterize above the lower part of the back with one iron, or two irons: and let the iron be a clavical one.
On the method of cauterizing the shoulder in dislocation.
When the mucus humors flow to the ankle of the ankle joint and become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of it is that one leg is longer than the other, when they are compared together: and the place of dislocation is found empty.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the weak one above the ankle joint with a cautery similar to a circle: after you sign with a branding iron around the ankle joint, as it turns: and so that the ankle falls in the middle of the circle.
Which if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-tree cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole skin.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint and its causes are cold and humidity: and the weak one is treated with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and it becomes chronic: then it is necessary to release the weak one from gross humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things. Then cauterize him.
And the method of the cautery in it is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medications, or a cautery with fire.
The cautery with fire is according to many methods.
Of which one is, that you cauterize above the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape. And give them a good or bad depth. And let the space that is between all cautery be of the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be of olive oil.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the ankle itself. There are four cauteries.
And if you use a cautery with a circle, whose form precedes the dislocation of the ankle, alone: so that it is a little circle containing the whole ankle.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the ankle itself, and does not extend to the hip and thigh.
If it extends to the hip and thigh, then cautery it with two cauteries above the hip, above the place to which the weakness points, in which is the pain, and your cautery above the haunch four fingers towards the wooded part for a little while: and let the cautery be knife-shaped.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
What if the weakness indicates that the pain extends nearly to the toes of the foot, then cautery it there where it points with a cautery of one, two, three, or four, or more points, if it needs that.
And if it indicates the pain is under the knee turning to the thigh, then cautery it there with one knife-shaped cautery.
And beware to yourself in every cautery that you do, that you do not apply the cautery so as to burn a nerve, or a large artery, and draw out through it above the weakness a malignant tumor, or a contraction.
And I indeed have already seen one and another, of those who were cauterized above the haunch, and finished in the cautery, and the thigh became inflamed, until a tumor followed to the foot, and it was entirely perforated, and the entire foot was corrupted: thereafter there occurred a dissolution of the belly, and death after that.
What if there is pain in both parts at the same time, cauterize each according to this method.
And certain wise men have said regarding cauterization of the ankle, that this is the method of its cauterization. Make a similar iron instrument, the diameter of which is half a palm, and at its orifice it should be as thick as a kernel of a date, or a little less, and inside that instrument let there be a third instrument.
And let the space that is between all the instruments be the size of a thumb knot, and let the instruments be open on both sides, and let their height be like a knot, or two knots, and make for them a handle from iron decently fitted to the instruments.
Then let it be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and throws off sparks: then let it be placed on a weak ankle lying on its side. Cauterize it therefore with three round cauterizations in one spot.
Then leave it for three days. Afterwards apply a plaster with butter, and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis said, we have used this kind of cauterization little, on account of the terror of its appearance, and because we find few who expect benefit from it.
However, it is one of the good cauterizations for whoever endures it and finds its place.
The cauterization with adhering medicines is like this, that you make two instruments having a perforated armlet, into which descends a hinge of its door made from bronze or iron, the length of a wall, of which in height are two knots, or about that size.
And let the space that is between both be the size of a finger's thickness, and let them be open at top and bottom, and let what they contain be joined together according to this form.
Then remove it and place it on a plaster of anchusa, while the patient lies on their healthy side. And press your hand strongly on the plaster of anchusa. Then pour between the two circles from warm water, which has been heated with fire for a short time, and hold it for an hour's space of time: and let the patient tolerate its biting and burning, for he finds the biting as fire, until the biting calms.
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the warm water from the entire anchusa with sweet water: then leave it for three days.
And put on it butter, until the blackness of the burning is removed: and leave it for several days, and an ulcer will be cured from it. It is indeed the last resource in treatment.
Then treat it with ointments, until it heals.
What if the pain extends to the hip or the leg: make for him a plaster that contains water, according to what you did with the anchusa equally.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written it in the treatment of rectification of medicines. Take of alkaline substance and unslaked lime, both one part: grind each, and put them in a new pot, the lower part of which is perforated with one small hole, according to the quantity that the radius may enter: and put under the bottom of the pot another pot vitreous: and throw on the alkaline substance and lime from sweet water, so that it submerges both with your finger: after which you press them with a good compression by your hand: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the vitreous pot.
Then collect that water entirely, and throw it on another lime: and filter, until it is renewed.
It will then be strongly active, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the remaining members. Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And there are medicines with which they cauterize the ankle, such as these: tessie and mel of anacard, and chalk with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen told of a certain ancient cure of some man, by which the pain of the ankle and the vein of the thigh was cured: and he declared its value to be great. And he said that it did not require another cure, and that he was healed by one remedy, until he told that he perhaps entered a bath of medicine, and came out of it already healthy.
And it is, that it be taken from the green of the seatragi, and if the green is not found, let the fresh and dry one be taken, and let it be ground much with some fat, and placed on the ankle, where there is pain, or on the leg, or on the hip: and let it be tied, and left for the quantity of three hours, or as long as he feels a weak sensation of burning. Then put him into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes very moist, put him into the sun. For the pain recedes and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use a cautery with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that the dung of capers, when with it the vein of the thigh is cauterized, helps it: and makes a cautery in this manner. Let wool be ground, and imbued with old oil, and placed on the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot, and the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take dry dung of a goat and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on a woolen cloth and let it stay until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Do not stop doing that until the sensation is felt up to the knee and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the cow-pox cauterization.
On the cauterization of pain in the back.
When pain occurs in the back for many reasons, or from a fall, or a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and wet material: and cauterization is not suitable, except in this single case, which occurs from the infusion of cold material.
It is necessary therefore after evacuation to apply to the weak person with foul-smelling poultices, and similar things, so that they make on the back, where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the affected part, afterwards marking with a cautery iron in each line five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity which can be tolerated by the strength of the weak person: and let the cauterization be done with cauterized points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations, with a cautery iron in the middle of the shoulder, according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing for the disease of gibbosity of the nape of the neck.
This sickness often happens to little children.
And the sign of this disease in children is: that there occurs a narrowing on the breath during elevation and movement: and you find in the upper part of the spine of the back and its knobs, which already begins to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When I raise that and make it thus, then cauterize it with a cauterizer which is a circle in this form.
And let the cauterization take hold equally over every part of the vertebrae: and if you cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cauterizer two or three lines: and let the points be close to one another.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we have said.
And beware, lest you apply the cauterization on a hump that forms in the spasm of a nerve.
On the method of cauterizing for gout and pains of the joints.
When the pains of the joints are from cold humidities, which flow to whichever members of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is by custom of physicians to call that specifically Gout.
When therefore a cold gout is being treated with methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then cauterization removes them.
And it is that you should cauterize it after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauterizers: and let the cauterization be with an oil.
And if you indicate that there are points on the surface of the foot, then make them with a pointed cauterizer. Which if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it on every knee with three cauterizers, or four on every side, with this same cauterizer of the ankle.
If however many of these cauterizations are necessary for you, then cauterize it. And do not insert your hand with the cauterizer, but rather to the thickness of the skin only.
If however the pains ascend to the knees and the back, then administer what we have said from the cauterizer in its chapter.
What if there are pains in the hands only, then punctures around the focus, as two lines revolve.
If however pain remains in the fingers, then puncture them, a point above each knot, and above the palm of the hand.
If however pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the weak from a good regimen, from the reception of medicines. For if a good regimen is made, and the phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the aid of God by this cauterization.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of rupture.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine descends, or a hernia to the testicle, and it is beginning nearby: then it is necessary to advise the weak person to omit purging on that day. And let him use laxatives, so that feces may descend from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and command him to hold his breath, until it comes out, or the hernia or intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a cauterization under the rupture above the bone of the hip, with a sign whose extremities are similar to the middle of a circle towards the upper parts of the body.
Then ignite the cauterium, which is of this form, until it becomes white, and throws out sparks. Then reduce the intestine or hernia to its concavity. Then let the servant place his hand over the spot, so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the thighs of the weak person, and put a cushion under it, and one servant holds the thighs of him, and another holds his chest who holds the hands.
Then apply the cautery on that same sign, your hand with the cautery standing upright. And hold it, until you have obtained a mouth with it, or repeat it with it twice or thrice, if you have not succeeded with it at first even unto the mouth.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and an issue comes out through that above the weak part or a sore or great evil.
And know that when you do not succeed with the cautery to the mouth, your operation is of no use.
And it is proper that the cautery for infants be subtle, according to their measure.
Then treat with the remaining ointment, until it has healed.
And let the weak person lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is closed.
And it is proper that you put nourishment for it for the length of time of its cure, which will soothe its stomach, so that the intestine does not come out at the anus and vomiting.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a well-made bandage, and let him hold it for forty more days.
And he should be kept from labor, and from fullness of food and drink, and vehement voices.
For when he uses this regimen, thus he is healed with a complete healing.
And I will speak of the cure for hernias with an incision in its own chapter.
When however hernias occur in the remaining belly, and are beginning, and it is not possible to add them, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let that which is applied be about one third of it. Then treat it with what we have said, and it will not increase.
And some of the first ones have already said that a hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with a cautery, and a line is applied which runs along the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And put your hand in the middle with the cautery on the clavele.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
On the method of cauterizing for pains resulting from a fall or a blow.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in certain limbs from a fall or blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize with a puncturing cautery.
And let the cautery be for each limb a second cautery according to its size, and its own slightness, and weakness, and its own power, and the location of the twisting and pain from it.
If therefore it is healed by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then repeat it over the same cautery.
Since it is customary with these pains that they are transferred from one limb to the one that is nearest to it. Wherefore it is necessary to follow them with a cautery until the weak part is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes helped by a large cautery. And especially the type of leprosy which occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: when therefore you consider treating it with a cautery.
If therefore the leprosy is beginning, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it does not decline, nor does it remain: and you apply above the weak part which comprehends the corruption above the entire complexion of it: then cauterize him above the head with five cauteries: one on the middle knot of the head, and a second below that towards the front at the end of the hair, and two above the two horns, and one behind above the nape of the neck.
And finally put your hand with the cautery briefly, until it impresses a small impression on the mouth, and the cortices will be dislocated from it: so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from it, and cauterize with the cautery also over the spleen itself, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the weak part, and appears manifestly: then it is necessary to cauterize with those cauteries that we mentioned in the head, and to cauterize over the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two jaws, and with two cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck, and six over the vertebrae of the back, and one large one over the prominence near the tailbone and one over it, in the same alumead: and two over the shoulders: namely one over each shoulder, and two over the knees: one over each knee, and two over the shoulders, and two over the elbows, and two over the tenderness of its chest: and cauterize over every joint, of the joints of its hands and feet: and cauterize over every heel of its feet, and the soles of its hands.
And beware for yourself of the nerves that are above the posterior part of the heel, so that you do not burn them.
And when a cauterization is made with a cautery over the bone of the breast, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater is the benefit, and the more it helps.
And know that the weak person does not find pain in the cautery, as the healthy ones do: because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of a size and smallness according to the limbs and joints: according to what has preceded regarding the types of iron instruments.
Then treat with a cautery made from the powder of the herb with honey, and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of Gangrene.
When any limb is affected with gangrene and is treated with medicines, and oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then cauterize the affected limb with cauteries, according to what the size of the limb deserves or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate into the thickness of the skin for a short time. Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
And when the gangrene is cauterized on that which occurs to the hand and foot, at the joints of the back near the exit of the nerves, which move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
But it does not presume above that, except for one who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves moving the body.
Chapter 51.
When Barbers itch becomes chronic and nothing from the resources of medicine is effective for it: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery for a short time, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then treat it with the powder of the herb and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and pigeon's blood, and dove's blood: let each be one part: mix all these things, and apply them to a cloth, and adhere to the place, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for a Cancer.
When a cancer is beginning and you wish to restrain it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it revolves.
The wise men have said that it should be cauterized with a final cauterization in the middle.
It does not seem to me, for I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that happen many times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle, as we have said, or with many cauterizations.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of scalding.
When someone has a scald and it is delayed in maturing, either because of the excess that causes it or because of the age of the weak person when he is decrepit and has little blood, or because of the time and the need to hasten the maturing of the scald, then cauterize around its circumference with many small points. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten the maturing by itself.
If you want to make a perforation of it with a cauterization iron, then ignite the cauterization iron, whose shape is this.
And place it in the middle of the scald, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cauterization be from that which follows, that the flow of pus may be relieved.
Then treat it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for a corrosive ulcer.
Chapter 54.
A corrosive ulcer is nothing but a corruption that walks in a member and corrodes it: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosive ulcer in a place that can tolerate a cauterization with fire, then make many cauterizations, small and large iron rods, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosive ulcer is.
Then cauterize it on every side until you eradicate the entire corruption, and nothing of it remains deeply.
Then touch the same place for three days, and apply over the cauterized area a mixture of sulphur and oil, until all the scabs are eradicated and all corruption.
Then heal it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born with healthy birth, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply the cautery again over that which remains of the corrupted places.
The corroding is treated with sharp medicine whenever it becomes necessary. It itself rises in place of the cautery.
But indeed a cautery with fire is of quicker aid: and I have already spoken of its cauterization with sharp medicine in the division: therefore take it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing in pimples and warts.
Chapter 55.
It often happens that this disease occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a coarse, foul thing, which hurts the foot.
And indeed the cautery for them is according to two methods: a cautery with fire, and a cautery with hot water.
As for the one with fire, it is like a hollow cautery of a bird's feather, which is made from iron, according to the quantity that the nail contains on all sides: and let its edges be subtle.
Then apply it ignited over the nail. Then move the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then plaster it with woodland marshes, crushed with salt: and leave the plaster over it at night. For it will be eradicated from its own roots.
Then treat the place with a generating ointment of flesh, until it heals.
What if these are not turned and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then you will administer to them a cauterization with hot water: and it is, that you take a small tube made of bronze, or iron, or a feather quill: and apply it to the nail, or the scar. Then throw into the tube a small quantity of hot water: hold your hand and turn it with compression of your hand for a little while, so that the margin of the tube is impressed on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the weak one wait a little upon the biting of the hot water for one hour.
Then release it, for the nail is eradicated with its roots.
Do this with them one after another, until you come to all of them that are on the body.
Then treat them after they have been eradicated, with what generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing for the Tremor.
When there happens to someone a Tremor from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another: then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauterizations, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and between all the vertebrae a cauterization, and on his chest a cauterization, and on his stomach a cauterization.
For the Tremor is stilled with an oily cauterization, and it hastens health from cold sickness.
On the method of cauterizing for Albahtir (also known as Al Zahrawi or Albucasis
Chapter 57.
When there are expelled from the body of Albucasis foul things, that is, pimples, which are made from corrupted thick matter.
It is necessary therefore in the beginning when it appears, that they should be cauterized on every part of the head with a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, whose ends have been ignited with fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lens-shaped cauterization.
And when they are cauterized with an adamant, at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method: and it does not increase: and the excess is broken, making them, and it heals from them.
Nevertheless it is necessary that it be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
Of the method of cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
It often happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut at the wound, which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things to these: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When therefore it happens to anyone, then put your hand quickly to the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger on it: and press it strongly, until the blood is stopped under your finger, and does not go out from it at all.
Then put small olive cauterizations on the fire, and a large number of them: and blow upon them, until they are ignited strongly.
Then take one of them, either small, or large, according to the wound and the place, where the artery is disrupted, and put the cauterization on the vein itself, after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cauterization, until the blood is stopped.
Which if it is expelled when the finger is lifted from the orifice of the artery, and the cauterization is extinguished, then quickly take another cauterization, from the cauterizations which are prepared in the fire.
I will not cease to do that one thing after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you confuse the nerve which is there, and a malicious accident happens to the weak place.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it off: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends are contracted, and the blood is cut off. Or let it be tied with a strong ligature thread. Or let medicines of the proper property be placed on it, which are to cut off blood, and be tightened with a decent constriction poultice.
He who administers the cutting off of it with a ligature, and tightening with a bandage, or application of cauterizing things, and similar, does not harm it deeply, except rarely.
If it happens to anyone and there is not a doctor present to him, nor medicine: then let him begin with the placing of the index finger on the mouth of the vein itself, as we have described, and a strong constriction of it, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed from on top of it with water of vehement cold, always, until the blood coagulates and thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile, let him consider what it needs from a cautery or from medicine.
Of the Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and their similar things.
We have described in the first chapter, every kind of illness for which it is suitable to combine with fire a cauterization and a burning medicine, and its opportunities, its causes, its instruments, and the forms of cauterizations.
And I have set forth chapters from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method: that the investigator should investigate what is being sought.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, O sons, what in this chapter is that which is from the terror of what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary that there be a more vigorous caution, since in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an apostema, or opening of a cyst, or cure of an ulcer, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which are associated trembling, and fear, and death often occurs in many of them.
And I warn you, lest what is hesitant falls upon you, for sometimes men of such a kind fall to you in this art with kinds of weaknesses. For there is one who becomes angry with his own illness, and death is easy for him: on account of the vehemence of what he finds from his weakness and the length of his suffering. And an illness is from fear which signifies death.
And there is one who gives his attention to you, and says it to you, hoping for health, and his illness is destructive.
Therefore, it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you from those whose manner is such. And let your caution be more vigorous than your greed and your rapaciousness. And do not presume anything about it, unless after certain knowledge, which proves to you that which leads to successful treatment.
And that you use in the cure of all your weaknesses, prognosis and indication of that to which health is more suitable.
For in it is to you assistance for acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and may He not withhold from you guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter by distinguishing the chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck to the feet: so that may be alleviated for you what you want from it, and what you need.
On the cure of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this weakness often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightly grasps the head of the child without gentleness.
And it also happens sometimes from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I have indeed not seen this illness in others than in children: and for every one of them whom I saw, death hastened: therefore it seemed to me that it was advisable to omit the operation in it.
And I have indeed seen one of them, a child, whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day, until he could not sit up by himself, because of the size of his head: and the moisture increased, until he died.
And this moisture indeed either accumulates between the skin and the bone: or accumulates under the bone above the brain.
And the operation on it, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a single incision in the middle of the head, in width: and let the length of the incision be about two knots, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the form of a spatula.
If therefore the humidity is greatly increased and the apostema is larger, then put two fissures, according to this form.
And if the humidity is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the commissures of the head open on every side, and water is pressed out when you press it with your hand inward, and it is not hidden from you: then it is necessary that you find in the middle of the head three fissures, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract the whole humidity. Then bind the fissures with bandages and poultices. Then anoint it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then undo the bandage, and cure the wound with dressings and ointments.
And do not cease to bind the head with equality. And feed the weak one with all dry food of little humidity, until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is, that you consider where appears the magnitude of the apostema, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Make an incision therefore where it appears to you that the apostema and collection of water are, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And beware, lest you cut the artery, and there occurs a flow of blood, and the weak one dies from that flow with an evacuation of humidity.
On the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter Two.
When there occurs to someone a cataract to the eyes, or to the breast, and it grows old, and the cure of medicines does not help: then the last cure is in that, an incision of these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when one wishes to make an incision on them, that the weak head should be shaved. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the weak one constrict his neck, with any cloth of his. Then consider where the vein beats. And the places of both are places which are behind the ears and depressed: and are rarely hidden, except in certain men.
Then mark with cauterization above both: and make an incision on both with a sharp spatula on both sides, the incision reaching to the mouth: and let it be according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery, and make an incision upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers joined.
For when the vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating discharge, which jumps inward with a frequent leap.
If however the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of a space of three fingers. Then mark with cauterization, and probe until you reach the mouth.
And what is necessary to emit from blood, is six ounces, and perhaps you will emit more or less from it. All that according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the weak person and the fullness of their artery.
Then consider the ulcer. Then if anything remains at the mouth from the abscess, then cut it, so that a hot aposteme does not occur: then constrict the ulcer with linen threads from a linen cloth.
Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
On the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When an old headache occurs to a man, or sharp catarrh due to acidic humidities and heat in the temples, or an old swelling, and things similar to them: and it is treated with modes of curative medicine, and it does not help: then we are experienced in these diseases in the extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we will narrate.
And the mode of operation in extracting them, is that he should shave the weak hairs that are on the temples, and aim at the apparent artery in the temple. It itself is shown to you by its own pulse, and is rarely hidden except in few men, or by the swelling of cold.
What if it is hidden from you, then he should bind his head tightly with any cloth of his: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or fumigate the place with hot water, until it appears to you with a clear appearance. Then take the spatula, which I formed a little before. Then scratch the skin with it with ease, until you penetrate to the artery. Then throw a hook into it, and pull it out upwards, until you pull it out of the skin, and make it emerge from the tunics that are under it on every side.
If the artery is delicate, then entwine it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from it a part according to the quantity by which its extremities are lengthened and contracted, and there does not occur a flow of blood. For if it is not cut and if it is not severed, the blood does not rise at all.
Then let out from the blood about six ounces, up to three.
If the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with a double thread, strong, of silk: or of a chord of alhohod, so that putrefaction does not come to it before consolidation of the wound, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then cut away the redundancy which is between the two ligaments. Do that at that hour or after another hour.
And if you use it, cauterize it with a cauterizer up to the mouth, with a razor-shaped cauterizer, until its extremities are cut and it will stay in place for the same operation.
And it is a better work, unless he who undergoes it has a fever or is of a hot complexion. For the cauterizer is one of those things which help to end moistures. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And after the extraction of the arteries, the place should be filled with old cotton, and powders well made should be put on top of it.
And after the dressing, it should be treated with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with bandages, until it is healed.
If meanwhile while you are operating there occurs a flow of blood from the artery, then quickly cut it with a cauterizer or fill the place with cotton, and constrict your hand until the bleeding is stopped. What if none of those things are present to you, then put your finger on the place until the blood coagulates. And moisten the place with water of vehement cold, until the acute pain is stilled and constricted according to what is necessary.
And from what is lighter and easier than the extraction of the artery, it is to cauterize the vein with this razor-shaped cauterizer having two blades: let the sharpness be similar to the pumice stone. However they are much less sharp than the two razor blades. For if they are as sharp as the two razors, then cold will quickly seize both, and they do not cut the flesh with speed. When there is some thickness in them, heat of fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: when this work is done it is better than any work, and lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cauterium.
And let the space that is between two clamps be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with cauterization; and apply both heated cauteries, until they reach the mouth, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between the extremities may protrude. For they are not consolidated with this cauterization thoroughly.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of a flow of tears from the eyes, with repeated ulcers.
When there are constant tears, and their flow is from the veins which are on the outside of the skull above the head: and no medicine can cure them with medical treatment, and you see the face of the weak already red, and he feels in his forehead a crawling, as is the crawling of ants: and his eyes are tired, moist, so that their lashes are already corroded by corrosion: and his eyelids are inflamed from the sharpness of tears: then the ancients have indicated for their cure this operation, and they have named it cure with Ense.
And it is that you should advise the weak person to shave the hairs which are on his forehead. Then cut on the forehead three equally distant fissures along the length of the forehead: and let the length of the fissure be about two fingers, and one fissure be equidistant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little from the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries which are in both sides: and stretch out your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all incision be the quantity of three joined fingers: and have for yourself a piece of prepared sponge, or many dried cloths, with which you will dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula of two sharp extremities, whose following shape is a moxa. From the incision which is on the temporal side, up to the second incision: and excavate with it the whole skin, which is between the two incisions, with a sifac, which is above the mouth. Then do that also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this spatula, and introduce into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp cultellum, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its shape.
And put its sharp side towards the flesh joined with the skin, and its blunt side towards the mouth: and push it, until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all the vessels, which descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues up to that which appears of the skin.
Then do that in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after a quantity of blood has flowed out equal, press out the places from the clots of coagulated blood.
Then put into every fissure a plaster made from old cotton, and put over them little balls soaked in wine, and oil, or vinegar. And see to it that hot apostema does not occur.
And on the third day loosen the ligament, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat it with royal ointment, and other things which are used to treat wounds: until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
Concerning the treatment of sharp tears and discharges from the eyes from the interior of the head.
When there occur to someone sharp and acid discharges, corrosive, constant: and you see his eyes weakened, pale, and already their appearance is debilitated: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall from them, and in the depth of the head is sharp pain, laesing, and consequent sneezing: then conclude from these accidents, that these matters and discharges do not come, unless from many veins.
And the better treatment for them is this. And it is that you should order the weak to scratch their own forehead. Then cut in it a single fissure in the middle of the forehead, or another one across its width, and start with the fissure from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the bone: and stretch your hand from the muscles of the temples, which move during mastication: until when the bone is laid bare: and you will dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a cotton thread, or with a linen thread. Then tie above with little pads: and soak the pads with wine and oil, so that hot apostema does not occur.
And when you untie it, and you see that the hot apostema has already begun to diminish: then it is necessary that you rub the bone, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then treat it with a regimen of excitation that makes flesh grow: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rose oil: and prepare from them an plaster, and administer to the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of that which falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or similar to stone, such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans: or it is a flowing thing, such as water and vinegar, and things like them: or some animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or a kind of stone from those that do not adhere, nor grow in the ear, expose the Ear to the sun: if therefore you see the stone, then instill into the Ear something from violet oil, or from sissamino. Then administer the extraction of it, and make sneeze with the condisi, and stop up the nostrils with a dressing at the time of sneezing, after you put in the opening of the ear fragments of cloth, or wool, and stretch the ear upwards.
For it often comes out with this treatment.
And if it does not come out, then administer the extraction of it with Gest, that is, with fine Pizigarolis: whose form is this.
If therefore it comes out with Gest, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine hook, bent at the end, of little doubling.
If therefore it does not come out by that, then make a tube of bronze, and introduce the extremity of the tube into the opening of the ear much, and stop up what is in the circumference of the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there is no passage except for the tube: then extract with your blowing attraction forcibly.
For it often comes out with what we have described. If however it does not come out in this manner: then take from helkalimbat, or from visco, that is, prepared glue, with which birds are caught, a small amount: and put it at the extremity of the staff after you have wrapped around it a bandage decently placed: then introduce it into the opening of the ear with facility, after you have freed the ear from humidity.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have described, then proceed to the cutting, before there occurs an aposteme of heat, or a spasm.
And the manner of the cutting is, as in phlebotomy the weaker vein first in the head: and let out from him blood according to the measure of his strength. Then make the weak one sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small cutting in the root of the ear at its fat in the depressed place itself: and let the cutting be of a lunar figure, until you reach the stone: then remove it with that which is possible for you from instruments.
Then with speed and care treat the fissure until it is healed.
What if a thing falls into the ear is from one of the grains which grow and become inflamed then administer its extraction.
If it does not come out to you at the exit, then take a thin, subtle spatula of this form.
And administer with it the cutting off of that species of grains which fall into the ear and do not do that when you think that grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear until you put many a poultice: then extract them with forceps or with a subtle instrument or with suction as we have said, for the extraction of it will be alleviated.
In the water which enters into the ear, it is necessary that he uses a weak blowing with condensing at first: and now he has filled his ear with some old cottar: and it lies upon that ear in which there is water. If therefore it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, gentle, and heat them with fire for a little while, and gently insert one of them into the opening of his ear: and let him jump on his foot on that side, and strike with another stone above the stone which is in the ear. Therefore do not cease to do that with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out thus, that you take a parsnip or a juniper and insert one extremity of it into the ear: and burn the other extremity with fire until it is greatly charred. Then take another juniper and do that many times until all the water comes out: and extract it with a cannula according to what was previously said regarding the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that enters into it, if it is small in body, such as a frog, and similar to it, treat it as I have said in the division.
But if it is of large body, which appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks: and its matter is easier than all those that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment does not work: then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun. If, therefore, something appears there from worms, then extract it with forceps, or with subtle hooks.
If, however, nothing appears there, then take a cannula, whose form is this, narrow below, wide above: and introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the weak part tolerates: then suck with a strong suction. Do it many times, until all the worms come out.
If, however, they do not obey you to exit, then stop up the surroundings of the cannula with wax, as I said regarding the stone.
What if they do not come out with what we have said: then administer the distillations which the ancients have already experienced in the infection of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your pouring be what you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver, or of copper, narrow below, in which there is a small hole, wide above.
Let it be then that the pusher which is in the concavity of the cannula, is made from copper, bent sideways. And if you use it, take a rod and insert cotton into its extremity with a suitable insertion: then pour oil, or juice, or what you wish of these medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then introduce the rod with the cotton above, and express it with your hand with tempered compression, until the oil is pushed into the concavity of the hearing, and the weak part feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear, should already be warmed with fire for a short time: and beware lest there be something that distills into it cold mucus: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of an injury to the ear.
Sometimes some infants are born from their mothers' wombs not perforated.
And it has already happened to some men that an obstruction occurred in the channel of the ear from a wound or flesh grown in it.
And this obstruction is sometimes made in the deep opening of the ear, which sight does not reach: and sometimes it happens at the outer opening of the ear, and sight reaches it.
That which occurs in the deep ear, and which the gaze does not comprehend, is in many cases difficult to cure.
And in that which the sight reaches, you should place the ear of the infirm person in the sun, and look into it: then if you see the obstruction appearing, open it with a spatula, the shape of which is this which follows, let its extremity be where there is a small width, whose part is acute: and let the rest of the spatula be of two smooth sides: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If the obstruction is from flesh grown in the ear's opening, then take it with a subtle hook, and cut it with gentle violence, until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is in the deep ear, then take a subtle and smooth wire, warm it with fire for a little while: then put it into the ear's opening.
If you perceive the obstruction with this, that the infirm person feels with a heaviness of hearing, try to open it with ease: and beware, lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put into the ear a dressing according to the quantity of the width of the opening, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days, until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Take a piece of linen cloth and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered tragacanth over it.
If you see the ear has already formed a postule: then it is necessary to extract the linen cloth, and allow it to remain with another cloth, which you will have wrapped in a kerchief made with rose oil, until the hot postule subsides: then treat it until it is healed.
If a flow of blood should happen: then submerge a sponge or cloths in cold water and apply it to the ear: and use the remainder of the treatment which stops the flow of blood as described in the treatment of distillations.
On the treatment of eyelids with nightshade.
Chapter 8.
These are the nightshades that occur on the eyelids of the eye, when they are moist and when they are dry.
It is necessary therefore to pull them with forceps, or with a needle, and to cut them with scissors from their roots. Then apply powdered tragacanth to the places.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a subtle lentiform cauter.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
On the treatment of granulations of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
It often happens on the eyelids something which resembles a grain in its solidity and hardness, and because of that it is named a granule: and it is an aggregation of thick humidity on the upper and lower eyelid.
The operation therefore for them is, that you should examine whether the granule proceeds from what appears on the eyelid, and moves to every part, and its treatment is easy.
Find then an incision above it in width. Then scrape it from every part with ease, until it is hollow. Then hang it with a hook, and cut it off.
If however the cutting away of it is not prepared for you, unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it harms the weak one in something.
What if the incision is large: then bring it together with a suture: and treat it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For an ointment restores it, and fleshes it over.
And if a polyp is hanging towards the interior of the ear turned to the inner surface, then invert the eyelid, and hang the polyp with a hook: besides which you need an incision, and press it from every part.
What if the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, it does not harm it in anything.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the polyp, with salt water: and treat the place with that which fleshes over, until the weak one is healed.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a tumor that generates in the tissues of the upper eyelid: and it happens most to children: and it weighs on their eyes, and they are afflicted with discharges in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears flow to them, and because of this you see them always rubbing their faces, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are humid under their eyebrows, which an inflammation has already covered: and a visible sign of Axirnath is to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of its operation is that the weak person puts their head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare on it ligatures, and make from that thread a circle according to the quantity that the instrument contains on all sides. Then put it above it, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the instrument gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that humidity with a spatula by making an incision through the width, and let not the incision be greater than what is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you cut the skin entirely, until you reach the instrument, for in many dispositions the instrument proceeds from the incision according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it then with a cloth, which you had inserted between your fingers to the outside, and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it is dispersed: and beware, lest you put in the incision, so that you do not reach with the spatula to the eye, and harm it.
If however the instrument does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you put a little into the incision with ease, until the instrument proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and put them on the place, and bind it with bandages.
And there are men who pound salt, and put it in a concavity of the incision, so that it dissolves what remains of that humidity.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however a hot abscess forms in the place, then treat it with cooling plasters, until it is healed.
Concerning the modes of relaxing the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft, whence it happens that it protrudes as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When additional hairs grow in the eyelids of the eye beyond the normal course under the natural hairs, and become long: then they themselves harm the eye, and cause various diseases to occur, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and a white spot, until it becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And the diseases of the eye are treated in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or diseases are cured by Ataxmir through incision and suture. Or with a tube, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the weak one on your lap. Then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is thus turned back, it is good. And if not: introduce the needle into it, where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it back with the thread.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid under the additional hairs with the spatula going from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct.
Then extract the thread, and put under the eyelid a small cotton ball from cotton, or a piece of cloth: then mark above the eyelid with ink, which should be in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: because that already varies among men.
For there are some in whom it is necessary to make an incision from the eyelid a large quantity, according to the quantity which becomes soft from the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find above the two lines that you marked, and begin at the larger tear duct up to the smaller tear duct, and let there be a single fissure near the natural hairs, just as is the thickness of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape out the whole thing. Then bring together the two lips with a suture, with a needle and thread of fine wool: and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what overflows from the threads above the two eyebrows, with certain soothing things, if you want to do that: and if not, do not trouble.
Then leave the suture and threads until three days, or four: afterwards cure it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and treat it with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is elevated at the time of the wound's sigillation and its closure: but the future one will be better.
This method of curing the Ataxmir was taught by the ancients.
However, there is concern for the weak, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method for the Ataxmir is also: and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks, according to this shape which follows, then cut away what overflows with small forceps, according to this shape, with equality of the incision.
If however it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not suffice: then take a needle in which there is a thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and a second thread near the smaller tear duct: and bring together between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then elevate your hand to the level of elevation and elevate the skin over which the scar is marked, as we have described.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and cure it, until it heals.
If a tumor or an aposteme occurs at your incision or your fissure: but apply that aposteme with a plaster, and similar things, from soothing ointments.
And when the eyelids also happen to convert their hairs.
It is necessary therefore that you use what we have said on the incision: but the suture of both is more artificial. On the treatment of ataxmia with canes doesn't translate well, a better translation would be: On the cure
And it is, that you turn the eyelid, and split the fissure which is within, according to what I have described. Then skillfully make two canes, or two thin little wooden rods: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them is less than the width of a spatula: and you have already made an incision at the extremities of both from both parts where you hold the threads.
Then bring together both with subtlety over that which exceeds from the eyelid of the eye, and tie the two canes from both parts tightly, and leave it for some days. For the skin that is tied will die, and become black, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If then it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then cure it, until it heals.
When therefore it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated: and the hairs do not protrude.
And this is the form of the two canes, which you will make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
Chapter 12.
On the removal of painful piles from the eye with a needle.
The operation on it is, that you take a subtle needle, and insert into it a thread from fine silk, thinly. Then you will gather its ends, and tie each knot with a subtle knot very firmly: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then you will put on the Alinxotati another subtle thread under it briefly, and tie its ends if you wish.
Then the weak one will put his head on your lap, and it should be near the sun so that the operation may be declared: since it is a subtle operation, or a minor one.
Then you will insert the needle with the Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you extract from above the natural pile.
Then you will pull the pile up to the Alinxotati: and insert into the Alinxotati that pile: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then you will pull your hand with it, until the pile goes out with the Alinxotati from the eyelid with the natural pile.
If the Alinxotati is pulled and the pile does not go out with it: you will pull the Alinxotati downwards, with the thread that you put in it, until the Alinxotati goes out from the upper hole, and you see it with the sight of the eye: then you pull the Alinxotati, and the thread: and extract both, and close the eye: and keep it closed for two days, or three, until the pile adheres to its place, and flesh is born on top of it.
If the pile is short, then you will attach to it a long pile from the natural piles, and remove it with that: or leave it until it comes out after a space, and then remove it.
Chapter XIII.
When this Alxatrati happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental, therefore, occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar to those.
And the method of operation in it is, that you find that consolidation, and that you separate its lips, and you put between them a linen pad, and you bind it, until it heals.
And it is not proper to use in the cure of it things that dry and constrict, for if you do that, the Alxatrati returns worse than it was; instead use in it things that soften, such as fenugreek: and apply with water, in which has been cooked althea, flaxseed: and anoint with dyaquilon, which has been liquefied with some oil: and wrap with it a linen pad, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you strive with all ingenuity, that it not be consolidated, according to the shape which it had at first.
And this operation that we have spoken of, is not anything but a certain correction of the Alxatrati, so that the shape of the place does not return to what it was entirely.
On the treatment of Alxatrati which occurs on the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is that which is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a tear, or a cauterization, and those similar things.
And the method of operation on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and you insert it into the flesh, and you make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread passes through both extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. If then the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is proper, it is good.
And if not, take a rasp, and put it in the cleft, and shape the eyelid with it: and make two clefts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two clefts be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and an angle is formed from them: until when they are gathered the figure of them becomes this figure, and it is the letter lambda of the Greek alphabet.
Then remove that flesh in quantity, which is its sharp lower width, from that which follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: sew it with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with what we have said, concerning softening medicines and plasters, until they heal.
And if a fistula occurs from the cleft, and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary that you find a flat cleft under the hair of the eyelids, also according to what has preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a plaster, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the discussion about the treatment of Alxatrati, when it is above or below, is that the operation runs in it according to what is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it itself is of many diversities in form: and the prudent artisan prepares his skill with whatever method is possible for him, so that he makes the figure return to its natural form, or near it, and the infirmity itself, according to what is convenient for him from the operation and instruments in multiple arrangements.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesions of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many men, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore you should insert the extremity of a probe under the eyelid and elevate it upwards; or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp in its incision, but rather blunt for a short time: so that the weak place is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and cuts the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you were excavating the adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Pour then salty water into the eye, and wash it with water: or distill into it a distilled product made from dissolved zinc oxide and water.
Then separate between the eyelid and eye with a linen thread: and put over the eye a woolen cloth soaked in the white of the egg: and after the third day use the aforementioned ointment, and the consolidations, until it is healed.
Of the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of tears.
Chapter 16.
Know that the nail is in two modes. Or it is nerve-like: and is similar to a hard, subtle callus. Or it is not nerve-like, similar to the humidity of frozen white substance: which when touched with iron, or a hook tries to seize it, it is cut off, and the hook does not stick to it.
And both types do not begin except from the larger tear duct, until which it advances gradually, until it covers the pupil, and prevents light and movement of the eye.
And the method of operating on it is that the weak person should place their head in your lap. Then open their eyes, and elevate the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with the claw of a pair of pincers, and extend it upwards. Then take a needle, and insert into it a thread from the hairs of a horse, or an ox, or a cow: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a short while, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it upwards: and scratch the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were sewing it with the thread up to its very back.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula, or with small forceps: and distinguish the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that there does not occur from the cutting a continual flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended with pincers alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scratch it with a blunt spatula, whose shape is this.
And beware, lest the spatula touch the horny tunic, and a rupture occur in it, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the cutting, throw into the eye something of ground salt, or made from ginger, and distinguish it until another day. Then treat it with what is necessary, until it is healed.
For if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a claw be fixed in it, then this type of nail is often treated with medicines, and healed as I have described in the division.
For if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the weak person, and take a subtle, blunt, and not very sharp spatula, according to this shape. And scratch the nail from above with subtlety. What if you see that it is rarefied and shattered, and the file impresses on the eye, then distill from your hour in the eye, either with lapis or with rubie, or with tritum salt: and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation over it, until all of it is removed. Unless there is a hot abscess in your eye to the contrary: then cease it, and cure the abscess, until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation over it with scraping, until it is healed.
The flesh of the tear duct, if it harms the eye with great annoyance, should be suspended with a hook, and a portion of it cut away: and do not make the incision ultimate, so that the flow of tears is not interrupted.
Then pour into the tear duct either rubie, or made from lapis, until it is healed.
On the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
There is born in certain eyes of men a red flesh, either composite or superficial, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps converts the eyelids to the outside: and it is like the rose called balaustine.
And the operation for it is also that the weak one places his head on your lap. Then open his eyes, and collect all that flesh with hooks converging to it: and hold it with one forceps, or tongs.
Then cut the flesh at first, until the whole of it is finished with the incision. And beware of the eye, so that you do not harm it during the operation: and let your incision be what you cut with, or with the spatula, which we described in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which the tissue is collected, according to the form that will come after this chapter.
When the incision is completed and the entire white cataract is removed, then fill the eye with powdered salt, or instill into it red powder, and similar things from corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a poultice of defrored cotton with the whites of eggs, so that it may be secured from hot apostema.
If something of the cataract remains and hot blood dominates you, and a hot apostema threatens, then leave the eye and cure it with that which settles the apostema.
Then repeat the treatment over it until it is healed.
And do likewise with the flesh that grows in the eye from this condition.
However, it is necessary that you delegate the cure of every weak eye to its natural or accidental disposition, operating with iron: and do not insert your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
On the collection of pus from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus are red veins that gather on the eye and prevent its proper function, and weaken the eye over time.
It is necessary for you first to consider if the eye in which there is pus, is strong and does not have any other disease besides the pus, then collect its pus.
And it is that you order the weak person to put their head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook or two according to your judgment and let the hook be a subtle duplication, or let there be two hooks graduated on one shaft.
Then collect those veins with subtle forceps with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye and dissolved, and beware lest you wound the eye with the extremities of the spatula.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and you should be firm in your operation indeed: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have excavated, then distill into the eye either a green or a red liquid: so that its acidity eats away what remains of the cataract.
If however it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for some days, until the pain of it subsides: and it is secure from the hot aposteme: then repeat over it the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
On the reduction of the nose to its proper shape.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call it Arissati's fistula, which you will treat with a cautery, or with corrosive medicine, according to what its description has previously stated.
And if it does not heal, then there is no ingenuity in it: except that you find a gathering of pus above the aposteme at its birthplace, and extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus, until the bone is exposed.
When therefore the bone is exposed, and you see in it a corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called the Asper of the head.
Let it be made from Indian iron, and let its head be round like a grindstone, which is dotted with the dotting of a file, or the dotting of a fine awl: and put it on the corrupted place of the bone.
Then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand for a little while, until you know that the corruption has already been scraped: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with medicines which are astringent and contracting.
If then the place is consolidated, and flesh is born in it, and the flow of blood is cut off: and it remains for forty days, and is not renewed, and is not apostemated, and no accident happens to it: then you should know that it is already healed.
And if not, then there is no ingenuity in it, except to reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this form.
And it is, that you scrape the bone with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is scraped, then take an instrument according to this form, let it be a metal extremity, triangular: and its wood is a pyramid extended to the extremity, as you see.
Then put that on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and stretch out your hand a little from the eye. Then turn your hand with the instrument, until it penetrates the bone, and the weak one feels it: by that which he finds the air coming out of it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
Then restore the place with medicines, astringent and drying, as I have taught you.
When then flesh is born, and the place is hardened: then the matter that was flowing to the exterior, returns to the nose: it is then lighter on the weak one.
On the reduction of the prominence of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with its entire mass, and no harm or diminution happens to the sight: then it is necessary that you relieve the weak one: then you bleed him: afterwards you put cups on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then put on the eye an ointment that is made from acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarcocolla. Then tie the eye above with a plaster and many poultices.
And the method of poultices is that you take many soft cloths and fold each cloth four times: make many of them: then put one on top of another, a second according to the quantity that the eye needs: then tie over them with a hard cloth tightly.
And repeat the applications with suction without scarification.
Then remove the applications, and bind the eye tightly by day and night.
If however the bandage is again softened, then it is necessary that it be tied firmly: then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye already returned to its own coat, it is good: and if not, then repeat the plaster, and poultices, and binding, and applications, until it be healed.
On the incision of the conjunctiva.
Chapter 21.
When there occurs a disruption in the conjunctiva, then it protrudes and comes out from between the eyelids like a grain of the conjunctiva, and the appearance of the man is disfigured because of that, and he wants to cut it: then the operation for it is, according to what I will describe: and it is, that you insert a needle at the root of the conjunctiva from the lower part to the upper.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread on the tear duct side, and make it penetrate: and leave the first needle according to its own position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the conjunctiva around the needle: and tie it tightly.
Then remove the needle, and put over the eye a soft woolen cloth on the white of the eye: and leave it, until the thread falls out with the conjunctiva.
Then treat the eye with what comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And when the wound is constricted on all sides with a circle of cloth, until the eye adds great prominence.
Then it is perforated with a subtle spatula, which penetrates to the depth of the eye, and the white humidity flows out, and the eye sinks down, and enters at once: then constrict it, until it is healed.
On the treatment of cataract.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called Alcomnati, is nothing but a cataract, which gathers in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not the eye itself.
And the method of operating on it is, that you make the weak one sit on a prepared seat, or a directed one.
Then take the head of it with your hands on both sides, and move it, until you see the cataract pass to the lower parts of the eye. Then it is fixed, and does not come down, and the light is freed: and the weak one sees things as he used to see: and if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
If however the descent of the cataract is not prepared with what we have said, then make the weak one sit between your hands. Then take a subtle spatula, and probe with it above the corneal membrane slightly at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the corona, until the cataract comes out.
When it comes out, then instill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey: then let it be treated with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have mentioned the types of water in division, and what is suitable for perforation, as the speech declares and explains, then take that same one according to health.
Then therefore it is necessary that you make the weak person sit between your hands squarely, opposite to the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye, and press it firmly: then with your right hand, the eyelid of his eye, if the eye in which there is water, is the left eye: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then take with your right hand the cataract needle, if the eye is the left one: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then place the point of the needle near the corona through the thickness of the radius in the same white part of the eye apparent with tearlessness of the lesser one: then push the needle with strength: and you withdraw with it your hand, until it penetrates into the white of the eye: and you feel, that the needle has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the length of the journey of the needle to the depth be the length of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and this is the corona of the eye. For you will see it in the same pupil of the vision of the eye, on account of the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then place the needle up to the place where the water is. Then press it downward one after another.
If then the water descends at once, then the weak person sees that which is above what opens his vision at once, and the needle in his eye.
Then rest a little. If then the water descends, then put it down again, except that the needle should come out.
When I raise the figure, and it does not rise: then extract the arrow with ease: and you will free your hand little by little.
Then dissolve something from clear salt of gem in water: and wash the infected eye with it. Then put outside the whole eye a pledget or a cloth soaked in rose oil and eyebath white of egg: and tie it with that to the healthy eye.
We however, and those who are of our time, put on it ground cumin with egg white.
What if the arrow does not obey you to enter into the eye on account of its hardness, because it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take a spatula, which is called Alberid, whose shape is this.
Make a perforation with it therefore the same conjunctiva, and do not put your hand in the opening: and it is not except that you make way to the arrow place subtle.
Then insert the arrow, according to what we have said.
And at the completion of your work, let there be prepared for the infirm a dormitory decently made, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark house: and let him be prohibited from all movements, and from coughing: and let his food be that which soothes his nature: and let him not move his head to the right, nor to the left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its disposition until the third day.
Then undo it in that dark house, and try his vision: and make him see things. Then put back the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that he do that at the hour of cure, or immediately after the incision: but rather it is necessary to avoid that: because water ascends quickly through violent sight.
If however a hot aposteme occurs: then it is necessary that you loosen the eye before the seventh: and straighten it with what sits on the aposteme, until it is seated: then without its strength, and put over its face an oral bandage which regulates its vision under it for some days, while it exists in that dark house.
Then let it go out of the house gradually, and let it turn to its own habits.
And know that the pupil is not excavated in the glassy body many times: for then it dares above the operation.
And now indeed it has come to us a certain one of those who are from Alayrach, who said that a perforated sink was made in Alayrach, through which water is sucked.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that: nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are forms of species from a sink, so that it stands over them who are ignorant of them.
Let them be made from their own bronze: and let their extremities be with the same subtlety triangular, and the extremities pointed.
Chapter 24.
Of the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
Sometimes there are born in the nose various added flesh, among which is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet: and from it is a cancerous, stony, dark-colored flesh: and from it is what is a smooth, not dark-colored flesh.
In that therefore which is of these flesh smooth, not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary that you make the weak one sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open its nostrils, and throw a hook into those flesh: then draw them to the outside, and cut what you have grasped of them with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the whole flesh has now been removed.
What if something remains of it whose excision is not possible then scratch that with one of the subtle instruments with ease until nothing of it remains. If however blood dominates you or there occurs a hot aposteme then apply to it what is necessary or it is one of the malignant apostemes then cauterize it quickly until the blood is cut off and all flesh is removed.
Then let vinegar and water or wine be thrown into the nose after the incision. If however the nose opens and moisture proceeds from it to the palate then know that it is already healthy.
If indeed the moisture does not penetrate according to what is necessary then know that there is flesh born inside the upper bones of the nose to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then therefore it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen which has some thickness and knots on it many knots and put between each knot the quantity of a finger or less and let the weak one thrust so that he puts one end of the thread into the nose with the radius or as far as possible for him after which having made it similar to azar he draws his smelling thing until it reaches the caassus and comes out above his throat.
And many times indeed boys do something similar to this in schools and it is an easy thing for one who wants.
Then put two ends of the thread, one end which comes out above the nose and the other which remains in the nose. Then take a minister to saw the flesh with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread and put into the nose after wiping away the blood a linen cloth which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then put at the end of the thing a tin pipe into the nose, for some days, until it is healed.
If however it needs a treatment that dries it out, use that.
For making a head purging, with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it of silver or of brass: which should be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you want make a closed pipe, like a reed.
And the shell-shaped instrument for making a head purging, should be full, perforated: which should have a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat in it oil, or whatever you want from juices and flowing things.
Chapter 25.
Often a polyp grows at the end of the nose, and it increases and grows with time, until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of that, it is necessary to cauterize it at the beginning of its appearance, and to eradicate all of it. Then put on the place, or a cauterization, or a medicine that burns which takes its place.
If therefore the cutting of it is delayed, until it becomes large, then consider if it is stony, hard, of a dark color, of little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: because it is a cancerous aposteme.
For I have often seen, that one who cuts a malignant tumor, and it happens from it great evil to the one who has it.
And if the tumor is of a soft touch, not of a dark color, and you see that cutting is possible in its entirety, then evacuate the weak part, and cut it without fear, without anxiety: and treat the place with what dries and constricts, until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
We should know when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, an operation is hardly performed on it, except in certain men.
It is necessary therefore when anything happens to someone, that you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you should bring together the lips of the wound with a suture, afterwards cure it until it heals.
And if the lips of a solution of continuity are already separated and each part has become healthy, then it is necessary that you should cut away every part from its own skin until it becomes bloody. Then bring together the two lips with a suture, and tie them, and powder over it dragon's blood and pounded olibanum: and put over the powders a piece of diafinicon plaster, or some other of the consolidating plasters: and leave it tied for two days, or three. Then untie it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads separate of themselves. Then cure it with an ointment, until it heals.
The method of the suture is, that you should bring together a solution of continuity, either with needles, as we have described in the suture of the belly: or bring together the solution with thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of tumors of the lips.
Many men have lumps occurring inside their lips, hard excrescences similar to grains of herb, and some of them are small and others large.
Therefore it is necessary that you should turn back the lip, and find the node above it, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it on every side.
Then fill the space after the incision with zegi paste until the blood stops.
Then let it be mixed with vinegar and the place where there is a styptic property be treated with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of the flesh born above the gum.
Frequently there is a birth of flesh above the gum which the ancients call abuluss.
It is necessary therefore that you suspend it with a hook, or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
Then put on the place zegi paste, or other styptic powders, which are astringent.
For if that flesh returns after the treatment, for it often returns, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
On the scraping of teeth with iron.
Sometimes there collect on the surfaces of teeth from the inner and outer part, and between the gums rough, foul, and sometimes blackened cortices, and become citrine and green, until corruption comes from that to the gum, and the teeth are made foul by it.
It is necessary therefore that you make the weak person sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape the molar and tooth, in which the cortices appear to you, and things similar to sand: until nothing remains of them, and do likewise with the blackness, and greenness, and yellowness, and other things until they are cleaned.
If therefore that which is in them from the beginning of scraping is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the scraping over them on one day, a second, and a third, until the utmost care is reached in what you use.
And you should know that the tooth needs scrapers of various forms and many shapes, according to which your operation is prepared: namely, because the scaper with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the scaper with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of scrapers should be prepared by you, as you see.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of toothache.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity, and delay in extracting it. For it is not that the place of it is supplied when it is extracted: since it is a lofty substance: until when there is no excuse for extracting it, then it is necessary when it is weakened to extract it, so that it may be strengthened and certified by you, the aching tooth.
For often the weak pain deceives, and it seems that it is in a tooth and extracts it: then the pain does not cease, until the weak tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the operation of bloodletting doctors.
When therefore the aching tooth is certified by you itself, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until the gum is loosened on all sides: then move it with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in it with a good grip, and the head of the weak tooth between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to straightness, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments, and introduce it under the tooth from all sides with ease, and check its movement, as you did at first.
If the dense is perforated or corroded, then you should fill that opening with a cloth and tie it with a slender thread so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction on it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you act skillfully with scarification around the gum on all sides abundantly.
And preserve your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and returns on the weak part from that evil which is greater than its pain at first.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bleeders do in their haste and boldness to eradicate it, beyond what we have administered.
For they often cause great weaknesses to come upon men, which are difficult to break, and all of its roots remain, or some of them: or so that they extract it with certain bones of the jaw: as we have often testified to that.
Then let it be cleansed after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
What if a flow of blood happens from the places (for it often happens), then take something of gum and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if the gum does not work for you.
The shape of the slender forceps which move the dense thing at first, should be of long extremities, with a short arm, thick, so that they do not double when pressed on the tooth: they should be as you see of thick arms, until when you squeeze with them, they do not displace themselves, nor double: of short extremities, and they should be made from hardened iron or well-made steel, of straight extremities: and in their extremities there should be teeth, some of which enter into others, and squeeze with a decent constriction, strong.
And sometimes the extremities are made in the shape of a parrot's beak which is called ciconia, and they are strong for constriction.
Chapter 31
On the eradication of teeth, and the extraction of broken jaw bones.
When something remains after the eradication of a tooth that is broken, then it is necessary to put on the spot a plaster with butter for one or two days, until the spot softens: then insert into it a spit or forceps: whose extremities are similar to a bird's beak which is called ciconia. The shape of this is a pair of forceps.
Let their extremities be made like a file for teeth, or like a tusk of ivory.
If then it does not come out for you with these forceps, then it is necessary that you cut above the root, and remove all the flesh, and insert an instrument which is called a small lever, whose shape is this.
Let one extremity be short, a little thick: and let it not be hollow, so that it does not break.
If then the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to use with these other instruments whose shapes are these.
The shape of the first has a triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness.
Shape of a triangular extremity that is subtle.
And with other instruments and iron tools which were previously mentioned in the scraping of teeth.
And also let there be a using of this instrument which is similar to a large hook, of this shape, of triangular extremity twisted, in which there is a certain thickness, so that it does not break: and let it not be hollow.
And know that the instruments of teeth are many: and similarly the remaining instruments are not counted, and the skilled artisan, subtle in his art, finds for himself the instrument, according to which he signifies the operation and the ailments themselves.
Since there are some ailments for which the ancients did not mention an instrument, because of the diversity of their species.
If the bone breaks from the jaw or from other bones of the mouth or becomes putrid: then probe over it in its own place with that which suits it from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and help with gestures, the form of which is this.
Let there be in it something of thickness gradually, so that it may be tightened, or the bone may be held with it, and it does not flee and is steady, until the bone goes out: and restore the place with medicines suitable for that.
If however there is a small amount of rot in the bone, then scrape it from its own rot, and cure it, until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
On the sawing of prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, a foul shape is made by it: and especially when it happens in women, and girls, namely those with veins.
It is necessary therefore that you consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth, and does not have its place, or it is possible to saw it, nor to file it: then extract it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, the form of which is this.
It is similar to a small beak, and is made from Indian iron, of sharp extremity, strongly.
And let your cutting be that which you cut with for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that another of the teeth is not disturbed.
If however it is prominent and exposed to its own filing: then file it with a file made from Indian iron, the form of which is this.
Let it be entirely made from Indian iron, and its handle be of a lesser thickness, strongly pointed, like a file with which they make needles: with which the tooth is filed gradually over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls: then smooth it, finally scrape it with certain scrapers.
What if it is dense, from which a part will be broken and injures the tongue: then it is necessary to smooth it also, until the roughness of that fracture is removed, and it is made even, and flattened, and does not injure the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
Chapter 33.
Of the gold wire for filing the teeth.
When the front teeth are subject to concussion and commotion from a blow or a fall: and the weak one cannot chew on what he eats so that it does not fall: and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and the treatment was of no use: then the idea for them is to be fastened with a gold wire: because silver becomes greenish and putrefies after days: but gold never changes.
And let the thread be moderate in thinness and thickness according to the quantity that it can hold between the teeth.
And the shape of the filing indeed is, that you take the thread and insert double of it between two healthy teeth: then weave with both ends of the thread between the loose teeth, whether one or several, until you reach with the web to a healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the texture until the part from which you began: and pull your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not moved outwardly: and let your constriction with which you tighten the thread be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not protrude.
Then cut the overflowing ends of the thread with scissors: and gather both, and shape them with forceps: and hide them between a healthy tooth and a loose tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue: then let it be tightened thus while it remains.
But if it becomes undone, or is cut, tighten them with another thread, and it will stay with that for the whole time.
And this is the shape of teeth, and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth, and of two movable teeth, as you see.
And when it happens, that one tooth or two teeth return to their places after a fall, and are retained as we have described, and remain: and this is not done except by an artisan who is prudent and experienced.
And when something is fitted from the bones of the cheeks: and it is made from it in the form of a tooth, and it is put in the place, from which the tooth is strengthened and tightened, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is, that you open the mouth of the weak person in your lap, and elevate their tongue: then cut that nervous ligament in width, until the tongue is freed from its retention.
What if in it there is something of hardness and knotting, and it is from the consolidation of a wound: then introduce an instrument into that, and cut it in width, until you cut the ligament, and the knotting is loosened.
And beware, lest there be a fissure in the depth of the flesh, and you cut the artery there, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then let the area of the incision be colluted with rose water, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then put under the tongue a plaster made of flax, which the weak person holds during the whole night: so that it does not consolidate again.
If however there occurs a flow of blood, then put on the place a poultice of toasted barley. If the blood overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a sluggish cauterization iron, which suits that purpose: afterwards cure it with the remaining cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue an apostema resembling a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it is so enlarged, until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is, that you open the mouth of the infirm in front of the sun: and examine the apostema.
If you see it to be of a dark or black color, hard, which the infirm person does not feel: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it leans to whiteness, where there is humidity, then cast a hook into it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and free it from every part. What if the blood overcomes you during the time of your operation, then put above it pounded zegi, until the blood is stopped: afterwards return to your operation, until you extract it with its completeness.
Then let it be glued with vinegar and salt: and cure it with the remaining cure suitable for that, until it is healed.
Of the cure of the apostema of the two tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes there occur in the throat glands, that is, glandules, which resemble almonds, which occur in the form of nuts: and are named the two Amygdala: which when you cure with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard apostema, of dark color, of little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it also with iron, fearing the flow of blood, but rather leave it, until it matures. And then you will either perforate it or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of a white color, round, and its root is subtle: then it should be cut.
And the operation on it is, that you consider before its operation, if its aposteme has cooled quiet completion, or is diminished by some diminution: then make the weak sit in front of the sun, and its head be in your bosom: and open its mouth, and let the servant receive between his hands, and press its tongue downwards with an instrument, of this form.
Let it be made from silver, or copper, which is subtle like a knife.
When you press its tongue with it, and the aposteme is shown to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the amygdala, and extract it to the outside as much as you can, except that you pull with it something of the tunics.
Then cut it with an instrument, of which the shape is as follows. It is similar to forceps: nevertheless its extremities are curved, so that the orifice of each of them is directed towards the tip of the other: whence take care that it be made from iron, or steel that has been tempered.
If however this instrument is not available, then cut it with a spatulum, of which the shape is as follows. Let one side be sharp, and the other side not sharp.
And after you have cut one amygdala, cut the other according to the same pattern of cutting.
Then after the cutting, let the weak person gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
And if a flow of blood happens to him, let him gargle with water in which the bark of pomegranates have been boiled: or leaves of myrtle, and similar things among astringents, until the flow of blood is stopped: then take care of it, until it is healed.
And when abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut it therefore equally on both sides as I said in the incision of the two tonsils.
And I indeed have already treated a woman for an abscess that had developed in her throat, which was pulling towards the trachea, with little sensation, which had nearly closed her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and it had already prohibited her from eating, and drinking water: and she would have reached death, if she had remained one day, or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had sent out two branches, until they came out above the two nostrils.
I forced it therefore hastily, and I fixed one of them with a hook. Then I pulled it, and a large portion was pulled out from it.
Then I cut it off, where it was grasped coming from the nostril.
Then I did to it what proceeded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess: then I cut off from it a part of it, and there did not flow from it except a little blood: therefore the throat of the woman was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, then she took some food.
I did not therefore cease to cut into that abscess many times for a long time: and the abscess followed in the place of what I was cutting, until it was prolonged too much and with that.
I cauterized therefore, and I burned the abscess in the throat.
It stood therefore from increasing: then I walked away from the area, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
Of the incision of the abscess of the uvula.
Chapter 37
When the cold descends to the ulcers and becomes inflamed and is long: then it itself is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it itself is called a UAV or haw, however,  more properly translated as "ulcer" as uva.
When it is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not work: and you see that the hot aposteme has quieted from it, and is subtle: then it is necessary to cut it.
And that which is gathered from it round, and is not long, and is bloody, or of a dark reddish color, or black, and has no sensation: then it is necessary to avoid cutting it. For in it there is fear for the weak.
It is necessary therefore when you see it according to the measure which I spoke of from its whiteness and its length, that you make the weak one sit before the sun: and press his tongue with an instrument, whose description was given before: then tie a hook in the mouth, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in the cutting of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it except that which exceeds the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will injure the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting use that which we described in the cutting of the two tonsils: and treat it, until it is healed.
If however the weak one trembles at the cutting: then it is necessary that you use ingenuity in the cauterization of it without fear and trembling.
And the method of cauterization on it is not, except with sharp water: and it is, that you put the head of the weak one on your shoulder. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned. Then take from the water which I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and mix with it quicklime, and put it not too thick, nor too subtle, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, whose form is this.
Let the extremities of it in which the medicine is put be hollow, such as the hollow of a spoon or a radius.
And put the instrument with medicine on the wound itself: and let the weak person be lying on his side, so that saliva runs out of his mouth from the inner medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat, and harms him.
Then hold your hand with medicine. And you apply it to the wound for the space of half an hour, until you see that it is already blackened and the biting of the medicine has settled.
And if you want to take a piece of cloth, and wrap it around the extremity of the radius, and dip the cloth with medicine, and insert the radius with the cloth into the tube from above, until the cloth adheres to the wound.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you want concerning the cauterization of the wound. Then leave it alone: for it will dry and fall off after three days, or four.
What if you judge that you should repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization cleanse around the wound with cloth soaked in butter, and clean what is around it from medicine: and wash with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This therefore is the most wholesome method of treatment, surpassing incision and remote from fear.
And sometimes wounds are also treated with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision: for they are treated with fumigation, in this manner. Take calamine, and hyssop, and origan, and rue, and sseah, and chamomile, and abrotan, and similar things from herbs: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be coated with plaster; and let there be an opening in the middle of the pot, upon which the instrument called concave is placed in this manner.
Let it be made from silver or brass: and the extremity should be inserted, in which there is a grain, into the mouth of the infirm, until the vapor ascends to the palate above the tube, until the palate becomes very obscured.
Then rub over it many times, until it is scraped away.
And beware, that you do not make this cure at the beginning of an apostema. For a plaster adds to an apostema: and it is not proper to make that unless at the decline of the apostema when it has become cool.
If however this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane, and place the bark of an oak at its extremity: so that the mouth of the infirm does not burn: for the bark of the oak prohibits vapor from burning the mouth: and this is from good cure with health.
On the extraction of spines, and bones from the jaw.
Chapter 38.
Often a bone or a fish spine, or something else sticks to the throat.
It is necessary therefore to extract that which of them appears visible upon which the sight falls, after you press the tongue with an instrument at the base, and it becomes clear to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the infirm vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the thing attached will come out through vomiting.
Let the weak person swallow a piece of nap, or a root of lettuce, or let him swallow a morsel of dry bread: or let him take a piece of dried marine sponge: and tie it in a thread, then let him swallow it. When it reaches the place where there are spines, or bones, and is extracted, then it comes out.
If it does not come out with what we have said: then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than a Rod for a little while, and at its end let there be a curvature, which it may introduce into the throat with ease: and let it have its head elevated upwards.
And let it beware of the touch of its epiglottis, so that coughing does not befall it, and let it push the mouth, or spine, or let the physician introduce it with his hand.
But that which the weak person introduces, is better: on account of its knowledge of the place of the thing annexed: and it pushes below, or draws his hand upwards with the instrument, all that according to the quantity that is prepared for it, until it comes out.
Of the extraction of bloodsuckers.
Chapter 39.
When a bloodsucker is treated with what I have said in the division on curation with medicines, and it does not come out, then examine in the throat of the weak person before the sun, or at the window after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument that I described to you.
If your sight then falls upon the bloodsucker, extract it with a small hook, or with gentle gestures.
If it is not possible with these: then take a concave tube, and introduce it into the throat of the weak person until near the throat: then introduce into the concavity of the tube ignited iron with fire. Let him do that many times: and let the weak man abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him receive a full drink of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and let him gargle his mouth with it, and not swallow anything of it: and let him move the water with one hand after another. For a leech sticks to the skin when it feels the water falling.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the weak person with cumin seeds, or with asphalt with an instrument that I have described in the fumigation of the ulcer.
Let him do that many times, for it will fall out by itself.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot, in which there are burning prunes or laurel with fire: and the pot is covered with a cover, in the middle of which there is a hole: and let the end of the instrument be placed in that hole.
Then throw in the fumigation, and let the weak person put his mouth on the end of the tube, and let him close his mouth, so that the fumigation does not come out, until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall out.
For if it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the weak person endure thirst, and eat salty things, and garlic, and not drink water.
It is necessary therefore that it comes out with this treatment.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which a leech is extracted from the throat, when it falls on the same thing seen.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is introduced into the throat. And its end is similar to a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, in which there is roughness of lime: when it seizes something, it does not release it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their cutting, and treatment in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of many modes, according to which the treatment of them is remembered, namely one and only one in this book: and they are diverse in the perforation of them, and the cutting of them from two modes.
Of which one is from the species of abscess by itself, and that which it includes from humors.
And the second mode is on account of the places, in which it occurs in the body.
For an abscess that occurs on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in the joints: and each of them has its own judgment from the operation.
And of abscesses there are some which should not be perforated, unless after the maturation of pus in them and its completion: and of them there are some which should be perforated while they are raw and do not mature according to completion.
Like abscesses that are near the joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and its existence is prolonged until it putrefies what is in its surroundings, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted: which is a cause closer to the contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess near a principal member: for if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will harm either it or through that principal member.
Or it is near the anus, therefore perforate it while it is immature: and it is not proper to perforate a raw abscess, of incomplete digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or become in its end what does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, which has matured according to its completion: and it is at the sedation of pain, the recession of fever, and the diminution of redness, and pulsation, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess: and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lowest place of the abscess, and of the most prominent elevation: and let the perforation be going in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and the places of the arms, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places, to which there is not a reflexion.
In those however which reflect, let it go with the perforation according to that membrane.
When indeed the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better that you omit the perforation of it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to its completion.
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus is prolonged from it, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps the lips of it will become calloused, and its depth.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body, by necessity: or according to that which the membrane needs.
And it is necessary that you administer to small abscesses a small perforation, and to large abscesses a large perforation: or many sections by similarity of the magnitude of the abscess.
And there are abscesses, in which it is necessary that the skin be concave: and an incision be made when already it has been made like a cloth, and it has been made to its limit, which already is dead: as that which happens in many, such as buboes.
And of them there are those which cut with a section having three angles. And from them is that which is cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like an abscess in the groin.
And from them are those for which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, and similar ones from the incisions.
That one indeed which has no head, as are the lenient superficial abscesses, should be perforated with a superficial perforation, or merely a flat one.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is thick, and has already collected much pus, and you perforate it, that you not hurry and extract all the pus at that hour: but rather extract a part of it from it. Then dress the abscess until another day. Then extract something from the pus again.
Do that many times according to the condition, until it goes out: especially if the person is weak and lacking in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or a decrepit old man: for the vital spirit of an animal is often resolved with the discharge of pus: and perhaps the weak person dies, and you do not perceive.
Beware therefore this chapter with great caution.
And after your perforation, by which you perforate the abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wound: and take care. If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat incision, then administer dressings made from linen, or old cloth. And if the abscess is large, and there are many openings of the incision, then it is necessary that you insert a dressing into every opening, until they meet in the middle.
And if you have cut away a part of the skin in the abscess, or have hollowed it out around the edges: then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth, or as when a fabric is woven, or wool from linen without moisture: and tie it up until the third day.
Then anoint it, and treat it with what is suitable from the ointment, until it is healed.
If however a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which the cloth is soaked in them: and you put it on the place of the flow of blood many times.
If however the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you administer a treatment and a cure and powders, which I have described in many places in this our book, and from division.
If however it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves: then it is necessary that you pour in powders with wine, and hot oil: and you put them on the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you put powders soaked in water, and oil, or wine and oil, and all of that is cold. Until when it will be the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you loosen the abscess, and wipe it clean, and administer in its cure what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess, in what way it is a route to its cure, chapter by chapter, individually.
Chapter 41.
Of the section on abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
There occur on the skin of the head small abscesses, and they are of the species of Knots, which are contained in sacs, which are attached to them: as if they themselves were the gizzard's husks.
And there are many species of them.
Some of them are fatty: and some of them contain a moisture similar to slime: and some of them contain a moisture similar to that of roasted and boiled things: and similar things, and some of them are hard and stony.
And in the cutting of all, and their extraction, there is no fear, as long as the arterial cut does not cause a contradiction.
And the operation in the cutting of them is, that you should try it with an instrument, whose form will be described after this, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it by a cut according to the length of the superficial cut: according to this form.
And begin with the cut from line b to line g. When therefore the moisture is evacuated, then scratch out the cyst which contains that moisture, and do not leave any of it inside.
For it returns many times, if something of it remains.
Then submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For it corrodes what remains of the cyst.
Then repeat over the wound with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if you apply it to it, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst, then treat the wound with an ointment, until it is healed.
Which if the abscess contains a fatty knot: then cut it according to this form, having the shape of a cross: and put unguents between the lips of the cut, and scratch it out from every side: and test your skill in the extraction of the tunic which contains it.
If however the artery causes a complication for you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And do similarly in the case of a stone, from cutting and curing, the same as we have said.
And the cutting above a stone abscess is easier: since there is little blood and moisture. And there are sometimes certain apostemata which are on the head in which there is not humidity within.
Which is: because I cut into an apostema on the head of an old woman, and I found the apostema like a hard and solid stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if someone were to strike it by throwing, it would wound.
In other accidental apostemata on the head, besides these, namely the apostemata which occur on the heads of children, and at the roots of the ears, the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
Or make a perforation in them always from the lower part, so that the flow of blood may be alleviated downwards.
Then treat them with what is suitable for them from the treatment.
On the cutting of Strangulations in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These apostemata often occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur on the rest of the body.
And above those that occur on the neck, there are one or many: and they generate from a cause: and every Strangulation of them is within its own proper tunic, as it is in knots and apostemata of the head, as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these Strangulations. And of them some are stony: and of them some contain humidities: and of them some are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you see of them with a good disposition to the touch, whose manifest appearance is near to the color of the skin, and moves to every part, and is not attached with the nerves of the neck, nor with the gullet, nor with the artery, nor is it deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body in a line, and remove it from every part: and stretch the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks, if it is necessary for it, as we have said in the case of apostemata of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is above the caution, that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula be not sharp, lest you add your hand with the incision, or disturb the weak part, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut the vein, or artery, it prohibits you from operation, then put on the wound a poultice of zeolite, or some powders that staunch blood, and constrict the wound, and leave it until the acuteness of the inflammation subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to putrefy.
For blood is staunched by a tunic of flesh, therefore return to your operation, until you complete.
Then probe with your index finger, if any of the small fragments of the strophules remain: therefore cut them, and clean them.
What if there is in the root of the strophule a large vein: then it is necessary that you do not cut that strophule from its root: but rather it is necessary that you tie it with a double strong thread, and let it go until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you have already steeped in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the whole strophule is cut, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew them up at once, after you see that nothing remains superfluous.
If you see that something remains superfluous on account of the size of the strophule, then it is necessary that you proceed to cut its root, and extract it: and administer the suture which we mentioned.
And which of the strophules contains humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation: that the place of its maturation may appear to you: and put the perforation from that which follows below the body, as we have said.
Then administer a dressing with ointment after the perforation, and similar things to it, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until when you see the wound is already clean: then treat it with a generating ointment of flesh, until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the cutting of the epiglottis from an abscess that happens inside the throat.
The ancients said this incision on the epiglottis, and I did not see anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the writing of their speech.
In those having a synanche, it is necessary that the incision of the epiglottis be made: since there is no passage through it: because all the veins and lung are weak.
In those indeed who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use the incision of the epiglottis, to flee from the destruction which is made by the suffocation.
It is necessary therefore when the need arises, that we cut the epiglottis under three circles of the epiglottis, or four, a small incision in width, in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that it is an incision in the sifac, not in the cartilage: and this place indeed is suitable for the incision, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood are far from it.
What if the doctor is timid, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then let him pierce the skin, until when he reaches the canal: let him divert the vessels of blood, if he sees any of them.
Then let him cut the sifac which we have mentioned: and it is indicated above the incision of the canal from the phlegm that exits from it, with what disrupts it, and from the cutting off of the voice.
And leave the open wound for some time.
When the hour arrives in which the suppuration is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and suture it by itself without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. The sum of this sermon which we have narrated is not an exposition, except when they see that one of these apostemata has already strangled the throat of the infirm, and the infirm has been lifted up from death, and his breaths are about to be cut off: they proceed to cut the Epiglottis, so that the infirm may breathe over the place of the wound with a certain respiration, and may be saved from death: and for this reason they have ordered to leave the wound open, until the malignity of the disease is consumed, and its malignity is for three days, and as it were; then therefore they have ordered to suture the wound, and to cure it, until it is healed.
And that which I have seen by myself is, that a certain servant girl took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung.
And I was called to the cure of it, and I found her vomiting, as is the vomiting of the dead.
I probed therefore at the wound, and I found blood which had come out from the wound a little. I was confounded therefore that she had not cut the vein, nor the windpipe: and air came out from the wound.
I treated therefore the wound, and I cured it, until it was healed: and nothing happened to the servant girl, except hoarseness of voice: and she returned after days to her better dispositions.
Therefore I say: that in the cutting of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
On the surgical cutting of the throat hernia.
Chapter 44
This condition called Hernia of the throat is a large abscess, secondary to the color of the body, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is secondary to two modes: for it is either natural or it is accidental.
In the natural one certainly there is no trickery.
The accidental one, indeed, is secondary to two modes: of which one is similar to fatty knots. And the other mode is similar to an abscess that occurs from a knotting of the artery. And in it there is fear, and it is not suitable that a presumptuous action be taken on it with iron, unless it is small: and you will test it, and investigate it with an introducer. If therefore you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not suspended with any of the veins: then cut it, as knots are cut: and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then thoroughly examine all of it. Then treat the place with what is suitable for the cure, until it heals.
Chapter 45
On the cutting of the species of Knots.
There are many species of knots, and I have already mentioned all their species in the division: and it is necessary that I explain here the difference between a Knot and an Excrescence: since it causes doubt.
I say therefore, that when there is an Excrescence, there is heat, and fever, and violent pains, until the ebullition of the overflowing is settled, and putrefaction is complete: then indeed the fever and heat subside.
With a Knot, however, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains them in cysts of the flesh, which is their proper sac, and it is secondary to the color of the body: and its inception is like a seed, and it forms like a lump, and is greater and lesser.
And they are divided into two types: either fatty or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
It is necessary therefore, when you come to the cure of a Knot, that you examine it, and inquire into it first with an instrument which is called Intromissum, according to which its form will appear in the chapter which is after this.
And the method of inquiring into abscesses and all Knots is that you take this instrument and insert it into the moist place which you find in the abscess, and you move your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then put your hand last according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then extract the Intromissum, and consider that which comes out in its track.
If therefore a running moisture comes out, of whatever color it may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said concerning other abscesses.
And if moisture does not come out in the track of the Intromissum, then know that it is fatty: dry therefore above it with an incision having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scratch the skin from every part with ease: and guard the cyst if you can above it, so that you extract it healthy with the Knot.
If the cyst however is ruptured during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, for this often happens, then extract it fragment by fragment, until nothing of it remains.
For if a little or much of it remains, the Knot returns according to the greatest part.
If it conquers you, and a little of it remains: then fill the wound at the completion with certain corrosive powders: and bind the wound, and put on top of it what sits on the abscess, a warm application, and cure it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
If then it is a large knot, then sew its two lips, and cure it with what flesh grows.
If however the contrary vein is pulsating or not pulsating: then treat it, and fill the place of the zegi with trito, and leave it tightened for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the ebullition of blood quiets down: then return to cutting that which remains of the knot.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments for cutting and boring.
There are forms of the introdgers, and they are of three kinds.
For there is one large, and there is one medium, and there is one small.
Let them be made from iron of Al-fuld quadratus of the extremities decent, so that they hold fast the entrance in the abscess.
And these are the forms of the EXPERIENCIA, and that is to say, the perforators: and one of them is named Beris, that is, the perforator: and they are of three kinds.
For there is one large, and one medium, and one small.
They convene, that they investigate through them the abscesses, and the exit wounds, and the fistulas, and the bubos from what is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and blunt, like large needles with which sutures are sewn, namely of citrin, or of copper, or of iron, or of silver.
And the better ones of them are those which are made from citrin.
And the EXPERIENCIA are also made from black lead, which convene that they experiment with fistulas, whose concavities are reflections, so that they reflect with gentleness with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. For there are some of them long, some of them medium, and some of them short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
The shape of wounds, and they are of many species.
Since some of them are simple, namely those which have one treatment, and they are of three species, as you see, large, medium, and small.
And some of them are blind wounds, and they are of three species.
And some of them are wounds having two treatments, and they are of three species: and some of them are wounds having three treatments, and they are of three species: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the shapes of surgical knives, with which they cut and excavate knots and abscesses: and they are of three species: since some of them are large, medium, and small.
Their extremities with which the cutting is done are sharp, the other extremities are not sharp: and they are not placed thus, except so that with them a juncture is made in the excavation of knots near the fear of cutting a vein, or nerve: and so that it may be healed through this, and find tranquility for a time from the burning which it found near the excavation of an abscess.
They are made of brass, and are similar to a file, with which is made a fine powder: and on the broad extremity there is a hidden point of a spatula: and it goes inside and outside when you wish, as you see.
The shape of spatulas which are hidden between the fingers near the perforation of abscesses: and the weak do not perceive them: and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
The shapes of cauteries with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of brass or copper, round, a little long, as you see: and let them be subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of bleedings are great and small with you, so that you cut blood with them quickly when necessary, and then when medicine is not present with you.
However, you will not use them for cutting blood in every part of the body, and you will not use them except in fleshy places: such as the thighs, and hips, and arms, and breasts, and belly, and groin, and similar fleshy and moist ones.
And sometimes small instruments similar to the skins of whips are made from them, according to their shape: with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the cutting of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this shape.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts which resemble women's breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflated during a fullness of sleep (that is, when they begin to be polluted in sleep) until they resemble women's breasts: and they remain as foul apostemas.
He who therefore abhors this, should cut above the breasts a lunar section, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape out all the fat. Afterwards fill the wound with an incarnative medicine. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure it, until it is healed.
If however the breast declines to the lower parts and becomes soft because of its size, as it happens with women: then it is necessary that two sections similar in shape to a crescent moon be made on its upper sides, each of which is connected to the other at their edges, until there is a larger line containing a smaller one, according to this shape from line b to line g. Afterwards scrape off the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
If you do not close the incision of what you need to cut, because of the unease of the weak or because of the flow of blood: then you should fill the wound with a submersed corrosive ointment, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then cure it, until it is healed.
On the perforation of an aposteme, which occurs under the tongue.
Chapter 48.
These apostemes which occur under the tongue, are of the hard species of Strophulons, which contain cysts, and of them are those which contain humors.
Which therefore are of those which contain humors, it is necessary that they be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b. to line g., when therefore all that is in the aposteme is evacuated of blood, then fill it with old oil, and leave it until another day.
Then let the plaster be removed, and let it be cured with an ointment suitable for that, until it is healed.
Which if the aposteme was of the species of nodes of Strophulons, then cut above it, as we have said in the section on Strophulons equally.
If however the wound extends in this so that it emits pus, then administer to it a cautery, according to what we have said in what has been previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
On the cutting of an aposteme which occurs because of the artery and vein.
When the artery is torn and the skin which is above it becomes consolidated, then often an aposteme occurs from it: and similarly it happens to the veins also, so that an aposteme and inflammation occur in them.
And the signs by which it is known that an aposteme and inflammation are because of the artery and vein, are: since when the aposteme is because of the artery, it is long, collected in the depth of the body: and when you press the aposteme with your fingers, you feel as if there were a hissing.
And that which is on account of the Vein, is round in the manifest body.
And cutting above this swelling is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and the groin, and the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is a great fault. It is necessary therefore that its treatment be undertaken with iron, and what of them is also in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary that it be undertaken.
Above that therefore which of them is from the inflation of the opening of the artery, a cut is made in the skin in length. Then open the cut with forceps, afterwards the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is exposed.
Then insert beneath it a needle, and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread at two places, according to that which I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place, which is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the swelling is relieved.
Then administer a treatment that generates pus, until the ligaments fall away: afterwards treat it with ointments suitable to it, until it is healed.
What if the swelling is on account of a cut of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can from the swelling with the skin. Then insert the needle under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be double thread in it, until you extract it from the other side. Then tie the swelling with a good ligature: according to what I said to you concerning the ligature of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread.
If however you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert another needle with another thread under the whole swelling at the point of the incision of the needle: press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the aposteme in its middle, until when what is in it comes out: then cut the excess of the skin, and release what was tied from it.
Then put on it a poultice which you have submerged in wine, and oil. Then administer the cure, which is done with plasters and ointments, until it is healed.
Chapter L
Concerning the aposteme that occurs from a twisting of the nerves.
Just as an aposteme occurs in the artery and vein, similarly an aposteme occurs in the nerves: which occurs from a blow, or occurs from excessive labor, and similar things: and it happens most to those in the places of joints, or heel, and in every place where the joints move: and it is a grave aposteme.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is constricted with inflammation, one feels in it a weakness similar to numbness.
And it is not an aposteme collected in the depth of the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not proceed to the front, nor forward, nor backward to the rear.
What therefore is in the joints, ought not to be entered with iron. For perhaps a contraction will occur.
In that which of them is on the head, or on the forehead, cut the skin with a spatula. If therefore it is a small aposteme, then take hold of it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook, and scratch it: then remove it, and close the wound with a suture: and treat it, until it is healed.
Chapter LI.
Concerning the cutting of an aposteme that occurs in the belly.
Pains occur to certain men many times in their bellies and in the rest of their bodies, which are called Fungal infections, because of their similarity with mushrooms.
Of which the root is subtle, and their head is thick, and their lips are inverted. And there is one of them that is small: and there is one of them that is greatly swollen.
And I have seen a man, and in his belly were two fungal infections, which were more similar to mushrooms than the others: there was no difference between them, they were white, with small roots, and their lips were inverted, and ended, and moisture flowed from them always.
I cut them out, and I found one of them weighed about 8 ounces and the other about 6 ounces. And the operation for cutting them out is that you should consider then, if the patient is weak and the color of the fungal infection is white, moist, with a subtle root: then cut it out with a broad spatula, and have your cauterizing irons ready at hand.
For much blood is often expelled in the cutting of it: therefore if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see the patient is weak, pale and timid of the cutting with iron, then take a thread made from lead and tie it around the suture: whose method is what we have described, and leave it for two days.
Then put on the suture a lead dressing. Do not therefore cease to bind with lead, as many times as it impresses on the fungal infection, until it is cut off and falls away by itself without effort.
If the fungal infection is thick of root, then in the cutting of it there is something to be feared and dreaded: especially if it is in the belly.
It is possible to cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then treat it, until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not cut into the black bile which is of a dark color, of little sensation, and foul appearance: for it is a cancerous aposteme: and I call it with remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of the prominence of the navel.
The prominence of the navel occurs from many causes. Or from a tear of the diaphragm, which is above the belly: and there comes out of it either gut or intestine, according to which there occurs in the remainder a rupture. Or from blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been previously stated. Or from flatulence confined within it.
If however it is on account of a tear of the diaphragm, and an issue of the gut: then the color of the tumor is similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and appears in different places. And if it is on account of a protrusion of the intestine, then its location is with that which we have narrated, of more vehement diversity. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a gurgling sound: and it is greatly increased at the entrance of the bath, and vehement labor.
If indeed it is on account of humidity, it is soft, then it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor does it contract, nor is it added to.
For if it is on account of blood, then with these signs the tumor appears as a blackness on the navel.
If however it is on account of flesh that has grown: then the tumor is serious, thick, hard, and fixed according to a single quantity.
If the wound is on account of obesity, then the touch of it is gentle.
And the operation on it is, that you should consider then, if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the Artery, or Vein, or obesity: then it is necessary that you should abstain from the cure of it. For there is fear and dread in it, as I have taught you in the chapter, in which I said that apostems are due to the artery and vein.
What if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine, or a cyst: then it is necessary that you should instruct the weak person, so that he may hold his breath, and stand standing upright. Then mark with a cauterizing agent around the entire navel. Afterwards instruct him to breathe again between your hands over his back. Then apply a plaster with a broad spatula around the navel above the place which you marked with the cauterizing agent. Afterwards extend the middle of the apostema upwards with a large hook. Then tie it around the strong part with a thread, or with a cord of silk of firm binding: and let the knot of the binding be secure.
Then open the middle of the extended apostema above the binding. If therefore you find that it is already caught by the binding: then pull out the secure one, and insert the index finger into it, and push the intestine to the interior of the belly: and if you find a cyst, then take it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If on the other hand the artery or vein is opposite to you: then apply a bandage around it plentifully. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert the two needles around the area which you made around the apostema in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then tie the aposteme in four places above the needle, and if it is necessary, remove the needle, and leave the place until the flesh putrefies and extends and falls off by itself, or cut it when it becomes subtle and putrefies.
Then treat it with what is necessary from ointments, until it is healed.
What if there is an elevation of the navel from the flesh or from humidity, then it is necessary to concave the aposteme, as we have said. And extract the blood, or humidity, which you find in it.
Then treat it with what solidifies the place.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of cancer, and how it is the way to cure it with medicines: and to be cautious with the treatment of it with iron, so that it does not become ulcerated: and we have spoken of cancer generated in the matrix, and the caution in its treatment.
And the ancients said that whenever cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, such as cancer which is in the breasts, or in the hip, and similar members located for extraction of all of it: especially when it is beginning and small.
When, however, it becomes old and is large, it is not necessary to approach it.
For I was not able to heal anyone from it, nor have I seen another before me who has approached that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to proceed and dissolve the weak part with black bile several times. Then perform bloodletting on it if you find it with a clear fullness.
Then prepare the weak part with a preparation, in which it will be located with the operation.
Then throw onto the cancer acidic juices that agree with it. Afterward, cut it away from every part with the skin, according to the examination, until nothing of its roots remains: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but express the place, and wipe away all the gross blood with your hand, or with whatever instrument is possible there.
If however the flow of gross blood causes a contradiction to you from the incision of an artery, or a vein: then cauterize the vein, until the blood is stopped. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
On the treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 44. We have now described in the division of the species of Dropsy, and how the collection of water is made: and the signs of each species, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron, is not but the species of ascites alone: and it does not come near to the species of tympanites with iron: nor to the species of hyposarca deeply: for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of Dropsy, tympanites, with medicines, and your medication has not been effective: then consider. For if weakness has already befallen the patient, or there is with it another infirmity besides Dropsy: such as if there is with it a cough, or a loosening of the stomach, and things similar to these: then beware lest you treat him with iron: for that is to be feared.
If however you see the weak one of overflowing strength, and there is not with it a disease besides Dropsy alone: and it is neither a child, nor an old man: then the method of operation on it is, that you lift the weak one standing between your hands, and a servant behind him expresses his stomach with his hand pushing water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spiney splint, second to this shape. It is a sharp instrument of two parts, long, at the acute extremity like a Spatula. It has in it something of shortness gradually, so that you do not pass through with it during the operation to the intestine, and wound it.
Then consider. For if there is a generation of dropsy from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary that you should extend with the incision from the navel the quantity of three fingers, downwards directly above the breast.
If indeed the generation of dropsy is because of sickness of the liver, then let your incision be to the left from the navel three fingers.
And if the generation of it is because of the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side: and it is not necessary also that the incision be on the side above which the weak person wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place.
Then pierce with an instrument the whole skin. Then introduce into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin, and scrape, as if you were excavating it: and let the quantity which is excavated be the quantity of a nail, or around it.
Then scrape pierce, until the spatula reaches the empty place: and it is the place of water. Then extract it, and introduce into the opening an instrument, whose form is this. And it is similar to a cannula: made from silver, or copper, or gold, smooth: which has in its lower part a small opening, and on its sides are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side: and the end of it is cut, according to the mode of cutting of a reed, as you see: on its upper end is an armilla.
When the instrument penetrates the water, then it itself descends immediately on top of the instrument, and thus evacuates from the water half the quantity in an hour.
For if you evacuate from it more than is proper, the weak perhaps dies in an hour through the resolution of its vital spirit, or a fainting fit that approaches death befalls him.
Evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the weak signifies to you from the virtue of his pulse, and from his goodness.
Then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is, because it is retained immediately on account of the skin which retains the opening that is above the navel: concerning which I have spoken, that you should perforate it according to that method.
Then insert the instrument on the second day, if you see the weak person tolerate it: and withdraw also from the water a small quantity.
Do that for some days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there does not remain from the water except a little.
If however you fear for the weak person, and you let remain from the water a large amount: then treat it with wrapping in hot sand, and with much sweating in a bath and sun, and waiting upon thirst: and treat it with evacuating medicines, until it is healed: and cauterize on the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the evacuation of the water: according to what I have narrated in what has preceded.
Concerning the treatment of infants who are born with their urine places not perforated.
Chapter 45.
When any infant proceeds from the womb of its mother, and the head of its bladder is not perforated, or the opening is constricted, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary therefore to help with the perforation of it at once when it is born with a sharp needle, according to this method.
Then put in the opening a subtle key made of lead, and tie it; and hold it for three days, or four.
When the bladder is raised to emit urine, it should be removed, and micturated. Then reduce it.
And if you do not put in the lead, it is possible that the urine which enters over the place will not allow it to close.
He, indeed, whose opening is narrow, is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those, however, in whom the opening is not in its proper place, are injured. Which is, that in those who are born with it, the opening is at the end of the head of the penis: wherefore they cannot urinate to the front, unless they lift the penis with their hand to the top. And there is not for them generation, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to the right direction: and it is a foul and loathsome disease.
And the method of treatment for this is that the weak one should lie on his back. Then stretch out the head of his penis with your left hand with vigorous extension, and cut the head of the head of the penis from its place at the foreskin with a sharp needle, or a sharp scalpel: just as is the cutting of a reed, or just as you would pare something, so that the middle of it comes to resemble the head of the penis: and so that the opening falls in the middle according to what is fitting.
And beware for yourself during the operation of a flow of blood. For that thing has happened many times. Apply to it therefore something that stops the blood, and cure the wound, until it is healed.
Of Albucasis concerning what happens to the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 6.
These often occur to that Albather on a branch, and it is a prominence of foul flesh.
And some of them are malignant, and some are not malignant.
You should therefore hang the non-malignant one with a fine hook, and cut it off, until you cleanse it completely. Then put on it a plaster submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it afterwards with the diaphatic ointment, until it is healed.
Which if the Albather is malignant, of foul color, then you should administer to it a cautery after its incision and shaving.
If the Albather is on the foreskin of one who is not circumcised, and part of the Albather is under the foreskin, and part of it outside: then you should remove the Albather that is inside first, until when it has consolidated, then treat the outside one: for when you treat them both at the same time, the foreskin does not heal unless it is perforated.
And they also occur on the testicles, and a blackening and corruption of the foreskin. You should therefore cauterize all that has already turned black, and what is about to decay, or has already decayed.
Then apply on it after that a honey which has already been mixed with flour of roasted grains and crushed herbs.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If there occurs a flow of blood, then administer a cautery with lunar cautery, according to this method.
For cautery is useful for two conditions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood, and for an ulcer when it becomes decayed.
Which if the head of the branch is eaten away, and it is destroyed entirely in an hour: then you should insert into the mouth of the penis a tube made of lead, so that the weak man urinates over it.
In the adhesion of the skin of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require being cut around it; and when adhesion happens because of a wound or an abscess, it is necessary to cauterize it with a blunt cautery until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
What if it is difficult to discern these things exactly, then it is necessary to cauterize something from the head of the penis and from the foreskin. What is, that the foreskin, when it is delicate, is perhaps perforated quickly because of its delicacy.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then let it be treated with astringent wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
On the purification of infants, and the treatment of errors that occur to them by chance.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, like other wounds: nevertheless since it is from our operation, our will, and its use is properly in children, it is necessary that we indicate in it the better operation, and the lighter way leading to health.
I say therefore, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, since they do not use it in their laws, and it is not except what we have acquired through experimentation.
What is, that I have found the greater part of artisans and bloodletters using purification by circumcision with a razor, and with scissors: and they use poultices, and ligatures with thread, and incisions with a nail.
And I have already tried all these methods, and I did not find a better purification than with scissors, and ligature with thread.
Since in cleansing with a razor, the skin often slips away. For the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower layer remains: hence it is forced to a cutting in order to cut the other, and future pain. And with the cleansing that is done by means of a digital dilator, which surgeons use, the cutting of the extremity of the member is not secured: because perhaps it will enter into its opening.
In cleansing with a nail, perhaps the iron will slip and spoil your operation: and indeed the skin of a child is brief by nature, and often such things are born, which do not require cleansing: and I have already seen it.
Cleansing with forceps and ligation with a thread has shown me a good test: because the forceps are proportional to the incision: therefore, since the sharpness that is above is as the sharpness that is below. When I press with my hand, the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they cut according to one operation at one time: and a compression of similar figure is made, containing the skin of the member from all parts, with which error does not fall at all.
And the method of its operation is that you should cause to extenuate, especially a child, if it is one of those who understand for a little while, what you do not do, except that you tie a thread on its member only: and leave it until another day.
Then make it rejoice and be happy in every way that is possible for you, from the fact that it receives its intelligence. Then make it stand between your prepared hands, and let it not be sitting: and hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the child does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into her vagina, and blow into the wound, and pull it upwards, until the head of the vagina comes out. Then cleanse it from the filth that has accumulated in its dirtiness.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards tie below it for a short space a second ligature. Then hold with your index finger, and thumb the place of the lower ligature with good retention, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the wound upwards quickly, and extract the head of the vagina. Then let the blood flow out gradually (for it is better) and put powder on top: and over the powder a cloth in which the yolk of an egg has been spread, mixed with oil of fresh rose, and let it stay on until the next day: and treat it with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
The shape of a fork is for this cleansing.
Let the two extremities be blunt, and let them be cutting: so that a branch of a nail does not come out in them: and let the length of the two sharp edges be equal to the length of the two armlets.
The error falling in the cleansing is: that perhaps the whole inner skin escapes, or a part of it at the place of the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you stretch it out with your nail before the postulation of the place: and cut it according to equality.
What if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
If however three days have passed and what is under the vagina remains inflated, a postulate: then let it be, until a warm postulate settles, and remove it with ease, and cut it according to what is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the vagina. For it will not harm him.
Treatment is thus with what consolidates the wound from powders, which we described in the treatment of powders: and if it cuts into the skin above the measure, and proceeds to the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
Treatment is thus with that which we mentioned, until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the extraction of retained urine from the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made from stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh that has grown, and similar things to these which we mentioned as methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine does not flow, and you see that its retention is on account of a stone, which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he should be made to sit bending over his knees. Then his feet should be placed on his back, and he should stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and the man should constrict his breath as much as possible for him. It is thus pressed with the neck of the bladder to expel the stone backwards, wherefore the urine will flow.
What if it is not solved with what we mentioned, and the thing is severe for the man: then it is necessary that you administer its extraction with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose form is this: It should be of silver, and should be subtle, thin, concave like the quill of a feather in subtlety of a radius, long in likeness of one and a half palms: to which there should be a thin tube at its head.
And the method of exit of urine through it is, that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a wool or a string, with a good knot: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with the forceps if something overflows from the wool, truly introduce into the tube with vehemence, like alzer.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and the white of an egg: and make the weak sit upon a seat, and embrocate the vessel, and its own virge with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the virge with ease, until it reaches to the root of the virge.
Then fold it over double from the upper part near the navel.
Then push the syringe into it, until it reaches to the bladder, and let the weak feel that it has already reached to the empty space: and this is not done according to this order, unless the passage, in which it goes, is where there is a tortuosity.
Then extend the thread with a woolen yarn little by little. For the vein will follow the wool.
Then extract it, and make the vein run through the way of urine: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do that, until the bladder is evacuated, and the weak feels relief.
On the quality of evacuating the bladder with a Clyster.
Chapter 59.
When there happens to be an ulcer in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is confined in it, and one wishes to distill waters and medicines into it: then let it be done with an instrument which is called a Clyster, and this is its form.
For it is closed, that is, shut. And in it are three openings, two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which pushes, should be according to the quantity that fills it without addition, until when something is pulled with it, it attracts from humidities: and when it is pushed, it expels far off: according to which the clyster does, which projects naphtha, that is, Greek fire in the mart's bellows.
When I insert the instrument to project moistures into the bladder, I introduce the extremity of the catheter into the moisture, and pull with it what pushes upwards, for moisture is pulled into the concavity of the catheter.
Then I introduce its extremity into the vein, according to what we have narrated concerning the syringe. Then I push moisture with that which pushes it, for moisture immediately penetrates to the bladder, so that the weak person feels it.
The shape of a thin enema instrument by which the bladder is enemad.
Let it be made from silver or gold: whose head is higher, similar to a small spoon, and under that a sinus in which the ligament falls.
Then take the bladder of a goat, and put in it moisture, with which you will enema the bladder. Then tie it between two sinuses with a strong ligature and double thread: and heat that moisture a little over the fire.
Then introduce the extremity of the enema instrument into the vein, afterwards press your hand over the bladder with moisture with a suitable pressure, until the weak person feels that the moisture has already penetrated to the bladder.
If however the bladder is not present for you, then take a piece of parchment, and make from it a circle, and perforate it throughout its entire roundness. Then introduce a strong thread into those holes, as they are turned. Then gather the circle, as the sponge is gathered: after which you put in it that which you use from moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it in the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand, until moisture penetrates to the bladder.
Chapter 60
On the extraction of a stone.
We have spoken in the division of the species of Stone, and its cure with medicines: and I have said the difference between the Stone generated in the kidneys, and bladder, and the signs of all that: and I have said the Stone in which the operation falls with the hand and cutting: and it is a Stone generated in the bladder properly: and that which is fixed in the rod: and I am narrating that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that the Stone generated in the bladder, happens most to boys.
And of its signs is that urine comes out from the bladder similar to water in its thinness: and appears in it white sand, and the weak man rubs his rod, and labors with it, and many times it hangs. Then it is erected, and comes out with that the bottom in many of them.
And the healing is easy for boys, as long as they are up to fourteen years old. And it is difficult in the elderly. In youths, however, it is moderate, in that which is between the two: and of him whose Stone is larger, the cure is easier: and if small, the care is the opposite.
When therefore we arrive at the cure, it is necessary first to clean the weak man with a clyster, which will extract all the dung that is in his intestines: for this sometimes prevents the discovery of the Stone during the examination.
Then let the weak man be taken by the feet, and shaken, and moved downwards: so that the Stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or jump from a high place many times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are under his hips, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If I feel a stone in the space, then immediately with a cut above it.
What if it does not fall under your touch at all, then it is necessary that you wipe the index finger of the left hand with oil, if he is a weak child: or the middle finger if he is a young adult: and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone, until it stands under your finger: and turn it little by little to the neck of the bladder.
Then press above it with your finger, and push it to the outside opposite the place of which you wish to make the incision: and instruct one attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct another attendant to stretch the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with his other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles on the part away from the place in which the incision is.
Then insert the spatula of the incision, whose shape is this. And find in that which is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left buttock: and let the incision be above the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that it be externally ample and internally strict, according to the quantity that it is possible for the exit of the stone from it not being larger.
For perhaps the finger which is in the anus compresses the stone at the incision, and it goes out without difficulty.
And know that the stone which has angles and edges makes its exit difficult because of that.
And it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
Therefore for those which have angles and edges, add to the incision.
What if it does not go out thus, then it is necessary that you ingeniate above it: or bind above it with a decent instrument, whose extremity is like the Moon, which binds above the stone and does not slip from it: or that you insert under it an subtle instrument of curved extremity.
If you cannot sew above it, then enlarge the opening a little. What if something of blood conquers you, cut it off with a ligature.
If there is more than one stone in the bladder, then first push the large one to the mouth of the bladder. Then cut above it. Afterwards push a small one after that, and do likewise if there are more than two.
What if the valve is very large, then it is ignorance to cut above it with a large incision. Because it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or that there occurs to him a continuous dripping of urine: therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
Direct the expulsion of it, until it comes out: or instruments on the fracture with forceps, until you extract it bit by bit.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with resin, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the hot aposteme may be assuaged.
Then let the weak one rest on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage, until the third day. When you then loosen it, bathe the place with water, and much oil.
Then treat it with the ointment called diaphenicum, and the ointment called basilicum, until it is healed.
If however there occurs in the wound a hot and corroding aposteme, and similar things: as if blood coagulates in the bladder, and urine is prohibited from it: and this is recognized by the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and apply all the species with what is suitable from the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the hours of treatment of the whole, that you bind two hips, and gather, the causes of the medicines which are placed on the spot.
What if the stone is small, and it is in the flesh of the rod, and it is fixed in it, and the exit of the urine is prohibited: then treat it with what I will narrate before you proceed to the cutting. For many times indeed you will be excused from cutting by this treatment, for I have already tested that.
And there is, that you receive the perforator made of iron, whose form this is, a triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and bind the rod with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron perforator into the rod with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone itself: and turn the perforator with your hand in the stone little by little: and complete the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For the urine will be freed at once.
Then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the external part of the rod. For it itself breaks and comes out with the urine, and the weak man is healed.
If however this treatment is not prepared for you, on account of something which prohibits it: then bind a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the rod itself between the two bindings. Then extract it. Afterwards loosen the bandage and cleanse the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone, except that it does not return to the bladder; and another bandage above, except that when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for that reason it is necessary for you, when you tie the upper thread, to elevate the skin upwards, so that it returns to its complement and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of a stone from women.
A small stone is generated in women.
If however it happens that a stone forms in any of them, then the treatment is difficult and is forbidden because of many methods.
One of them is: that the woman is perhaps a virgin.
And the second is, that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to the physician, when she is chaste, or among those having husbands.
The third is, that you do not find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the remoteness of the place of the stone: where it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
What if necessity provokes to that, then it is necessary that you receive a woman physician, well skilled: and she is rarely found.
If indeed you are deprived of them, then seek a chaste physician, subtle, and present a woman midwife well taught in the matter of women, or a woman who has acquired a part of the art: make her therefore present, and especially instruct her, that she do all that you prescribe to her from the inquiry concerning the stone.
At first what is, to examine if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she insert a finger into her anus, and seek the stone.
If then it finds it, it constricts it under its finger, and then orders the midwife to insert her finger into the weak womb, and feels above the stone, after which she places her left hand over the bladder, and presses it with a good compression.
If then it finds the stone, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the opening of the bladder to the lower areas with her greatest strength, until she reaches with it to the root of the hip.
Then she cuts above it at the opposite of the middle of the womb at the root of the hip, from whichever side it is prepared for her, and she feels the stone on that side: and her finger does not move away from the stone, constricting under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then she inserts the rasp over that incision.
Then she inserts the rasp over that incision. If then she feels the stone, then she adds to the incision a second cut proportional in quantity to what the stone protrudes from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. For from these is the small and the large, the smooth and the rough, the long, and the round with branches.
Know therefore its kinds, so that it may be indicated to you through this above what you use.
If then blood overcomes you, then add to the place of the wound some pounded tragacanth, and hold it for one hour, until the blood is stopped.
Then return to your operation, until the stone comes out: and make that you prepare with you from the instruments, which I spoke of in the extraction of the stone from the bladder, so that you may help yourself by them in your operation.
For if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery which has been cut: then put powder on the place, and constrict it with decent strictures: and do not touch it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. For a weak woman will surely die. Then treat the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood has sat after some days and the place has become putrid, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
On the cutting of a watery hernia.
A watery hernia is not a rupture, but an aggregation of humidity in the white membrane, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg: and it is named a membrane.
And sometimes it is in its own proper membrane, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg, until it becomes putrid: which is another egg, and is the skin of the testicle between the white membrane, which we mentioned: and that does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of this hernia is from weakness which happens to the testicles: for which reason this material flows to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this humidity has many colors. For it is either a color leaning to yellow, or it is a bloody red, or a filthy black, or it is a watery white, and that which is most.
And the signs by which it is known where the collection of water is, are these. For if it is in the white membrane which we mentioned, then the swelling is round in length for a while as the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the humidity contains it from every side.
And if it is humidity in its own proper membrane, then the swelling is round with part of the egg, and because of this a man thinks that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore you use the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then try the color of the humidity in the swelling with a probe that is inserted, whose shape has been described. Secondly, I consider what comes out in the wake of the instrument that has been inserted, and I judge it by what is between it.
When we proceed to cure with iron, then it is necessary that you should prescribe to the weak, that they should be bled if possible, and you see his body full.
Then he should be made to lie on his back on a high seat or bench, and many cloths should be put under him.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, who should stretch out the vein to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the region of the navel.
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles in the middle along its length, almost to the pectine: and let the incision be according to rectitude equidistant from the line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white cord that encompasses: and pare it and observe, or beware lest you cut from this, as you cut it: and your paring should be where it hangs with the egg more: and carefully examine with the paring according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then puncture the full cord with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and stretch the cord upwards, and do not touch the skin of the testicles that encompasses: and cut the cord as much as it is possible for you to cut it, either in its entirety or bit by bit, especially the wide part subtlely. For if you do not carefully examine, in the cutting of it there will be no security, lest the water return.
But if the egg proceeds outward from its skin during the time of your operation: then when you have completed the cutting of the cord, push it back. Then bring together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then treat it as the rest of the wounds, until it heals.
What if you find a corrupted vein from blackness of another, then it is necessary to tie the vessels, which are the suspensors, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspensor, and extract the vein: afterwards treat it with what we have said.
If water is collected in the two parts, then know that there are two channels: cut therefore one part equally as you did in the other.
And if it seems to you that it is one operation, then do it: afterwards wipe away the blood. And insert into the incisions a thread soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and put on top another thread which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and the navel: and put on top of that double cloths, and they are bandages: and tie them on top with a ligature, which has six according to this form.
Then let two cloths be taken, and they be sewn, and filled with medicated wool, according to this likeness: and let extremities be made which are pressed from a cloth, or a wet thread: and let them be tied with a bandage around the loins of the arms: and one extremity take above the groin up to the back, and the second take at the part of the chest: and two extremities above the two hips below, and two other extremities above the two groins, and all the bandage be tied around the loins of the arms.
And when the ramex is artificially treated with a cautery in place of the incision with iron: and it is, that you take a small knife-shaped cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it: and it is ignited, according to what we have described: until when it is discovered that there is an album containing water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
It becomes like Greek poultices.
Then pierce that spongy flesh with it and it is cauterized until all the moisture goes out.
Then stretch the spongy flesh with forceps, and scrape it with a sharp burning cautery, and cut it according to what is possible for you, until you eradicate all of it.
And cauterize from the egg, so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and less bloody and better than the operation with cutting.
If indeed it shows opposition to you at the time of cutting, or at the time of cauterization, a hot aposteme, or a flow of blood, or something else, then it is necessary that you should cure what shows opposition to you from that with a cure that suits it, according to what has been said before.
If however he is weak and fearful, and does not hope for this operation, because of its dreadfulness: then administer the piercing according to what I describe it to be.
When it is certain to you from what we have said concerning the signs, that the humor is watery: then it is necessary that you should make the weak person sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the aposteme in its lower part with a broad spatula, and make the piercing according to the length of the body, and let it be widely open, until all the water flows out.
Then put a dressing on the place, and bind it, and leave it so that the remainder of the water can flow out: then treat it until the wound is healed.
If however there is an obstruction to the flow of water at the time when you pierce it, and it does not happen except because the white pannicle makes an obstruction at the mouth of the wound, and prevents the exit of the water: then it is necessary that you should insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which the water of dropsy is extracted, whose form I previously described: or add to the operation of the wound for a little while.
And you should know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time. When therefore it has accumulated, then it will perforate according to the same method, and the weak days will pass.
Chapter 63.
On the treatment of a fleshy ulcer.
You should know that in the operation on this ulcer, there is a risk of destruction due to fear in many conditions. Wherefore it seems to me that its dismissal appears to be beneficial for its healing.
And I recall an operation on it, and the appearance of a postule or boil.
I say therefore, that many boils occur in the bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and it happens for many reasons, namely.
Or from an excess of sharp or sour humors, which flow to the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the boil is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a serious boil.
And perhaps it is a stone boil, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from the knotting of the arteries, and their swelling: as I have already mentioned before: or from the swelling of the veins.
That which is therefore from the swelling of the arteries, is recognized by the condition of the boil, when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary that you touch it directly.
That which happens from the swelling of the veins, does not disappear with pressing on it with the fingers.
And now it is possible that an operation be performed on this type, and on the rest of the flesh: and it is to cut the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the cord upwards, and extract it with a curved needle: and free the suspension from the vessels, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspension afterwards when you have freed it from every part of the cord.
If then the consolidated wound is with those born tissues, then it is necessary that you attract the wound and cut into it.
And if the adhesion is between something of the siphac, or in that which is between the vessels: then it is necessary that you free the whole of that adhesion, and cut into it with a rounded incision.
If however the nativity of the flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut the whole of it, and extract the wound, as we have said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool steeped in rose oil and wine: afterwards cure it with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of varices, which is with a ligature.
A hernia is an unreduced protrusion with a certain reduction, similar to a botrus, with softening of the testicles: and it makes difficult the motion and exercise and walking of the infirm.
And in the cure of this disease is fear, on account of that which has preceded, the memory of it.
It is necessary that we say the operation in it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore, that it is necessary that you make the infirm person sit on a raised seat. Then apply a suspender to the testicles towards the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with vessels which are near the virgin area: and let another assistant hold them, and stretch them with a violent stretching.
Then cut with a broad sharp spatula a transverse section in the direction of the vessels, until the vessels are laid bare.
Then scratch from every part, as we have said to you in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Afterwards fix on them a double thread where there is a filament, and tie it in the first places to which the veins arrive: and tie it again in the last of them. Then cut them in a straight cross-section according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from fetid corrupt humors.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which a force is generated to produce a sanative, so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles fall away. For it is not an evil on account of that.
And if the vein happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles with the vessels be extracted on account of this: so that the egg is not deprived of nourishment, on account of the incision, and withers, or dries up, and is not a help with them.
Chapter 65.
Of the treatment of intestinal wounds.
The exit of this wound is from a section, which happens in the sifac extended over the belly in the groin area from the middle of the belly.
Why the intestines protrude from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the sifac or from its extension.
And these two kinds happen from many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy thing, and similar things.
And a sign, when it is from an extension of the sifac. It is that which happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an equal abscess on the surface as opposed to the depth: because the sifac compresses the intestine.
And a sign of it when it is from a section of the sifac, because it causes to happen from the beginning a vehement pain suddenly: and it is a diverse abscess, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is on account of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior of the sifac.
And when it comes out with the intestine a piece: and this is called intestinal Ramex and zirbium: and when it happens with inflammation.
And when feces run into the intestine and are retained there: and it is with them a danger to the weak: because it causes severe pain to happen, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear: where it is necessary to beware of the case in it.
And the method of treatment is, that you instruct the weak person, to reduce the intestine with his hand to the innermost parts of his concavity, if it has slipped back. Then he should be lifted up over his neck between your hands: and his thighs should be elevated.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and cut the skin of the testicles along its entire length. Then fix on both lips of the incision hooks, according to which you will open the incision with them: and the incision should be according to the quantity that is possible, so that the egg can come out from it.
Then scratch the siphac, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white sifach is revealed, hard on every side: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white sifach, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the first and second sifach, and release with it the adhesion which is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the interior skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white sifach upwards, with your left hand: and lift the egg with the sifach to the part of the incision: and instruct the assistant, that he should stretch the egg upwards: and you solve the adhesion, which is behind the complete solution.
And search with your fingers, so that there is not anything there inside the intestine involved in the sifak, against the hard white thing. If you find something coming out of it, then push it to the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, in which is a thick thread, made from ten threads: and insert it at the end of the sifak, that is, of the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles which follows the section: then cut the extremities which stick out from the thread, until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over others with a figure that is in the shape of a cross: and tie them with the sifak, which we spoke of, which is under the skin of the testicles with a violent ligature, until it cannot send anything from the vessels that nourish them to them: so that there does not occur from it a hot aposteme. And put again a second ligature outside the first ligature, at a distance from it less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures, let out from the sifak, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity of the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely around the circumference, and remove the egg.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles at the incision, from which runs blood and pus: as we have described in what has been said before.
Then administer a thread soaked in oil, and put it on the wound: and administer the ligature that we described. And sometimes cauterize the white sifak that we mentioned, after the incision of it, fearing a flow of blood. For this often happens. And let go the ligature until it falls off by itself.
If however the case is delayed, then moisten it with warm water: and put on it what we said, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the remaining treatments for wounds, until it is cured.
Chapter 66.
Of the stitch with the thread.
In this suture I have not seen anyone who has dared to undertake its cure with iron.
And the first ones indeed said, that it should be done as we have described in the suture which is with the thread of vitis. Which is, that you should tie the vessels after the incision above it with ease below: then cut in the middle, and treat afterwards with that which opens it, until the vessels fall: and treat the wound, according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the hernia that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the area protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is very little, and returns every hour: but if it is prolonged with that time, a fissure is added in the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And this occurs due to the extension of the sifach, which is in the groin, as we have said. Which is, that the sifach extends: then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed, and protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as the description of it has preceded.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, in this manner: and it is, that the weak person lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the area of the ruptured and swollen place, a crosswise incision, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tie the alsifak and what is under the skin, until when the white sifach is revealed, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a scalpel and place it on the prominent area of the spleen and press it to the depth of the belly.
Next sew two prominent areas on the extremity of the scalpel from the spleen and connect one to another with a suture: then pull out the extremity of the scalpel.
And do not cut the spleen at all, nor stretch a vein, nor anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of intestinal rupture.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. When you cut the threads, clean it, and restore the wound, until it becomes consolidated.
For the spleen contracts itself, and the prominence of the rupture is not added to.
And cauterization is better in this place: because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles often becomes softened in certain men, because of which the flesh that is between them becomes softened and their appearance becomes disfigured.
Therefore it is necessary for he who is asked to cure it, to make the weak one lie on his back, and to cut away all the skin that has been softened from the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if necessary, or at first, the excess of softened skin with three or four sutures, and secure the suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds, until it is healed, and the threads fall out.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law: and because of this, it would be permitted for me not to mention it in my book: and it is not necessary to mention it, except for two reasons.
One of them is that it should be in the science of the physician when he is questioned about it, and that he knows the cure for the one to whom it happens.
And another method is that we often need to castrate certain animals because of our needs through them, such as rams, boars, and cats, and similar ones among the animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Or by pulling. Or by tearing and cutting.
In that which is done by pulling, the method of operation is this: we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles become soft and relaxed, and hang down: then we pull them with our hand until they are torn apart and do not appear to touch.
In castration by tearing and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory, and cut above all one ovum with a single section, until when two ovum proceed: then cut it after you have excised both, and do not leave on them anything of the sifaket except subtle sifac, which is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by pulling: because pulling perhaps leaves something of the testicles, for which reason the animal desires copulation.
Then treat the wound, until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of a hermaphrodite of two kinds.
A hermaphrodite is from the members according to two methods. One of them is that which appears in the space that follows, or on the skin of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from that which is on the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one species, and it is the vulva of the woman above the breast like the testicles of a small man entirely, standing out to the outside: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two like the two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from men and one species from women, is: that it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh until the impression of them disappears. Then treat them with the cure of remaining wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine exits, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
On the cutting of the labia and the prominent flesh in the vulvas of women.
The labia possibly grow over the natural part, until they become ugly and their appearance is offensive: and sometimes they are enlarged in some women so much, that they spread out like in men, and reach to the coitus.
It is necessary therefore to hold the excess of the labia with the hand or with a hook, and to cut: and not to go too far in the cutting, especially in the depth of the root, so that there does not occur a flow of blood.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds, until it heals.
The flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the opening of the uterus, until it fills it: and possibly it comes out to the exterior like a tail: and because of this some of the first call the disease a "tailed" disease. It is necessary therefore to cut it as we cut the labia, and to treat it, until it heals.
On the treatment of the Imperforate, which is the woman's vulva not pierced.
Chapter 72.
The incision is such that it should be a woman's vulva not perforated or it should be a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from a disease which has preceded it: and this itself is made either from flesh born added, or from sifach subtle, or from a clamp: and it is made either in the depth of the matrix, or in its sides, or in its upper part, or in its lower part: and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps it prevents menses.
And the recognition of it is made by the aspect of an obstetrician, if the obstruction is appearing nearby.
If however it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a probe.
If however the obstruction is from subtle sifach, and it is near the two lips: then touch it, and break it apart.
And it should be that you put upon the two lips a poultice.
Then place your indexes of the two hands together, and let the woman be on her back with her thighs spread apart. Then stretch the two lips with force, until the subtle sifach is broken apart, and the obstruction is opened.
Then take a woolen thread, and soak it in oil, and put it on the place: and let the woman apply it every day, so that the place is not consolidated with another vice.
If however the sifach is thick and dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If however the obstruction is from flesh born, then suspend it with hooks, and incise it: and let there be with you medicines which quiet the flux of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus aggregated with the whites of eggs.
Then administer a lead pipe wide enough, so that the wound does not consolidate quickly, hold it for some days: and administer a plaster made from dry flax, then let the rest of the treatment be done, until it is healed.
And when there is a birth of flesh in the matrix of the nativities, it is necessary that they be cut according to this method: since there is not an apostema which is cancerous, for the cancerous apostema that is in the matrix does not become contrary with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and red pimples on the vulvas of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed openings of the veins, insofar as there runs out from them much blood continually.
When therefore hemorrhoids become chronic, they become thelil: and I have already spoken about the division of their types, and their signs: and I will say here which of them receive a cure, and which do not.
I say therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the matrix and do not appear to the senses: then there is no cure for them with iron.
But those of them which are in the opening of the matrix and upon which the sensation falls, are those that can be cured.
It is necessary therefore that you put the woman into a cold house. Then stretch out the hemorrhoids with forceps or with coarse cloth, and cut them out from their roots.
Then sprinkle over them at the flow of blood from one powder of incisions without biting: such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense and similar things.
Then press her feet against a wall for one hour. Afterwards put her into cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and a crust of pomegranates, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If blood is cut off with it, it is good: and if not, make the ventoses adhere to the back and the breasts, without scarification.
Then take a wool and submerge it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of the branches of alaulat, that is, aglanter, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the place.
When then the aposteme quiets, treat the place with ointments, until it is healed.
The Albarth herb is similar to the heads of alhaasse, and its appearance is rough.
It is necessary therefore that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said equally in the former: and treat it, until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the perforation of the uterus which occurs in the matrix.
There occur in the matrix many kinds of apostemes, such as cancer, and aposteme of stones, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot aposteme.
And I have already spoken of all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of them, and their cures in division: it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot aposteme which occurs in the matrix, when it is among the apostemes which collect blood, and you should know how its opening is done with iron.
It is necessary therefore that you consider. Then if the pain of the aposteme in its beginning is acute with its percussion, and inflammation, and fever: and you see it to be red: if sense falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and treat it with that which helps against maturation, until when the acuteness of the accidents quiets.
Then it is appropriate that you make the woman sit on a seat that has two seats, and she should lean back or lie on her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of her abdomen: and her hips should be expanded, and she should put her arms under her thighs, and tie them with a convenient ligature.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument by which the opening of the matrix is opened.
And it is necessary when you administer this instrument, that you fix with the radius the depth of the woman's matrix: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and hurts the weak part.
If the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary that you put pillows on the surface of the depth of the matrix: so that the entrance of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix is prohibited: and it is necessary that a loop, which runs on the instrument, be placed from the upper side: and that it hold the instrument, and that the servant turn the loop, until the depth of the matrix is opened.
When therefore the exit appears, and is touched by the hand, and it is gentle and soft: then it is necessary that you cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the sanies is evacuated, then it is necessary that you put on the wound a dressing submerged in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is a certain astringency: and put the dressing, and extract the section from the depth of the matrix.
And put externally on the matrix, and on the navel a clean woolen cloth submerged in water, in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it is healed.
And when the matrix and wound are washed, it is cleaned with water and honey; then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled; then it returns to the ointment.
What if the wound is hidden within the matrix, then it is necessary that you prohibit the cure of it with iron, but rather cure it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 70.
The doctrine of obstetrics, how they medically treat living embryos, according to an unnatural shape having emerged.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to recognize first the shape of a natural birth.
From the signs of it, is that when you see a woman compressed at the lower parts, and desires to smell the air, and there is relief over her what is over her from birth, and the exit of the embryo is hastened: then know that this birth is according to natural shape, and its exit is over its head, and the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary that her womb be compressed, so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the afterbirth descends with it, and is cleansed from those superfluities of a good cleansing.
Which however is beyond this birth, is unnatural, deserving no praise.
Since when the fetus exits over its feet, and its body exits before its head, and its feet, and one of its hands, or one of its feet: or its head and its hands exit: or its belly exits: and perhaps it is turned over its neck, and similar things from unnatural shapes.
It is necessary therefore for the obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and beware of error and deception: and I am showing every shape from them, and how it is ingenious in it, and signified by that, and established upon it.
When the fetus moves up above its head with its natural exit, and presses upon the woman, and parturition becomes difficult for her, and you see her virtue now weakened: then make her sit upon a seat, or let women hold her: and apply vapors to her vulva with decocted fumitory, and with humid oils.
Then the Midwife should insert between her fingers a small spatula, and find with it the secondine, and cut it with her nail, until there runs out what is in it from humidity: and press the belly of the woman, until the fetus descends.
If however it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be given a clyster of fumitory mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then order her after the clyster, that she be compressed: and make her sneeze with condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
What if the two hands of the fetus come out first, then it is necessary that you reduce them with ease little by little. If however it does not enter at the entrance, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high: then strike the seat against the ground: and let the woman be held, so that she does not fall with the shock.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut them off, and extract the remainder of the fetus: and tie its hand with a cloth, and pull it out gently: for it will come out.
The fetus comes out over its feet. When the fetus comes out over its feet, then it is necessary that you push them up high: then turn the fetus little by little: afterwards pull it even.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
When the suppurating matter comes out up to the hips, then order him to compress it and make him sneeze with condiments: it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then reduce the fart little by little until you put it in its natural shape. For it will itself come out then with an easy exit.
What if it is prohibited with all that we have described: then take from the mucus of the altea, and oil of sisamine, and dissolved gum: and strike the whole in a mortar with a good stroke: then smear the woman's vulva and her lower belly. Then make her sit in warm water, until she obtains a hypogastric discharge.
When you see that her lower parts are already warmed, then make for her a seat of myrrh: and apply it. When she has held the seat for one hour, then make her sit on the seat. Then make her sneeze: and constrict its mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with an easy compression. For the fart will come out immediately.
The fetus comes out over the knees and hands. When it comes out according to this form, then she should insert her hands gradually. Then the woman should be lifted up over her neck, and her feet hang down to the lower parts: and she herself should sit leaning on a bed, and clasp her hands. Then press above her belly little by little. Then extract what is under her feet from the dust, until it is prepared in the lower part. What if the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a vehement movement. Then press what is above the hypogastric region little by little, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then he should insert his hands and gradually straighten the navel, and instruct the woman to press, until the fetus comes out.
The fetus hanging crosswise from the hands having exited. It will be kneaded during the reduction of his hands. If however he cannot reduce it, then let him lift the woman and make her walk.
If indeed she is not able to walk, then let him make her lie on a bed and strike her knees with a violent concussion.
Then administer the ointment that you have prepared from poultices.
Which if the afterbirth comes out, then make her sit on a seat. Then attend to the reduction with the hands, and straighten the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press herself, until it comes out.
The fetus exits with its head behind its shoulders, its hands stretched out, and its face towards the mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife should hold the hand of the fetus, then slowly turn it, and straighten it with ease.
When it is straightened, then put on its neck what we have prepared from oil and poultices.
Then instruct her to move it slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to lean towards the right side. Then instruct her to press herself, and make her sneeze with coughing.
The prepared fetus exits on the side. When it descends to the opening of the womb in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail, until it is evacuated from the moisture.
If indeed it hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel, so that it is not retained and does not cause death.
Then push the fetus to the inside, until you place it according to what is suitable, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, for it will come out with an easy delivery.
The exit of twins, or a fetus of many. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three and four are born. But truly that is extraordinary, and rarely happens.
Five is a thing beyond nature, and they do not live long: and the afterbirth contains them, however many they are multiplied, one secundine: and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing between them the ligament at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they come out just as one fetus comes out with a natural and easy delivery: and they come out with a laudable delivery, as we have described.
That if any of them are difficult at birth, and they reach that which we spoke of concerning unnatural positions, then treat them as we have described: and let it be by a subtle hand, and do what is done with ease and slowness, and it will be adapted according to every figure with what is prepared for it from the guiding intellect towards health.
The memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has been verified by me, that a woman, aborting, expelled seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
This therefore is all that is required to be in the science of Obstetrics. Perhaps indeed he will come across something similar to that: so let him oppose it with what is suitable.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I mentioned in the division from medication, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to use an operation with the hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If the woman is of healthy strength, and is not with any of the accidents, from which loss is feared for her: then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed, on her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her thighs be elevated: and an assistant hold her from both sides, or she be tied to the bed, so that her body not be moved during the extraction of the fetus.
Then the mouth of the matrix is moistened with humid oils of linseed, and flax, and fenugreek.
Then the midwife anoints her hand with these oils and mucilages: then she inserts it into the matrix with ease. Then she feels for the place where the nails will be fixed from the fetus, and the places convenient to it.
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend on its head: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its throat, or in places near the ribs, and under the hips.
If however it descends on its feet, then in its chest, and in the middle of its ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and put the curvature of it between the fingers of the left hand: and insert it with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places which we mentioned, until she reaches the empty space.
Then fix another hook or a third if necessary, opposite to it: so that the contraction be equal, and not decline to one side.
Then it should be extended with an equal extension, and the extension should not be according to straightness only, but rather it should be moved to every part, so that its exit is alleviated, just as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is suitable for what is between them, that the extension is softened. What if a part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoints some fingers with oil, and inserts them from the side, so that she delivers with them what is retained.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks are moved to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If therefore the hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to push it back, on account of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth is wrapped over it. Then pull it out until when the whole comes out, cut it at the joint of the foot, or at the elbow: and so it is necessary that you do to the other hand, and to the two feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or it suffers constriction at the exit, or there is water collected on its head: then it is necessary that a spatula spinosa is inserted between the fingers, and finds with it the head, and extracts the water: or it breaks it with an instrument which is called Almisdac: whose shape comes with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Similarly, let it be done if the fetus is of a large head nature, then it is necessary that the shoulder is cut: or extract it with a misdach, as we have said. Then pull the bones with forceps.
What if the head comes out and is constricted at the fork: then it should be pierced until the moisture that is in the chest is poured out.
If it is not complicated and does not obstruct the exit, then cut the head bit by bit, according to what is possible for you.
What if the lower part of the abscess is apostemated, or there is dropsy in it: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until humidity flows out from it.
If the fetus is positioned over its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the matrix is slight.
If it is constricted at the belly or chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth which you have wrapped over your hand: and press the belly or chest, until what is in them flows out.
If the other limbs are delivered, and the head returns: then the Midwife should insert her left hand. If the mouth of the matrix is open, then she should insert her hand into the depth of the matrix, and search for the head with it, and draw it out with her fingers to the mouth of the matrix: then she should insert one hook, or two hooks, into it, and draw it out with them.
What if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, on account of a hot apostema which has happened to it: then it is not necessary that she should labor over it, but rather it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid things, and apply plasters: and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
What if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible that it will equalize: then administer what we have said regarding a living fetus.
What if it is not possible, then cut bit by bit, and extract.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything of the afterbirth inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said regarding hot apostemas that happen to the matrices.
What if it happens there is a flow of blood, then let it descend into astringent liquids, and administer the remainder of the treatment.
And I have already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was: afterwards she became pregnant on top of it, then another fetus also died. It happened to her after a long time an abscess on her navel, and it became swollen, until it was opened: and it began to emit pus.
I was summoned therefore to her treatment, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound was not consolidated.
I placed therefore on it certain strong attractant plasters: and the bone came out from the place. Then several days passed for her, and another bone came out. I was astonished therefore at that, since there is no bone in the womb.
I thought therefore, that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I probed the wound, and extracted many bones, with the woman being in her better conditions: and she lived for a long time afterwards, and a little pus came out from the place.
And I did not confirm this strange thing, except that there is science in it, and assistance for that which the skilled physician administers with his hand from treatment.
Chapter 78.
On the forms of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
The form of the Vertiginis by which the matrix is opened.
This below is the form of a Tightener, which has two equal arms, with two uprights at the ends of two wooden rods. However, this Upright should be finer than the Tightener: and that it be made either of ebony or of boxwood.
And the width of each wooden rod is about two fingers: and the thickness of each of them is about one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two rods there are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed to both, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of each is about two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix, so that it opens with them when you turn two Vertigines.
The form of another like that, more subtle and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood or boxwood, similar to the likeness of forceps. However, on the extremity of it there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of all the addition from them is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
When you wish to open the matrix with it, then have the woman sit on a couch, her feet hanging down, with what is between her thighs open. Then insert these two additions joined together into the matrix, and you hold the extremity of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you wish from the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another Vertiginis which the ancients called the form of the Impeller by which the fetus is pushed.
The form of the Almisdac, by which the large head is compressed: and it is similar to forceps, which has teeth on the extremity, as you see.
And sometimes it is made with a stop, like forceps according to this form, as you see, which has teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it is cut and compressed.
The form of the Vncinus having one spike.
The form of the Vncinus having two spikes.
The spatula has two extensions for cutting off the head.
Shape of two broad Spatulas.
All these instruments are to be exercised, and the more their kinds are multiplied and prepared by the artisan, the swifter will be his operation and the higher he will be among men, on account of their quantity.
Do not therefore despise any of them, so that it may be prepared by you. Their necessity is indeed inexcusable.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
On the extraction of the Secondine.
When the Secondine is retained with the afterbirth, then it is necessary that you should precipitate the weaker one, so that it may retain its breath. Then make it sneeze with a condiment: and press your hand over its mouth, and its nostrils. If then it comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and perforate in its cover an opening: and put in it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, and dill, and chamomile, and sesame, and lignous cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over fire.
Then put a bulb of reeds over the opening of the pot, and another end into the mouth of the womb: and hold it until the vapour penetrates to the concavity of the womb.
Then make it sneeze, as we have said. For the Secondine will come out with facility.
If however it remains after this cure, and does not come out: then instruct the Midwife, that she should submerge her hand in oil of sesame, or mallow. Then he should insert it into the wound and look for the secondary wound with it. When therefore he has found it, then he should take it and pull it out gradually.
If it is attached deep within the womb, then he should insert his hand, as we have described, until when he finds the secondary wound, and pull it out gradually according to what is right, so that the womb does not fall during violent pulling: indeed it should be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the amount of the pulling. For it detaches itself then, and is saved, and comes away from the adhering things.
What if the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with fumigation, and from a medication of a poultice with herbs.
If however it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware lest you weary yourself over it in the repetition of the extraction.
It is necessary indeed, that what comes out to the mouth of the womb from it, should be tied to the thigh of the woman. Then anoint her with the ointment tetrapharmacon. For it will rot it after some days, and it will dissolve, and will come out.
Truly when it rots, there rises from it a bad smell to the stomach and head, and it harms that weak woman. It is necessary therefore that fumigations suitable for that be administered.
Certain of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of nasturtium and figs of sycar.
The form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated for the retention of the secundina and menses.
Let a vessel be made similar to an alcama, or from clay: and let the wide end be placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be put on the coals: let her hold it, until that fumigation is consumed: and then another.
Chapter 79.
On the treatment of a non-perforated anus.
Many of the boys are born, and their anuses are not perforated, which the subtle siphac has already obstructed. It is necessary therefore, that the midwife should perforate the siphac with her finger: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp style: and let her beware of the intestine, lest it touch it.
Then put on top of it a piece of wool soaked in wine and oil. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If however the time comes that it becomes obstructed, then put a lead pipe in the opening for many days, and it will be removed when the boy wants to defecate.
And now obstruction of the anus also occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or an abscess. It is necessary therefore that the consolidation be cut, then treated with what we have said concerning treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part are a knot and a thickness that occur near the anus of the fundament or in the space of one of the parts: and it is one fistula or several.
When therefore that knot becomes chronic, it opens, and a watery white humidity or subtle pus flows out from it.
And sometimes there are ones of these fistulas that penetrate. Therefore the penetrating ones are recognized by that which comes out from the bowel movement and flatulence, when the sick person uses the bowel movement: and perhaps worms come out from them.
And there are ones of these fistulas when they penetrate the space up to the bladder and up to the passage of the rod. And there are ones of them that penetrate up to the joining of the hip and up to the knot of the tail.
From that which is known, the penetrating fistula reaches to the anus, and also from the non-penetrating one, it is so that you insert your index finger into the anus, and you insert a subtle probe made of air or iron when there is no tortuousness.
What if there is tortuousness in it, then insert into it a subtle probe made of lead, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
What if you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything proceed from the orifice by way of excretion, nor wind, nor worm as I have said: then know that it is non-penetrating: proceed therefore to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating to the bladder or to the urine passage: then its signification is the exit of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating to the hip joint or to the mouth of the hip: then its sign is that the probe penetrates up to that place, if there is no tortuousness up to the mouth: and the finding of pain in the surrounding part, and that pus always comes out from it: and that medicine is not effective in it, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity to him, from foolish medicines, on which it is formed.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is hoped for with a plaster: according to what I relate to you, and I have already proven: and it is, so that the weak person lies on his back between your hands, and you elevate his legs up above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his belly. Then insert a lead or copper probe, if there is tortuousness in the fistula, until you know where the probe penetrates.
If however he feels it weak around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel on your finger the probe having already penetrated by itself and detected, besides what you feel between your finger and the anus or flesh, then therefore you know for certain that it is penetrating: therefore do not labor in it, since its treatment is not like what we have said.
They have said, however, that the flesh is healed in some men and from the medication which is hoped for as a remedy, it is that you make a subtle cauterization according to the width of the Fistula, as was previously described, and insert the ignited thing into the Fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that two or three times, until you know that all those fleshy growths which are like the quill of a bird's feather have already been burned.
Then treat it with cloths wrapped in butter, until those growths that have been burned come out: then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with another cure of an ointment.
And if the probe comes out and has not reached up to your finger which is in the anus, and there is between it and the probe a thick covering of flesh or sifac: and you see the Fistula in that which follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the Fistula, and you direct the cutting with the probe that is in the fistula, until the cutting reaches where the end of the probe reaches, and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean those fleshy growths that resemble the quill of a bird's feather, so that none of them remain.
If however blood overcomes you, and it separates between you and your operation so that you cut those flesh: then what is done is better, and for the speedy healing, it is to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
Since the cauterization with fire aggregates good habits, it adds to the burning of those flesh, and the cutting off of blood, and the drying of moistures.
Then treat it with liniments wrapped in butter, or with pounded cabbage, until the place emits pus, and the burned flesh goes out into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments, which generate hard flesh: and there are medicines in which there are astringents and drying.
For when it is restored, then already it is healed: and do not repeat the treatment.
If however the fistula has already perforated to the depth of the anus, and it is prolonged from the excess of body, then insert your finger into the anus, and examine with it.
If therefore you feel a tension, and between you and it there is a covering of sifac, or flesh, and it is near to the penetration: then there is no operation on that, except according to the way of confidence and hope.
Which is, that one of the three methods is administered in it: either that you cauterize it, as we have said: or that you cut it, until you obtain its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert liniments, and a cure from nearby. And do not proceed far with the cutting, lest you injure the membrane that contains the anus, and it happens above the weak exit of the involuntary evacuation without control. Then treat it with what we have said.
Perhaps it will be healed: or you stretch the covering, and cleanse it after you cut it up to near the anus, as we have said, either with a probe, or with another instrument of sharp extremity. Then clean those filtered flesh parts that are in the incision, until where you can with scrutiny.
Then be concerned with the restoration of the entire wound with the incision, and the upper opening where it consolidates, and a remaining fistula open in the interior part of the anus, and it will be easier on the weaker.
And when a fistula follows in this manner: and it is, when you insert a probe into the Fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take the probe of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle, that is, preparing the tissues, according to this form. And insert into it a thread wound from five threads, and tie around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the Fistula, until it reaches its concavity.
If then it is penetrating the margin of the anus internally near, then pull out the thread from that hole: so that you insert your finger into the anus, and pull out the end of the thread, and bring together the two ends: and tie both, and leave it for one day, or two days: and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tie it well, until the flesh that is between the two ends of the thread is cut, and falls: then treat the wound, until it consolidates, and heals.
If however the opening of the Fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate by whatever method is prepared for you, unless it is deep within. For you should not do that on account of the pain, so as not to cut it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula for a fistulous spine, which is found where the fistula is, whose curvature is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
On the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from the incision of them: and the cure of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two modes. Either they are inside the anus, similar to vessels of charcoal, or of nuts: or as if they themselves were grain of a nut. And of them there are small ones, and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and they are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Truly however those that are outside the anus, are for the most part small in humidity, from which flows yellow water, or a little blood with constant flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus, is that you should press on the weak one so that it slips out: and it is squeezed, until the anus comes out, and the threads appear to you. Therefore hang them with hooks: or hold them with your finger. Then cut them at their roots.
If however they are not retained by the hooks, on account of their humidity and softening: then take them with rough cloth, or with a napkin made from coarse wool, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and powder over them after the incision certain hot powders, so that they may serve in place of a cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
Which if the anus does not obey for evacuation, then give a cluster of enema in which there is a little mordication, so that it may strike with what is in the anus, and it obeys evacuation quickly, when the weak one evacuates.
If however the hemorrhoids are extracted from the anus then their treatment is easy and simple and it is like you catch them with your finger or catch them with a hook and cut them. Then treat them with what we have said, until they are healed.
And whoever shuns cutting with iron, then it is fitting that you administer their suture according to this method. Take a thread and insert it into the needle. Then pull the hemorrhoid upwards and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the other side: and tie the two ends of the thread on the lower part of the needle, and let them be crosswise: and constrict the hemorrhoid with a strong tightening. Then knot the thread and withdraw the needle.
Do this with all the hemorrhoids and leave one of them alone: nor let itself, so that blood flows out excessively from it.
Then put on the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the anus: and order the sick person to rest. Then leave it alone until it falls off.
When the hemorrhoids fall off, treat them with ointments and the remainder of the treatment, until they are healed.
Of the treatment of Fissures. For often it happens from dryness of the feces and constriction of the nature.
When they become old and medicine does not penetrate them: then it is fitting that you rub with the points of a spatula or with your finger until they become moist and the outer skin which prevents them from consolidating is removed. Then treat them until they consolidate according to what is fitting.
If however they do not consolidate: then rub them again with a more vehement rubbing than the first, until they bleed much, and afterwards treat them until they are healed.
On the treatment of inverted and non-inverted piles, and of hemorrhoids, and of fistulas.
Chapter 82
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a club: and it occurs in the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and toes: and pain happens from them during walking.
It is necessary therefore that what is around the club should be cut, and it should be held with forceps, or with a hook, and it should be eradicated from its root.
Then treat that: and if you want to cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned in its chapter.
From the dry hemorrhoids one is a small, rough, flat, round eminence on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is, that you should stretch the hemorrhoid, and cut it: or tie it with a silk thread: or with a probe, until it falls off. And if you want, cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now both the inverted and non-inverted hemorrhoids are eradicated with an instrument that I will mention.
A boil is also a small, flat, thick elevation on the surface of the body, going deep into the flesh: and when it meets cold, it feels like the biting of a ant, and it occurs in the whole body: and most often it occurs in the hands.
And the treatment of it is, that you should take a small tube from a goose feather, or a strong vulture's feather: and put that tube over the boil, until the circle of the tube constricts its parts. Then move your hand with the tube, until you cut what is around the boil: and you put it deep into the flesh, and eradicate the boil from its root.
And if you use it, make that with a copper or iron tube, according to this shape.
Let the upper part of the tube be drawn to subtlety so that the thread wraps around it, so that the grasp of the finger is alleviated and its own rotation.
And if you use cauterization of ants according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
Of the forms of instruments which are administered for clysters in diseases of the anus, and for the relief of the belly, and for colic.
Sometimes the clyster is made from silver, or from gilt, or from copper, or from brass.
And sometimes it is made small and large from these instruments, according to those in which they are administered.
That which is administered in the treatment of little children should be small: and those whose anuses are weak, or painful, so also their clysters.
Large clyster.
The tube of it, that is, the upper head in which the string is tied, should be spacious according to this method: and it should have a distinction so that the string can be tied as you see, and the lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth, that is, not open, gentle, very, drawn to subtlety: and on one side of it there should be two openings, and on the other side one opening.
And the width of the opening should be according to the thickness of the rods, and a little thicker, and there should be a string in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal: or from paper, which is according to the shape of a small asafoetida: whose root is one palm.
And it should be perforated with many openings as it revolves, and the space that is between all the openings should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those openings a strong thread made from coarse thread, which should be of ten threads or thereabout, and mix with it the wool like gum arabic. When therefore the wool is placed in it, a thread should be tied at its head between two distinguishing constrictions of the rectal clamp. Then tie the cluster with it.
And this is the form of the circle and the utensils depicted here, and of the openings.
The quality of tying with it, is that you fill the wool or the bladder with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the weak person: and beware lest it be very hot or very cold.
Then the weak person should be placed on his back and lift his thighs upwards: and put under him an inthan, that is, a skin upon which men sit, or a linen cloth.
Then anoint the extremity of the rectal clamp with oil, or with egg white, or with the mucus of the flax seed, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the assistant should take the wool with both his hands at once, and squeeze it out with force, until he evacuates all that is in the rectal clamp into the intestine.
Then withdraw the rectal clamp, and let the weak person lift his thighs to his side.
If the medicine brings it to the end, then let him hold back as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it the whole night, it is more beneficial for the treatment.
If however you administer it to him in diseases of abdominal flux, and its evacuation is hastened: then repeat the rectal clamp until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful boils in the anus, then let the rectal clamp be very subtle, gentle, from those rectal clamps with which children are treated.
And this should be the form of a subtle enema on which the skin is tight.
Head, 84.
I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of wounds that which pertained to the book, and I will say here the treatment of them with the hand, and with medicines according to completion.
I say therefore, that wounds are diversified according to that by which the wounds are made, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are made are often such as the throw of a stone, or the cut of a sword, or the blow of a cudgel, or the thrust with a spear, or a stick, or an arrow, and similar things to these many.
The wounds which are made according to the places of the body are, such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar ones from these members.
And I am telling the treatments of certain wounds, so that I may put that reasoning and rule on the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the discussion of compound fractures will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When there is a simple wound on the head and it is not a fracture of bone: consider then if it is from the throw of a stone, or similar things, and has only broken the skin: and it is a great wound, and you apply on top a warm poultice for an aposteme: then do bloodletting at once, and do not delay it: and take out from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue: if there is nothing that prohibits bloodletting, especially if the blood which comes out of the wound is little. And let bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the weak man beware of excess, and wine, and coarse foods.
If anything prohibits diminishment, then he should diminish from food, and not approach flesh, nor wine.
And put on the wound if it happens to him a warm aposteme, a plaster infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
If you are safe from the warm aposteme, then put on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and the air has not changed it, a powder which I will describe after a little while: and if the air has already changed it, then put on it certain ointments, until it is healed.
If the wound is large, or is from a cut by a sword, and similar things: and its lips do not stick together with threads, then stick them together with a suture, according to what I will describe for wounds of the belly concerning their suture.
If the wound has already been torn from the bone, and is hanging, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspension, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore in it hard flesh in place of skin, and order the weak person to be nourished with foods in which there is thickness, such as are heads and cooked wheat, until it is like a pulse: and similar things.
What if you find in the skin putrefaction, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the entire putrid thing, and throw it away: then treat that.
If however in these wounds there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not separated by medicines, then tie above the artery. If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it. What if necessity demands it when that which we have said does not suffice, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
But if these wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy and light: so that you powder over them this powder: because it consolidates them before it changes their appearance.
Method of the Powder for Incurring Flesh Wounds. Take one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime: pound all together much, and sieve: and fill the wound with it, and bind with a good bandage, until it adheres well to the wound, and coagulates with the blood.
Then tie it above with a string, and leave it, and do not loosen it while it remains, so that it does not become an aposteme. For the medicine should not be eradicated from it until it is healed.
And when lime alone does that, when you do not have olibanum and dragon's blood present, and also dragon's blood performs the same operation in many large wounds, when it is suitable to be placed on them and bound, and they are fresh wounds with their own blood, which has not been altered by the air.
For if the wound has already been altered by the air due to some alteration, especially when it is in the summer season, then the intention of this powder is not in position: therefore treat it with what we have said, so that you place on them certain digestive ointments: or place on them poultices made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then treat the remaining things with treatment, until they are healed.
If it happens with a wound and a fracture of the bone, and it is small, then extract it with Gestus: and I will already speak about the treatment of fractures of the head in what is to come.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If a wound happens on the neck, then there is no difference between it and a head wound as regards treatment when it is simple.
If the nerve of the neck is cut, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no ingenuity in it, except that the treatment of it must be undertaken with what causes violent constriction, such as ziniar, and zegi, and similar things. For they injure nerves and constrict them.
And you should not put anything cold on the wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most elevated of the membranes: and let that with which it is treated be mild medicines, such as calx lota with sweet water infused several times with oil, or with rose oil and tutty, when it is washed also with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture: or constrict its lips with poultices. Then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth, or if a sinus forms on its lower part, in which pus is already collecting, then perforate it in the most depressed place.
For if an artery has been cut in the wound and a flow of its blood follows: then separate, or cut it out, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if necessity calls for that.
If the cartilages of the throat have been cut, or all of them, and the alhaudegi are preserved: then bring together the lips of the skin with a suture over the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat, but reduce it to its natural figure. Then tighten it with a bandage for some days. Then treat it with ointments which have astringency and excitation, until it is healed.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then perforate it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them, or as many as you can: and what is not prepared, leave it, until the wound becomes putrid, and is separated and the protrusion is alleviated.
What if the wound is fresh, then powder over it the powder which I have described. If however a bone is seen in the wound and a fistula is formed: then treat it with that which I have mentioned in its own chapter.
Of the wound on the shoulder blade.
If it is a thrust of a spear or a dagger, and you see its depth, then consider it. If therefore a windiness comes out of the wound, when the weak person breathes from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
What if the depth is not to it, and it is fresh with its blood: then do not put on it powder from the first hour, nor bind it, so that the blood is not retained in its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the weak person: but put on it an attractive ointment, and dress it twice a day.
If indeed the ointment is not present to you, then put in the opening of the wound old cloth, so that it sucks up what comes out from it due to moistures: and make the weak person sleep on the wound, so that what gathers in it runs.
If indeed the wound has already passed three days, or more, and no spasm has happened to the weak person, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see its other dispositions good: then know that the wound is safe. Treatment is applied to it and with bandages, and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If the skin is excavated for its healing, and now it always opens, then you should know that a fistula has already been made. Treatment is applied to it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut of a sword, or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the breast, or back: then treat it with what preceded concerning suture, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If however it has already made an impression on the bone, and a fragment has been cut from it: then investigate the wound, and hasten to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If indeed they are not separated, then leave them alone, until the wound becomes putrid, for the extraction of them will be alleviated.
The judgment of other accidental wounds in other limbs, in treatment, is the same judgment that we have already spoken.
Of wounds of the abdomen, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their treatment.
The disruption that occurs to the abdomen is great, and moderate, and small.
From a great one, therefore, when the intestine, or many of the intestines, protrudes outward.
Which is why their introduction and their suture is more vehement and difficult.
And a small disruption is also made difficult in another way. Therefore it follows that their reduction is more difficult, if you do not hasten to introduce them back to their place immediately: for it swells, opens, and becomes enlarged: which is why the entrance of it becomes difficult.
On account of this therefore, a moderate disruption is better than the others: since with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in these two types.
Know that the suture of a vein is second to four methods.
Two common suture methods come together in the suture of a vein, and in the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other special suture methods are suited to the rest of the wounds. But they are more properly associated with the suture of a vein: and I will describe to you each one with explanation, and declaration.
I say therefore, that when a wound is small, and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is suitable for one of the two methods. Or because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said: or since there is inflammation in the intestine on account of cold air.
When therefore it is thus, then it is necessary that you warm it, so that you submerge a sponge, or a moist cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water cypress and cumin, and spike lavender and chamomile with it on the intestine, until the inflammation is relieved.
Sometimes make a wine in which there is astringency: and it is better than water alone for relieving inflammation.
When therefore you see the inflammation has already been relieved, then moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow or mallow has been boiled. For by that the entrance of it is alleviated with something small.
But if its return is hastened after this cure, then find in the disruption a little, with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when prepared, than cutting: and there is no need to cut after necessity and lack of an instrument.
Let one part of it be twisted and acute, and the other part not acute, and the extremity subtle not with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather more blunt for a little while: and it is that which resembles a forceps, as you see.
When the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes, then it is necessary that there be a reduction of it according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, over the wound, because it is better.
When the disruption is large in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the weak one lie on its back, and put its legs higher than its head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then put its head, and its chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then put your intention and your consideration always in this, that the part in which there is a wound be higher than the other part.
And it is necessary that you administer it in large wounds, and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, put it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make that the assistant who holds the disrupted part with their hand is present between your hands, and bring its lips together. Then let him who follows remove from it a suture something after something, and this is the common method of one suture.
And it is that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's depth. Then measure from the edge of the disruption the quantity of a finger ring, that is, of the physician, and fix one needle beyond what you insert in it thread at the two edges of the skin, with the two edges of the suture which is under the skin from the interior, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have now brought together two edges of the skin, and two edges of the suture: and there are four rows.
Then tie with double thread around the needle several times from both parts at once, until the two lips of the wound are brought together by a proper union.
Then cut the thickness of the digit and also fix a needle in them: afterwards tie it with a thread, just as you did with the first needle. Do not cease to do that with what you insert from needles until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and fineness: for subtle needles easily pierce the flesh: and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin: because of that it is necessary that they be medium in fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in two extreme parts of the skin close together: so that the flesh does not pierce quickly, and the wound opens before its consolidation, and they do not stretch also with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the end of the threads, so that they do not harm the weak part during its sleep: and put pillows made of cloth on all sides, which hold the ends of the threads: and leave them, until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For one or two needles, or around them, are sufficient for the suture.
The second common suture is that you bring together with the suture four ends: two ends of the skin and two ends of the thread in one place, with a needle in which is a thread wound equal in fineness and thickness.
Then when you penetrate with the needle these four ends, draw back the needle from the part where you began, so that the thread tied on the upper part of the wound falls: so that it is a suture, like the suture of cloth which clothes are sewn with, and put between every suture the quantity of the thickness of a small digit.
These men know this suture.
And with this suture I have sewn a wound that occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a large disruption of the wound the size of one palm, and about two palms worth of intestines had come out of the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the abdomen.
I put it back after his intestine had stayed outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was then consolidated in a period of about 15 days: and I treated it, and it healed: and he lived many years after that, acting in his own affairs.
And the physicians had judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with an ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment was to be found, nor any of the medicines. I put therefore an old cloth over the wound, twice a day, and I persisted in washing it with honey water until it was healed.
I will describe two proper kinds of suture according to the account of my discourse.
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture, and you insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle thus penetrates the skin, and into the flesh that is cut according to the length and width of the whole body: leave the thread end on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from the inner part to the outer in the other thread end at the other side of the wound.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same thread end of the wound from the outer part to the inner: and leave the thread end that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate the other thread end from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration that you make it penetrate in the thread end of the wound, which is on its part, until it penetrates into it entirely.
Then take hold of it also from this same side, and pull it out with the extremity that is from the sifac on the other side, and extract the needle from the skin which it has penetrated.
Then reduce it to that skin, and pull out the extremity of the sifac that is on the other side with this extremity of the mirach: and extract it from the skin which is on its own part, and do one side and the other: and do that side after the other side, until you have extracted all of it according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that you should sew up the pellets which sew up the skins: just as you should put the sifac on one side with one extremity of the skin: and that you should let it go on the other side with another, until you have finished.
The second type of its own suture, which Galenus called.
This speech of his has been related thus, that they should sew it up according to the likeness, which some physicians sew them up, so that they join every part to its proper part by nature: and apply the extremity of the sifac to its other extremity, and the extremity of the mirach to its other extremity. And that is done according to what I relate to you.
It is necessary that you should fasten the needle in the extremity of the mirach nearest to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the interior in that alone: and let go two extremities of the sifac. Then turn the needle around, and make it penetrate from the outer part to the interior in the two extremities of the sifac, namely on both sides.
Then turn both around, and make both penetrate from the interior to the exterior, into the two other extremities of the mirach, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common suture and it is a suture whose success precedes memory.
This is therefore the treatment of Galen also.
And some have said. The suture of the belly is tightened with two fingers. That is, so that you insert into them both one thread: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from what is at your hands, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew leathers equally.
And know that when a disruption is in the middle of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than that of the other places of the belly.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
That is, because when you treat a fresh wound with its blood, before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, and sew it, and adapt it: then put on top an incarnative powder.
That if the air has already altered the wound: then put on it certain ointments, which are present to you, until they make pus: and the threads fall, and consolidate the tissue, and form a scar. Then treat it as is the treatment of other wounds, until it heals.
If however the medicines are not present to you, then put on it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, old coturn: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not use other medications in many treatments, when the wounds are simple.
If however you fear that the wound communicates with the principal members in a lesion, then it is necessary that you soak woolen threads in tempered oil of moderate warmth, or in rose oil: and put them on the circumference of the places which are between the groin, and under the armpits.
What if he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for that often happens) then a clyster with styptic wine, black, and warm: especially if the putrefaction has already entered the intestine, and a penetrating fistula has been made up to its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine, is of easier healing: and what is from them is from the subtle, of more difficult healing.
The intestine which is called Jejunum, does not receive healing from a wound that happens in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from the veins, and their greatness, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
If what proceeds from the wound is a flow, and you treat it freshly: reduce it according to your reduction, whereby you reduce the intestines equally.
If indeed it has passed the space, and already has become green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place which has been discolored from it, so that there does not happen a flow of blood. For in the flow are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and put two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so that the attraction of it may be alleviated over you, and the extraction of it at the time of flow, and emission of pus of the wound.
A remembering of the wound which happens in the intestine.
When a disruption happens in the intestine and is small: then it is possible that it be restored in certain men: because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with the thrust of a spear, and the wound was on the right stomach, and the wound became old, and a fistula was made, and there came out from it an egestion and flatulence.
I applied a treatment, until what I was not confident of in its healing: nor did I cease to refine it, until it was healed, and the place was consolidated.
After I saw the place already consolidated, I feared for the weak spot, that a weak accident would happen on the weak spot, an accident in its belly: and no accident happened to it from that accident. And it remained in its better dispositions, eating and drinking, and farting, and it entered the bath, and was exercised in its diets.
And now certain testers have said that when an injury happens in the intestine and it is small: then it should be bound in this manner. And it is, that you take poultices of large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and put one poultice of those which have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When it seizes upon them, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres, and is not loosened.
Then put another poultice near the first, and do not cease to do that with a poultice after a poultice according to the quantity of the whole wound.
Then reduce it, and heal its wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine, until the intestine is digested and healed, and no harm happens to the weak person at all.
And now it is possible, that the intestine be bound with a thin thread: which is taken from the intestine of an animal, and attached to it after it is inserted on a needle.
And it is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and much flesh is scraped away. Then tie on its end a thread of linen wrapped around. Then insert that thread into the needle, and sew with it the intestine. Then reduce it in a fracture.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is not unless according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is great, large, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no ingenuity except subtlety, and its healing is not at all.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Know that every wound, or abscess when it becomes old and aged, and becomes an ulcer, and does not heal, and always discharges pus, and does not separate: then it is called universally in whichever member it may be a Fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a Fistula indeed is according to truth a hard, white, calloused nodulation: with which there is no pain, to which is attached the feather of a bird: and on account of that some call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And it is in certain hours humid, which discharges pus. And perhaps the humidity is discharged at certain hours. And sometimes this humidity is much, and it is little: and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already mentioned in the division, then when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor is born in it flesh, is not that except on account of one of nine causes.
One of which is, or on account of the smallness of blood in the body: or on account of its malice: or because between it and above its lips there is hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is of much filth and foulness: or because the ulcer in itself is putrid, and the matter which is applied to it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inconvenient for its cure: or because the corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, or by the property of the region, as it happens in Caesaraugusta: in which difficult digestion of ailments occurs, and the healing of abscesses is delayed in it by nature: or because in it there is one mouth, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their cures with medicines in the division; and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore, that Fistula occurs in all members of the body. For some of them are Fistulas that pass into the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs: or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the composite joints of a composition: such as the hand, and foot: and some of them are which reach to the proximity of the principal member, and similar things.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is according to this method, is from diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and the occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
That if it is one of the Fistulas whose depth does not reach to these places which I mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and you use to reach the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of bronze, or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and investigate it with it.
If however there is tortuousness in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe of refined lead. For lead, with gentleness of its body, is lifted and turned around the tortuousness.
That if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to examine it with a probe. Therefore close one of its openings from its openings.
For the moisture that you close it with, goes back to the other openings, and flows out from them.
Then carefully inquire according to which method it is possible for you: to know what that place is, or a nerve, and whether it is a Fistula with a long or short concavity: or if it is one Fistula which has many openings, and stands on the whole of that, with the greatest fortitude of yours: with your interrogation, which you interrogate the weak, and the invention of pain upon compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents found.
When you stand over all those stations of that place, then proceed to cure according to confidence: and it is, as you consider then, if there is a fistula appearing near or in a healthy place far from the joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places I told you about: then cut the Fistula according to what was previously mentioned from my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt flesh, which grows in its opening from flesh, or pus, and similar things: and cure it, until it is healed.
If the fistula is of deep and distant length, and it is according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it as deeply as is possible for you. Then clean it out from all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer the unguents in acute medicines: and introduce them up to the concavity of the fistula which you grasped with the iron: do that several times, until the acute medicine corrodes all that remained in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that method, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
When the cause of the fistula is a hole, and it is confirmed to you: then investigate it, and cut it according to what I have narrated to you: if nothing prohibits you from the vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
When a hole is detected by you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it, until all its corruption is removed. Then cure it with what will make flesh on it, until it is healed.
What if it does not heal, and emits pus as it was doing: then know that you did not reach the complete eradication of the corruption.
Remove that thing from above it in the second place and make a cut of it and cleansing of it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If then it is healed, it is good: and if not, then you should know that the corruption is in the depth of the remote body part, which you have not reached. There is therefore no ingenuity for you in it, except to entrust it to nature.
What if the small mouth is corrupted and it is possible for you, draw it with subtle forceps that fit onto it.
If however there are many bones, then make a careful pulling of all of them, and do not leave any of them behind with your strength.
If indeed something among the moistures causes opposition to you, and there is no fear of incision or error: then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed you do not have preparation to remove the bones from your hour, then put on the wound what will rot it: and leave it, until it rots what is around those bones of flesh and moistures.
And guard the wound that it does not consolidate. And let the section which you cut in your operation be bound with a ligature. Below put on it, if you wish, a plaster submerged in sulphur beaten with oil: or a plaster submerged in Egyptian ointment, or some of the green ointments.
For when those moistures rot, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of them will be easy, and their attraction.
If however there is one large bone, such as the bone of the thigh or the hip bone, and similar to these, and what of it is corrupted is a large part: then scrape it with a final scraping, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If the corrupted part which is in it is a large portion, and the corruption has already affected the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and to cut it entirely up to the place where the corruption penetrates: then treat it, until it becomes consolidated.
And I will tell you a story about a man who had an injury on his thigh: so that you may consider it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a man of youthful age, about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, from a cause which moved upon it within the body, that is, from the interior, until the matter reached the thigh and became an abscess, a large abscess: and there was no external cause for him.
It was extended therefore with him the time when there was an error of the physicians, until the abscess was opened, and many matters ran together with it. And his treatment was put off, until his thigh became fistulous, and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus, and the moistures of the body.
A multitude of physicians therefore treated him for about two years, and there was not in it a wise hand in the art, until I was called, and I saw his thigh, and the matters which ran out of those openings with a great flow: also the whole body of the man had already wasted away, and its color was yellow.
I then inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached to the bone.
Then I examined all the openings, and I found that they connected to each other from all parts of the thigh.
I cut therefore and I separated above one of those openings, until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted, which had already been gnawed away, and was blackened, and rotten, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I will restore what has been lost to me, and prepared from a corrupted bone.
And I have cut away what was not on the bone except for that corruption which I excised and sawed. And I will now eradicate it.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines for a long time. And it has not been consolidated.
Then I probed and examined the bone a second time above the first detection, and I found continuous corruption with the bone, and I sawed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
I examined therefore the bone again, and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and to attempt its restoration: and it was not restored, until I cut around one palm from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and this repetition in the operation and cutting of it would not have been necessary, except because of the disposition of weakness and infirmity, and scarcity of tolerance of it, and my fear concerning it of death: since there occurred to him in every hour from an excess of evacuation of bad syncope.
He was healed therefore with complete healing: and hard flesh was born in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he turned to his habits: and walking did not cause him any harm at all.
If the prominent bone in the body is already broken, then it is necessary to saw it in this manner: and it is done by taking a bandage, and tying it at the extremity of the prominent bone: and instruct someone, who should pull it upwards: and put another bandage made of coarse wool on top of the first bandage. Then tie it above the flesh that is under the bone and extend the extremity so you pull the flesh to the lower parts and you will dissect the flesh above the place you want to saw, so the saw does not wound the flesh.
Put a stick or a plate under the lower bone decently: for when you do that, it is not prevented from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawing be above the corrupted place for a little while, so the corruption is not in the cavity of the bone, and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces itself to be sawn instead of another.
For if the bone is corrupted and it is not prominent, namely the part of it continues with a part, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then dissect the flesh from all parts entirely. Then put a stick below.
Afterwards saw it from the first side, where the corruption is, until the sawing continues from the other side: and let the sawing be according to the length a little away from the corruption, as we have said.
For if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
If indeed the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then there is no ingenuity in it except scraping.
For if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or in the sole of the foot, then the matter in it is very difficult. It is necessary that you investigate the corruption as it appears to you. And scrape it and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever ingenuity is right for you: when the vein or nerve does not make a contradiction for you.
And you should know that the incisions and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and fineness, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Wherefore it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrumental apparatus suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations signify to you the type of instrument which you need when you have a lengthy study with it. And knowledge of the modes of this art is testimony of the modes of ailments then indeed you will find by yourself that which is suitable for it from instruments for every weakness.
And I affirm to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will give as examples upon which you will stumble and a trial with which you will test other things.
The shape of another saw.
The shape of a razor for joints. Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key and its points be according to the shape of the points of an awl.
And it does not fit unless the joints are rubbed with it when they become corroded or the mouth is wide and large.
The shape of a larger razor.
The shape of a broad razor.
The shape of a razor in which there is a concavity.
The shape of another delicate razor.
The shape of a razor with a curved end.
The shape of a small razor, delicate handle.
This is similar to a file, and its outer edge is like a saw: it is exhibited in many places for the scraping of bones.
The form of a rasp which is suited for the scraping of that which is perforated by bones.
Its outer edge is triangular, and it is sharp at the edges.
It is made from Indian steel. And it is similarly necessary that all the things we have spoken of should be made from rasps, and incisors, and saws.
On the incision of edges, and the sawing of bones.
The extremities rot, either from an external cause or an intrinsic one.
When therefore you have treated that corruption with medical cures, and the treatment does not work: and you see the corruption spreading to the member, which nothing can penetrate: then it is necessary to cut into that member until where the corruption has reached, so that he may be saved from death, or from the evil which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign to which it happens is that the member blackens, until it becomes putrid: as if fire had burned it, or it had rotted after blackening: until the putrefaction is cut into, up to that which follows that member, and spreads through the whole body.
It is proper therefore with the incision of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous things: such as the sea scorpion, and viper, and rue, and similar things.
If therefore the corruption or sting is in the extremity of a finger, then cut into the finger, and do not give space to the corruption, lest it spread up to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut into it from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption, until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if it invades into it, then cut the arm at the elbow at its joint.
If however corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow then in that is death of the weak. And to administer beyond that from the cure, is a quantity of strength.
And do similarly for the foot, when corruption invades into the toe, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it reaches to the body of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. If however it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
What if corruption has already gone beyond the knee, then there is not in it ingenuity, except abandonment, and to leave the weak to death.
And the method of cutting a limb, or sawing it, is that you tie a ligature below, which you want to cut: and tie another ligature above the place. And let one assistant stretch a lower ligature downwards: and let another assistant stretch an upper ligature upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is detached. Then let it be cut or sawn.
And it is fitting, that you put a linen cloth on all parts, and the saw does not touch the healthy place: and there happens to the weak a lesion added, and a hot abscess.
If however there happens an internal flow of blood while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put on it some powders that staunch blood. Then return to your medication, until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage suitable for it, and treat it, until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a man with his foot, this same thing that I am telling you.
What is, that a blackening occurs in his foot, with a burning which resembles that of fire; and this corruption first occurs in his toe, until it begins to affect the entire foot.
It purified a man by itself, after it saw the corruption befalling the member with its swelling, which it found from the pain and burning of it: and it befall the joint, and it was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same corruption occurred to him in the index finger of his hand.
He came therefore to me, and I attempted to recover that excess with what I placed on the hand from medicines after the purification of his body: and the excess did not push back, and it began to enter into another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
He called therefore for me to cut into his hand: and I was unwilling to do it, hoping from me for the pushing back of that excess; and I feared also for him regarding death at the cutting of his hand. For the man's strength was on the decline.
After he therefore had given up on me, he returned to his own land: and he came to me about it, because he had hastened, and he cut his entire hand: and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration, except as an aid regarding that which falls under the type of this illness: and as a signification which is signified, and according to which it is acted.
On the treatment of abscesses, and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members, and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and there exits what is in it of pus, and the empty place remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is over it like cloth which has already been worn thin: and it does not arrive at the end in its corruption, nor does it press into the bone, nor into the nerve, nor into the ligament: it deserves to be named Sinus: and it is not named Fistula: nevertheless if its space is prolonged until the corruption presses into one of these members, then it is named Fistula, or zuken.
And its treatment is that you cut the entire wound as it was previously, and especially when it has been subtle and made like a cloth, and you are confident that it will not adhere to the place because of its own corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and there is no corruption from that last consequence, and if there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with a clyster, and it is so that you consider regarding the Anus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it is of foul odor: then give a clyster to it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and ziniar, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vessel: and decocted over fire, until the medicine reddens: and comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need, and dissolve it with water and honey, and give a clyster to the Anus with it: and constrict the orifice of it, and let the medicine stay in it for the quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: do this for as many days as until the Anus is cleansed, and the foul smell is removed.
And sometimes give a clyster with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is that you take the ash of vine wood, or the ash of holm oak wood: and throw water upon it. Then strain it, and give a clyster with it, until you are confident that the Anus is now cleaned.
What if the weak one is not able to tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, then give a clyster with water and honey, in which something has already been mixed from crushed ziniar. Or give a clyster with honey and wine mixed, since it is a property of honey to cleanse and wash: and the wine makes the Anus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and astringency in the wine.
When you do that several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has already been removed: then insert a suppository with what makes flesh grow in it.
And it is, that you take from the plaster dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine, or insert a suppository with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I wrote about in the treatise on ointments.
What if the orifice of the sinus is narrowed, in which the cannula of the clyster does not fit: then widen it with iron for a short time: or put in it a small amount of lichen wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in royal ointment, until it is widened.
And similarly if the orifice is also too wide, then bring its lips together with a suture: and reduce from it the quantity in which the clyster can enter without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which the pus runs is elevated upwards: then make an incision in the lower place that is in it, so that the pus runs out from it downwards: for pus when it is confined in the depth of the sinus, prevents flesh from being generated in it.
What if it is not possible for you to make an incision in the sinus around its lower part according to what you want: then try, that you prepare a membrane with a preparation so that the pus runs out from it with ease according to what is prepared for you. Try, that nothing of the pus is retained in it at all: and take consolidative medicines which are applied to the wound, suitable for what you want. And spread them on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it makes contact with the entire sinus. Then cut with forceps directly at the orifice of the sinus a hole, slightly larger than the orifice of the sinus. Then spread a lenient unguent over another cloth according to the quantity of the wound and put it on the wound in a long shape from the orifice of the sinus, so that the pus can flow out: and do not remove the large cloth unless after some days once.
That one, however, which is over the orifice of the Sinus, is that which you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus can flow out: and so that you know, whether what flows out from it is a lot, or a little: or digested, or undigested.
And with this again consider the location of the Sinus itself, whether the master of it feels pain in it, or if there is not pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or if there is not an abscess in it.
When therefore your medication is thus extended, and you see the matter that flows out over the orifice of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus already adheres, or approximates adherence: then therefore dissolve it on the next morning, or on the third day: and when you dress the wound, then change the cloth to another, and renew the unguent.
If however a subtle pus flows out from the Sinus after a long interval, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is approaching, since there are men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to that.
If however undigested pus flows out from the Sinus after many days, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adherence of the Sinus is delayed, and its matter is prolonged: then add to the drying of medicines, true ones made by doctors, so that they are humid in their substance and dry in their virtue: such as the unguentum dyafinicon, when a surplus addition from zegi is added to it.
And from the most extreme of what is cured, it is that you take the ointment called diyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil, and spread over it an equal old wine in its substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now do similar to this action, when the ointment diyafinicon is not present to you, honey, when you have cooked it, until it becomes thick, and use it. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind the whole, and pulverize it over the honey while it is over the fire. Then smear over it a cloth, and tie it over the wound: and smear with the honey that you have cooked, until it has thickened: and sprinkle the powder over it, and put over it a cloth, and tie it.
And when administered to it Aristolochia longa, and the roots of heavenly lily, and it is a lily: and flour of the herb, and centaury. Use them simple, or combined, grind them, and sieve them: and sprinkle over the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
What if the matter of the wound is prolonged, and it does not heal with this cure: then know that there is corruption in its depth: or now it makes an impression on the bones, or on the remaining hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with the cure for fistulas, according to what has been previously stated.
Of the treatment of a wounded or worn away nail, and the cutting of a toe, and the division.
A panaritium is a tumor that grows under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot: and perhaps it grows on the other toes.
When indeed it has prolonged its matter, and the treatment of it is neglected, and it suppurates with a hot tumor: or it becomes rotten, and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it rots the whole thing, and perhaps the corruption reaches to the bone, until it is foul smelling: and it makes the end of the toe thick, and its color becomes dark.
When you raise your treatment with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not work: then it is necessary to cut with iron all the excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cauterization is a strong helper.
If the bone is indeed healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of vacant nail now press the flesh inward, and begin to pierce it, and wound it: then it is necessary that you put a subtle pumice under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it upward: and cut that flesh with ease, and put on top of what remains of the flesh from medications burning, corrosive, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If the corruption has already made an impression on the bone, then it is necessary to cut that bone and extract it: for it will not be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains.
What if you see corrosion and corruption advancing into the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to which a reminder of its former state has been preserved. Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however nail attrition or a blow occurs, and there is severe pain in it, then it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the weak one first. Then cut the nail with a sharp razor, a cross-section from above to the root.
And be careful, lest the cut penetrate to the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause severe pain by it on the weak one, and it will be a cause of inflammation of the added flesh in the place.
Then treat the place with what calms pains.
The finger that is added to the ones that grow on certain hands of men is perhaps entirely fleshy and perhaps there are bones in some of them and perhaps there is a nail in it and some of them grow at the root of the joint or its growth is in certain nodes of the finger. That one which grows on certain nodes of the finger does not move and that one which grows at the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
The cutting of that one which is fleshy among them is easy. Which is to cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The treatment of that one whose growth is at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore refrain from cutting it.
In that one which grows on the finger near the last node, then it is necessary to cut first its flesh with a round incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws that are suitable for it. Then treat it until it is healed.
The joining together of fingers which occurs, often happens either from the birth of the man, that is, it grows with him, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from burns of fire, and similar things.
It is necessary therefore to separate that joining, until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then put between them ligatures or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not join quickly, and separate them, or put between them a subtle sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if a joining occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then separate that joining according to what prepares and suits the shape of the member.
Of the cutting of defects.
There are varices, which are swollen veins, full of melancholic superfluities that occur in many parts of the body: and they most often happen in the thighs, especially in the thighs of travelers and laborers.
It is necessary therefore that you administer a purging of the body from black bile by strong purging many times.
Then perform bloodletting on the patient with a basilica vein.
Treatment of them indeed is with iron, and it is in two methods. The treatment of them is that they should be cut, and black blood is extracted. And the second method is that the vein is evacuated, and everything is extracted.
The cutting of it indeed is according to this method. First immerse the thigh in warm water many times, until the thick bloody filth is dissolved. Then bind the weak thigh from the upper part of its hip to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then evacuate, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the thigh upwards, and it is necessary that you perform bloodletting on the weak one first. Then cut the vein until below, until there comes out from the blood a quantity that you see is sufficient, and which the strength of the weak one can tolerate.
Afterwards bind it: and order him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and prohibit evacuation and bloodletting, when the veins are full, and it harms the weak one.
The evacuation of it is according to this method. Scrape the weak thigh, if there are many hairs on it. Then insert it into a bath, or immerse it in its wound with hot water, until it becomes red and the veins become swollen, or let it be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not available to it, until the member becomes warm.
Then cut the skin in the direction of the vein's section along its length, or at its end near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and strip the vein from every side, until it becomes apparent to sensation: and at its appearance, that which you see it turning from redness to blackness declining. When therefore it comes out from the skin, you see it as white as if it were a tendon.
Then insert beneath it a metal rod, until when it is raised and comes out from the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook, gently.
Then cut another section near that section, three fingers apart. Then strip the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it becomes apparent. Then raise it with rods as you have done, and suspend it with another hook, as you have done at first.
Then cut another section, or several sections, if you need to. Then raise and cut it at the last section near the heel.
Then pull it out to the section which is above it.
And do that until you pull it out from the section which is above, or higher than all the sections, until when it comes out entirely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you to pull out and raise, then insert a needle with strong thread double, and tie it, and pull it out: or insert beneath it a rod: and move your hand to every part, until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to heal it, and a defect from it will increase over the weakened part.
When you have extracted it entirely, then put on the place of the wound a wool cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, and treat it until it is healed.
What if the vein is contracted, having a twisted condition with an involution to the parts, and it is not as we have said according to rectitude: then it is necessary that you find on it at every part of its twist, and the place of its involution.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you elevate it entirely: and beware at your dissection above it lest you fall into the vein, or wound: for it will be difficult for you to elevate, or extract it. Preserve therefore your prudence.
The figure of the incision by which the vein is healed.
The figure of the blind hook.
It does not have curvature like the other hooks, nor is it of sharp extremity, so that it does not wound the vein: and it is of coarse flexibility, gentle: for if it were subtle, it would fall into the vein by its subtlety: indeed let there be superfluous grossness to it, as we have said.
On the extraction of the saphena vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot climates, such as Alizegi, and the land of Arabia, and in dry, hot lands of little tenderness, that is, in which no herb or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as occur within bodies of snakes and worms, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
The sign of the inception of this vein is a severe inflammation which occurs in the thigh. Then the place should be warmed. Then the vein begins to come out from the place of that warming, as if it were a root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore the extremity of it appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead, the weight of which is one or two drachms, and tie it, and suspend the lead from the thigh.
As often as anything comes out from it to the outside, wrap that in lead and tie it. What if it is prolonged a great deal, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it at the root until the whole thing has come out. For if you cut it, it contracts and returns into the flesh, and causes an abscess to occur, and decay in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Wherefore it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it comes out from the farthest part of itself, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this vein come out in certain men what is five palms and ten in length. And it has already happened to me that a man came out with it twenty palms long.
If however it is cut during the time of your treatment, then introduce the needle into its opening, and perforate it with a long needle, with a thread, until all that is in it of material comes out: and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for some days. Then treat it with the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and there occur to it many openings, and a branch comes out from each opening.
Heal the wound itself, as we have said in the division, and with what has been prescribed beforehand.
On the excision of worms generated under the skin, and it is called a cattle disease.
This disease is called among us cattle disease; because it often happens to oxen, and there is a small worm which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it walks throughout the body, going up and down: and it is shown to sensation while walking from limb to limb, until it breaks out wherever it breaks out on the skin, and emerges.
And its generation is from the rot of certain humors. As worms and snakes happen, that is, intestinal worms, and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its wickedness. For when it walks in the body and rises to the head, and arrives at the place: then perhaps it opens in it, and emerges, and destroys the eye: and this happens many times.
When therefore you want to cure it, and extract it, then it is not done unless by its movement, and the appearance of itself to sensation.
It is necessary therefore, that you bind what is above it, and what is below it with a strong constraining bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
Which if it is deep in the flesh, and you do not find it: then apply to the place a cautery with fire, until it dies.
And what is feared most, is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If however you see it having already arrived at the head near the eye, then bind beneath it the eyebrow with a good tight bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
And it is fitting that the weak person should use purification of their body with medicines that dissolve putrid foul humors.
And let him beware of foods which generate putrefaction.
On the excision regarding the illness of Nakir.
This illness is called in our land Nakir, and it is a pain which occurs in certain members, then it moves from member to member.
And I indeed have already seen it, according to what I relate to you. I was called to a weak woman in certain villages. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after I remained for one hour, I saw one swelling increase with a gurgling sound, as a worm increases, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than it is able to be: so that it is like living silver, when it runs from place to place.
The pain therefore receded from that place, and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran into the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it wandered throughout her whole body, according to what I saw.
I was amazed therefore at the swiftness of its change from member to member. And I indeed had not seen this illness with my eyes in this manner before. However I saw many who find the pain changing from member to member, and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is, except that it is because the woman was one of those who are from villages of dry bodies and detected veins, hence therefore it appears to the sense that the migratory condition is changed.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this method in those who are delicate and have moist bodies of hidden veins.
When you apply the treatment to it, and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye, as we have said, then bind above it and below it quickly: and cut above it, until that constricted bloodiness goes out: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with bodily evacuation, and with that which expels bloodiness, and purges them with foul-smelling pills, and pills of serapion, and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are differentiated according to their types and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is this: that among them are those which have large and small heads: and are concave, and convex. And among them are those which have three angles. And among them are those which have barbs. And among them are those which have stars.
Those indeed which are according to the members in which they fall, are according to two modes. Or the members are from the principal hollow members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and their likes. When therefore it falls into any one of these members, and the signs of death appear to you, which I will tell you after, then it is necessary that you should desist from extracting that arrow from them, for death follows it in him in whom it is, in most dispositions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For indeed when an arrow falls into the brain and penetrates the skull, and exits through the siphac which is above the brain, it happens that there occur: soda uehemens, and scotomia, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and mixing up of the intellect, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood exits from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And a white humidity similar to poultice exits from the place of the wound. And there exits from it something similar to the suppuration of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast: and he feels as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in a soft thing. And perhaps the arrow has a motion similar to the motion of a pulse: and black blood runs out from the wound. And it is followed by coldness of the extremities, and a cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death descends without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung, is the exit of frothy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck become swollen, and the color of the sick person changes. And he breathes out a great, high breath: and he seeks an attraction of cold air.
For if the arrow falls into the membrane that is in the breast: then it is near the small ribs: and there is made a great panting with vehement pain, with sighing: and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps it will come out of the wound with some undigested food.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and is fixed in it, something of feces will come out of the wound, or a piece of intestine, or gut which is already torn. There is therefore no hope for its cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
What if an arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger above the weakened area: then you should know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder, and arm, and the vertebrae of the back, and the elbows, and the hips, and the legs, and their like, are saved from the members according to many dispositions: when the arrow does not find an artery or a nerve: and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I have seen regarding the removal of arrows, so that you may understand by it about your cure.
Which is, that to a certain man an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from him from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye below the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not take out of it except a small extremity, with which it adhered to his wooden arrow, and it was a large arrow among the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no notches.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no bad accident happened to his eye.
And I extracted an arrowhead from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and is that which has barbs. I sewed over it between two guidings: and now it was submerged in his throat. I was careful with it, until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man into whom it had fallen in his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After which thirty days passed for him, and nothing was changed regarding his condition, I sewed over the arrow, and I applied a poultice to it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no evil accident happened to him.
And I treated a man into whom an arrow had fallen in his back, and the wound was consolidated over it. After which it was, after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I treated a woman into whom an arrow fell in her belly, and the wound was consolidated over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and nothing was changed regarding her condition, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I treated another man, into whom an arrow fell in his face: and the wound was consolidated, and it remained, not finding much pain for him: and many things similar to these.
And I extracted an arrow from one of the King's princes, which had fallen into him in the middle of his nose, and already it had declined to the right side a little: and the whole arrow was hidden.
I was called therefore to his treatment after the accident of the arrow, for three days. I found the wound of the arrow constricted strongly.
I searched for it with a subtle probe, and I did not feel it: and he himself felt a puncture and pain under his right ear. The spear was removed, which was that puncture from the extremity of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the place with a plaster in which there was an attractive and digestive virtue, trusting with me that it would bring forth the place to a head and the sign of the arrow would appear to me, so I could cut above it: and no accident happened in the place indicating that the arrow had struck the place.
I treated it diligently with a plaster over it for many days: and no accident occurred, and the wound was consolidated meanwhile: and he remained weak from the extraction of that space for some days, until he felt the arrow on a certain day inside his nose. And he told me about it.
And he told me about it. I applied therefore a sharp medicine, corroding for many days, until it was opened: and when I probed I probed it, and I felt the extremity of the arrow subtle which adhered to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine, until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us: and a space of time passed for me with it for about four months.
Then after the wound had been enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey to come out: then I did not cease to contrive, and devise over it with methods of devices, until I began on it on a certain day with well-made forceps, according to which the shape of them will be found at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And doctors indeed judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. I restored it therefore, and the wound was consolidated, and the weak one was healed with complete health: and nothing harmed him at all.
And I will tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows: so that you put that rule and meaning on that which I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and the skillful artisan compares a little with much: and with what is present, with that which is absent: and he finds a new operation, and a new instrument according to the descent of extraneous things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed, except according to two modes. Or by traction from the place into which it entered. Or by the opposite part of another.
And that which comes out from where it entered, is an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place: and is drawn, and comes out.
For if it does not obey to exit at the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you leave it for some days, until the flesh which is around it putrefies: and its attraction will be alleviated, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone, and does not obey you to exit, then leave it also for some days: and move it with attraction and motion every day, until it comes out.
For if it does not obey you to exit after days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in the bone on every side with a subtle drill, until the arrows are freed. Then draw it out, and extract it.
If the arrow is already hidden in a location of the body, and is concealed and hidden from sensation: then investigate it with probing. If you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suited to its attraction.
If you cannot reach it, on account of the constriction of the wound, and on account of the length of the arrow in the depth: and there is not a bone, nor a nerve, nor a vein: then probe above it, until the wound is enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
What if there are to him nerves that hold it, then free the flesh fixed in them on all sides, with every device that you can, and devices, if it cannot overcome the swelling of the flesh in the fracture of the ears, and their distortion, until it comes out.
And you when you administer the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then use distortion of your hand, with forceps on all sides, until you make it come out: and proceed with ultimate subtlety, so that the arrow is not broken, and its attraction and extraction become difficult for you.
What if you cannot overcome it in one hour, then leave it for some days, until what are around it putrefy. Then repeat it: for the tunic will be loosened, if indeed a contrary condition makes for you an efflux of blood, then administer what we said concerning treatment in its own chapter: and preserve your strength from the incision of a vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer the arrow's extraction in every way that is possible for you, and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have narrated to you.
And it is fitting, that you do when you draw out the arrow, that the weak part be according to the figure, according to which it was in the case of the arrow itself. For it is a greater assistance. If however it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The arrow which comes out from the opposite part of another, or already proceeds from it something to the exterior: or makes a gibbosity of the extremity of the arrow by sensation from the upper part of the adjacent skin, and you see it prominent: make an incision over it, and let the incision be according to the quantity that the forceps can grasp in it.
Then draw it out: for it becomes easy to come out.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow impresses itself in the bone, and enlarges itself: then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for some days: then repeat it, until it comes out.
What if the wood of the arrow is in it, then push it with that.
If however the wood has fallen, and you want to administer a push: then introduce to it a hollow instrument, so that its hollow enters into the tail of the arrow: then push it with it.
If however the arrow head is barbed then push it out with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow is indeed pulled out through that.
What if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary, that the barbed flesh, in which is the venom, be cut out: if it is possible for you. Then treat it with what is suitable for that.
What if the arrow falls in the breast, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or in the side: and is near to that which you touch with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see it, and treat it, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let there be similar extremities like a bird's beak, which are made like iron: when they grasp above the arrow, they do not release it.
And many types are made from them, large and small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow, and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
The form of a pusher for barbed things.
And the form of a pusher for pointed things.
This is the extremity of the rod, like a radius, so that its entrance is pulled out from the barbed arrow, and it is pushed with it.
Of the venesection of veins.
The veins for bloodletting, whose cutting custom has run in the body, are thirty.
From which there are in the head sixteen: two pulsating Veins, which are behind the ears, called two Herbae; and two Arteries, which are on both temples apparent; and two Veins which are in both tear ducts of the eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a Vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose. And two Guidegi, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The Veins however which are bled in the arms, are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalica, and it is from the left side: and the common people call it the vein of the head. And the Fusca. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica: and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side: and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the cord of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow: and it is that in which bloodletting is performed, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger: and there are two branches of it.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is which is under the knee joint on the left side. And the second is the Saphena: and its location is near the heel on the inner side. And the third is the Vena Nesse: and its location is near the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three similar veins.
On the bloodletting of two veins behind the Ears.
The bloodletting of the two veins which are behind the Ears is a remedy for ancient catarrhs and hemicrania and sahafati and old bad head ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting it is according to what I will narrate. And it is that the head of the weak person should be rubbed: and his occiput should be rubbed in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth and good friction. Then the weak person should bind his neck with a cord, until the two veins appear. And their locations are behind the Ears in two depressed areas of the head. Seek them therefore with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there mark with a cautery.
Then take the lancet for bloodletting, and it is that which is called the Incisor. Then insert it under the vein in the skin, until the bloodletter reaches the opening. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein with the skin with an incising cut. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that, and make come out from the blood as much as you want.
Then bind it with dressings, and leave it, until it heals.
And now the cutting of them has been dealt with at the beginning of the book, and also their cauterization.
Of the two arterial veins that are in the two temples for bloodletting, the remedy is for old migraine: and foul sore, and constant eye disease: and the running of overflowing acrid humors to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting them is according to what I relate to you. The weak one will press his neck strongly, until two veins appear with a clear visible appearance: and the pulse of them will be shown under your finger. Then mark with cauterization.
Then raise the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the bloodletting needle underneath, and raise the vein to the upper parts. And cut it, as you have done with the two other veins: and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then release the constriction of the weak one, and put your finger on the vein for one hour. Afterwards put a plaster and poultices on it, and bind it strongly above with a tight bandage: and leave it, until it is healed.
And now the recollection of them has passed, and their cutting, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The remedy of the bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is after the bloodletting of the head, for old facial pains: and for migraine, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its bloodletting is, according to what I relate to you. The weak one constricts his neck with a band, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called a Fossorium.
Place a prominent needle which is on the head of the vein, and strike above it with the pectoral or with another tool in its manner, and let blood flow according to the quantity that you want. Then loosen the weak perforation, and constrict it, until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad phlebotome. But truly it is not suitable, that the phlebotome should be of sharp extremity, as are the rest of the phlebotomes, but rather of broad extremity. And let the phlebotome be according to the crossing, because the bone is nearby, and perhaps the phlebotome will break when it is subtle.
The treatment of the two veins which are in the two lachrymals of the two eyes, is for an eye affected by itch and redness, and dirt in the eye, and facial pains.
And the quality of the venesection of them is, that the weak neck constricts itself with a thread. Then perform venesection on them, and you should stand above its head.
And let the venesection be according to the crossing for a small length, with a small phlebotome, slightly broad, for there is no flesh in the location. For if the phlebotome is of subtle extremity, perhaps it will break.
Then make the blood flow as much as is necessary for you. And put a plaster on them, and constrict them for one night, and then loosen them.
The venesection of the veins of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent sweating, and facial pains, such as half-headache and redness which occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of his bloodletting is that it constricts the weak part of the neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a subtle, long bloodletting instrument: and insert it into the middle of the lip, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. Since a vein does not appear to sensation there, and because blood begins to flow at once.
And it is necessary that you withdraw your hand with the bloodletting instrument for a short time: and make the blood flow according to your necessity. Then bind it with one bandage at night. For it is restored quickly.
The instrument of Guidetti's bloodletting is for constriction of asthma, and for the interception of leprosy, and melancholic diseases, and for bad impetigo and ulcers, and corroding, that is, herpes and itching.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that it constricts the weak under both with a bandage on the neck: and let the practitioner stand over the head of the weak person, and the weak person be sitting on a seat.
Then let the bloodletting instrument pierce the vein to the length of the broad bloodletting for a short time. Then extract from the blood a moderate quantity, or according to that which you see is necessary for it. Then do likewise with another vein.
Afterwards loosen the bandage, and constrict the two veins in the middle tightly: so that the weak person is not suffocated. And leave it until morning. For the wound will be healed.
Of the bloodletting of the veins according to Algeberich. The instrument of Algeberich's bloodletting of the veins is because it helps against bad breath in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad ulcers: and cracks of the lips, and bad ulcers, also those which are in the nose, and in its surroundings.
The quality of bloodletting of the veins is that you should make the weak sit before you and stretch their neck with a towel. Then uncover the lip of it, and look at the two veins: one of which is to the right of the lip, and the second to the left of it: and the demonstration of both is through the blackness of the gums. And that vein is because around the edges of them there are small, black veins. Cut therefore both with an incision of the falling.
If however there is doubt about you, and you do not know which of them it is: then proceed to the cutting of the larger one, and its more manifest.
And do likewise concerning the two veins which are in the upper lip: and mostly custom runs with it: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Of bloodletting of the vein under the tongue after the bloodletting of the head. The aid of the two veins which are under the tongue for bloodletting is, that the bloodletting of the head is for the afflictions which are in the throat, and the sickness of the uvula, and the sicknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting them is that the weak should sit between your hands before you in the sun: and raise their tongue, and look under the tongue on one side a vein, and on the other side a vein: and the color of both declines to blackness.
Bloodlet therefore both: and beware, lest you wound your hand in bloodletting them. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it happens that there is a flow of blood from those arteries.
The three veins which are bloodlet in the elbow, are where bloodletting custom runs in all men.
And bloodletting of the ears is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad myrtle-shaped lancet, or with an olive-shaped one for subtlety, or by cutting with a knife-shaped lancet, and it is Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from them are broad and subtle types according to the width of the veins and their tightness The form of the myrtle-shaped lancet is broad, as you see. And it suits for opening hollow veins, full ones, protruding ones, visible ones, thick ones, and those which contain coarse, turbid blood.
And this lancet is of lesser breadth, and of more subtle extremity.
And it suits for bloodletting of subtle veins, which contain subtle yellowish blood.
The royal vein, which is one of these three veins for bloodletting, is a privilege. For it extracts blood from illnesses which are under the throat and neck, following the chest and stomach: and it suits the bloodletter to bloodlet with it, so that he may beware, and be above fear of it, for beneath it is an artery. If therefore he errs, and adds to the prick of the lancet, he will cut that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Wherefore it is necessary that the bloodletter does not bloodlet with the lancet, but rather cuts with Alnesil.
Which if it does not appear with a clear royal appearance, then it is necessary that you displace it, and change to another, or seek some branch of it: or in place of the bloodletting, use a ligature on the arm. It itself is obvious, and cut it with a lancet, Anesil, as we have said.
But if you perform phlebotomy on the same, then it is necessary before the tightening of the arm, so that you touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark on the place with a cauterizing agent, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave section using a lancet, Alnesil, as we have said. And beware that the blow does not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tie the ligature, an inflation in the place that you marked with a cauterizing agent, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: avoid it therefore.
For if you see blood in phlebotomy jumping, like the urine of a child, and it is subtle, red blood: then know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then press closely, and put your finger on it over a long space, then remove your finger. If the blood is then cut off (for it is often cut off), then tie the arm, and let it be: and let the weak one beware of its motion: and let him be above its fear.
And do not move it for some days, until it is healed.
But if the blood does not stop, and overcomes you: and your medicine is not present at the moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For the extremities of it contract, and the blood is cut off.
Take the bark of a plant, and bind it: take one half, and tie it over the place of the vein with a proper tightening, with a ligature and poultices until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then the cure itself with that which preceded it, a remembrance of the place of powders for cutting off the flow of blood: and the cutting off of its blood is not difficult in many dispositions, on account of the smallness of the place of the wound, and the possibility of binding from the arm.
The bloodletting of the dark vein is a remedy, which draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of the branch of the Royal and the branch of the Head, as we have said.
And it is suitable for the bloodletter to be cautious with it, that he should be above fear from its bloodletting, for beneath it is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the puncture of the bloodletting and finds the nerve, there occurs in it numbness, and its healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it will not be completely healed.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. If however it is hidden in some men, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then it is necessary that you place your bloodletting where you will bloodlet with a cut with Alnesil, and divert the nerve with your strength.
Which if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.
Of the vein of the head. The bloodletting of the vein of the head is a remedy, because it attracts blood from the head and applies to diseases of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein especially, if you wish, that you bloodlet it by pricking with an olive bloodletter, or with a myrtle bloodletter: because it is the savior of all veins, because there is not beneath it an artery, nor a nerve.
The vein that suits you for bloodletting is the one where you find the head of the elbow, and you look for a thinner spot: and it does not harm if it is not found with the first puncture, so that it is repeated over it several times with the bloodletting instrument.
However a vein perhaps forms an abscess in some men when it is not bloodletted at the first puncture, but that abscess does not harm it in any way.
On the usefulness of Bloodletting, and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of the bloodletting however, and its accidents that arise from it, are things in which you should consider correction.
First therefore it is that which you ought to know, that bloodletting is not administered except in the conservation of health and its preservation and caution against the approach of diseases.
And that bloodletting is done on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, and the Fusca, and the Basilic. And that bloodletting is done at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, and in summer, and autumn, and winter after digestion, when signs of fullness appear.
And bloodletting is done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed from the day.
Bloodletting which is administered in diseases does not have a determined hour, but when convenience and necessity provoke it, at night or day, and every hour, and every time.
And it is not suitable for children to be bloodletted until fourteen years are upon them. Nor should a pregnant woman be bloodletted, except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should old men be bloodletted, who have already passed sixty years.
When someone wants to undergo bloodletting for any condition, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines before bloodletting with a mild enema, if there is a lot of retained feces in them, so that the veins do not attract putrid and harmful superfluities from the intestines during bloodletting to the principal members.
Nor should bloodletting be performed on a patient who is vomiting, that is, with nausea, nor one who is drunk or vomiting from intoxication, until that is removed from them. Nor one who is weak with dropsy.
And bloodletting should be avoided again after a colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the belly, and frequent intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and anything that dissolves virtue from the bodily or animal substance.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines, if it is possible for him.
Then let him take a bath, if nothing prevents it, or let him be exercised with some exercise, so that the blood is made subtle.
And place bloodletting on his chest, around the third hour of the day, as we have said: and take care, that his chest is evacuated that day from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and punishment, and excessive evacuations, and similar things.
And let him have present things with which usage has created a habit in men from aromatics, and perfumes, and incense and similar things to the quantity of possibility.
Then let the one performing bloodletting sit on a cushion, which is higher than the cushion of the one undergoing bloodletting: afterwards let him draw out his arm, and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then he should tie the ligature with a bandage, and wrap it twice.
And the tightening should be moderate, because when the tightening is uneven, or excessive, it prevents the flow of blood; and similarly in leniency, it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the tightening it is necessary that the one performing the bloodletting should rub his hands together until the veins become swollen and declare themselves to the sensation.
Then the one performing the bloodletting should wipe the vein with a little old oil, properly.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand on the vein under the spot where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein does not flee and the puncture is made. For the vein is like a fleeing string when it comes to bloodletting: and of them there are those which are full of wind: and when you place the lancet on it, it contracts under the lancet, and the one performing the bloodletting is deceived, and the vein does not open: and if it does open, it is constricted: therefore it is necessary that the one performing the bloodletting should be steady, and be careful in all these things.
Then he should apply the lancet. If then the vein is opened from one side, then it is good. And if not, then he should try the other side under that same spot a little, or above it with speed, if the spot is not damaged.
What if the spot becomes inflamed, or becomes weak, then let it be for a day, or two days: and do not tie the ligature. For perhaps the warm poultice will attract the inflammation. And let him not enter the bath.
Then he should repeat the bloodletting if it is loved.
What if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and it happens that the amount does not come out of the blood as the force: then insert the lancet in the same opening according to the straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do that with speed, before the part becomes inflamed, for an inflamed part is in many men near a small operation.
If therefore you see it already inflamed, then do not go over it at all, for it does not excuse anything with regard to you. And put on it something from the dregs of oil: since it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your bloodletting, which you perform on veins to prohibit the flow of blood: and they call it tyrical alfarach, and sagzenea, when it is put from one of them on the place.
For the blood is refined and resolved, when it is thick.
What if there happens a great inflammation in the place of bloodletting, for it often happens, especially to him who is not accustomed to bloodletting except by chance, or is the opening of the vein small, then hasten and put on the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed a little: and bind it for one hour: since it loosens.
And it is necessary that you do that after the blood has come out from the same vein, when its flow is complete, or from another vein.
What if there remains in the place after days something blackish or greenish, it does not harm: and if you want, put on it something of aloes, or a solution of myrrh: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calament or something similar.
And many times there occur apostems and enlargements with phlebotomy of the Basilica.
Therefore put your hand on it, then if you find softness with compression of it, then that enlargement is bad. Beware therefore, that you put on it something of what we have said. For perhaps blood flows from the arterial vessel.
But make a plaster for it with that in which there is astringency, so that the place is hardened. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you extract from every man blood according to the quantity of his virtue. And that which appears from the color conquering over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it exit, until it becomes red: and similarly if you see it thick: then let it exit, until it becomes subtle: and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs extraction of blood twice, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified, and the phlebotomist be warned: and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary that he extract it in the veins, and that the opening be narrow: and better that which is administered in phlebotomy of the vein, is that it be a cross-section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And to whom it is accustomed to faint at phlebotomy of the syncopis, it is necessary that he eat before phlebotomy moderate bread infused in water of pomegranate or secaniabin, if it is warmed: and extract from him blood in three veins, or four.
And if it is of a cold complexion, then let it receive before phlebotomy bread soaked in juice of myrrh or in syrup of honey aromatized with spices, or in syrup aromatized with fragrant odors.
What if it happens to faint at phlebotomy, and the cause of this is the exit of much blood: then it should take in drink water of flesh, and subtle fragrant syrup: and make use of aromatics with gum, and let its chest be bound with it: and make use of the remainder which we said in the division on the chapter of fainting from evacuation.
Whoever wishes to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is because of much evacuation, and the virtue of which is weak, that he release blood little by little according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
Whoever indeed wishes to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time, and his body is strong: then let him do that after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body from the opposite part to which it inclines: it is necessary that he be evacuated on the second day, or on the third.
In whose body there is much blood already heated and sharpened, and it causes fever to happen: it is necessary that blood go out from it at once, and a large quantity be extracted from it: and the opening be enlarged until fainting happens: after you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy: and that you put your hand on his pulse during the flow of blood, so that death does not happen in place of fainting. For it often happens, when the phlebotomy practitioner is ignorant, and negligence occurs.
And it is not necessary when the vein has been opened to release the arm and release blood a second time, since the opening of the vein has already been closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, so that it is pressed upon with force, and the curved [needle] is extended quickly. For that is a malignant ulcer, or it diminishes itself, until it is blooded a second time.
Remove it with the sharpness of bloodletting that which has coagulated from blood in the opening of the vein, and put upon it something of salt dissolved in water. And put upon it something from theriac of Alfaroch, or Sagzenea, and apply to it a gentle compression, until the blood comes out.
If then the vein is an apostema, leave it, and do not touch it, until the apostema subsides.
What if necessity demands to release the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either bloodlet it above that place, or in another arm in another vein.
The veins of the arm are bloodlet at the place of the Fuscus and the Basilicus, when they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed from them.
And the quality of its bloodletting is, that the weak hand is inserted into hot water, until it becomes red and the vein appears manifestly.
Then let it be bound above it with a ligature of moderate constriction. Then bloodlet across a little at a time, not in width, nor in length: and let the opening be wide, and your bloodletting be that which you bloodlet upon the joint of the hand for a short while.
What if the exit of blood is forbidden, then put the hand again in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you obtain your necessity.
If however you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from putting the hand again in hot water. And the flow of blood into hot water is used a lot in the time of winter.
And the bloodletting of this vein is a savior to all veins, because there is not under it a pulsating vein, nor a nerve.
Venesection of the right hand is conducive to ailments of the liver.
And the quality of its venesection is that you bind the veins of the hand with a ligature, or with your hand, after you have inserted it in warm water until the vein becomes inflamed and is demonstrated to sensation strongly. Then venesect the vein by making a cross incision. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm it in anything.
And beware, lest you venesect your own hand. For under it are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not repeat it in warm water, the blood congeals in the opening of the vein, and is prevented from flowing.
When you have extracted the amount of blood necessary, then put oil and salt on the vein: so that it does not close quickly.
And similarly it is necessary to do with every constricted branch.
The remedy of venesection on the left hand is: because it is conducive to ailments of the spleen: and do similarly in its venesection as you did in the second equally.
The remedy of venesection of the saphena vein is for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, and retention of menses, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and thighs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of its venesection is that the weak person inserts their foot into warm water: and makes friction on it until the veins become swollen: and binds above the joint of the foot with a ligature. And the place of the vein is near the heel, visible towards the thumb: and many branches ramify from it on the sole of the foot.
Bloodletting is performed on the larger branch of it, or at the heel in its connection, because it is better and more beneficial for health.
What if bloodletting is performed on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are under it above the face of the foot.
And put your bloodletting where you perform it from a transverse position, as if you wish to cut it, and let the bloodletter be Nesil.
If the flow of blood is stopped, then immerse the foot in warm water, and let the blood flow into it, until it is evacuated.
What if the bloodletter misses the vein at first, then repeat the bloodletting towards the upper parts for a little while, for the place is safe, and you will not get harm from it, when you beware of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel on the wooded side.
And the indication for bloodletting of it is, for pain of the hip, when it is due to warm blood.
And the quality of its bloodletting is, that the weak enter the bath and be bound, and let the leg be constricted on the side of the hip up to above the heel four fingers, with a thin long bandage, for it does not appear except because of this.
When it appears, then perform bloodletting according to whatever method is possible for you, or according to a crosswise position, and it is better, either that you cut it with an incision, or that you cut it with a section. For its location is safe, and it is hidden in many men to a great extent.
For its location is safe, and it is hidden in many men to a great extent. What if you do not find it, and it does not appear to the senses at all, then perform bloodletting on some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, and opposite the ear, and beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in quantity as you wish.
Then loosen the tightening, and put a piece of leather over the place of bloodletting, and constrict the place. For it will heal quickly.
Of Purging, and the quality of its use.
Clysters are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And Purging is done in two ways. With scarification, and the extraction of blood: and the other is purging without scarification.
And this Purgation which is without scarification, is according to two methods. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the purgings that are administered with scarification and the extraction of blood, are in fourteen places of the body. Of which one is the purging of Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the purgings of Alhagdahim, and they are two sides of the neck from both parts together: and the purgings of the jaw, and it is under the jaw in the lower mouth: and the purgings of the two shoulders: and the purgings of Alachosos above the end of the tail: and the purgings of the two armpits, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and the purgings of the two thighs: and the purgings of the two hams.
And this Purgation does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that, virtue does not come out from them, as is the case with bloodletting. Nor is it necessary to administer purging, either with fire or without fire, in any of the illnesses that occur from overfilling, until the whole body is emptied.
What if necessity calls for Purgation from illness, or because of habit, we administer it at every hour, at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
What is it, that which is from humans who when the blood in them multiplies to the point that it requires extraction through venesection, finds in its head a heaviness and swooning.
And there is from them one who finds fullness and redness in his face, his head, and his neck. And there is from them one who finds itching in his face and his forehead, and darkness and dimness in his eyes.
And there is from them one who scratches the place of his venesection. And there is from them one whose sneezing is multiplied. And there is from them one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or it collects on his tongue and he spits up blood. And there is from them one whose sleep is multiplied. And there is from them one who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and the slain, and wounds, and things that are similar to those.
When therefore we see any of these things, and it is properly so in the third day of the month: we then order venesection to be done, after two or three hours have passed.
The juice of the Venesection of the nut, is: because it brings about heaviness in the head, and that which flows to the eyes. But indeed it should be that it is after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this Venesection is in place of the phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not permitted that one who is of a cold complexion, or in whom there is a catarrh, should use it. For it brings to them great harm.
And because of that it is not fitting that the old use it, and those in whose head there are cold agues.
He who does it frequently over it, is overcome by forgetfulness.
And because of that, it is necessary to instruct the one performing the surgery, that he should put his hand with the cannula for a short time towards the lower parts, fearing the generation of an obstruction.
Ventosatio or Alkehel is in place of phlebotomy of the spleen and phlebotomy of Basilic, and because of that it treats asthma and constriction of breathing and fissure of the instrument of breathing and coughing and replenishment.
And it is necessary that the cannula of Alkehel be pushed in for a short time, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosatio indeed is a treatment for accidental pains in the head, and diseases of the eyes, and migraines, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is in place of phlebotomy of Basilic.
And it is necessary to instruct the one performing the surgery, that he should not press his hand with the incision: so that he does not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventosatio under the chin treats ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar things from diseases which are in the mouth: and it is in place of phlebotomy of the two lips.
Ventosatio of the spatula treats the alchafacham, which is caused by retention and heat.
Ventosatio indeed of the interior parts of the two armpits treats the place of phlebotomy of the three veins, Basilic, and Splenic, and Cephalic: because it itself draws blood from all those tiny little veins which are in the flesh: and those tiny little veins draw from other thicker ones until the drawing reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary to instruct the one performing the surgery, that he should not proceed far in the incision: because the area is bare of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
A vein that is cauterized on the alchausos constricts hemorrhoids and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary to warn the cauterizer that the cautery should be large and made of copper: because the location requires strong suction and subtle cauterizations are likely to break.
Cauteries of the hips diminish with obvious reduction: because they attract blood from the whole body and increase old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus: they provoke menstruation, and cause bothor and ademenul: and they take the place of phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope to occur in many men.
And the benefit of cauterizing the alhorcobene is similar to the benefit of cauterizing both hips.
The quality of the position of cauterizations is that you should place a cautery in a vacant space, and apply moderate suction: and do not prolong the application of cauterizations, but rather put them on quickly, and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the area equally: and do not cease to repeat and continue this, until you see the area already red and inflamed, and an appearance of blood appears: then scarify, and repeat the suction little by little. Then consider the disposition of bodies.
For one who is of tender flesh and rare pores among men, it is necessary to scarify him only once, not more: so that the location does not become ulcers.
And instruct the cauterizer to enlarge the scarification, and make it a little deeper: and moderate the suction with facility, velocity, and his own movement.
For if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify it twice. In this case, what is first considered is the subtlety of the blood and its thinness, and secondly the scrutiny of the exact extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very foul, then let there be a third incision, so that it attains the ultimate.
And finally, when we want to extract blood gradually, or for a short time, one incision is sufficient for us. What if we want the extraction of much blood, we make many incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary that there be a deep incision: and the limit of equality in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered from oils at the application of poultices, and what the poultice itself will absorb.
In that case in which the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are constricted, it is necessary that the places of the poultice be anointed with opening, softening, resolving oils: if it is in the summer season, such as is oil of almonds, or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almond, or oil of gourd seed.
And if it is in the winter season, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or sabbatical oil: and their similars.
If the surplus is thick and cold, then let the oil be bitter, or oil of balsam, or oil of albene, or oil of anetina: and their similars.
If the poultice is of large pores, of tender flesh: then it is necessary that it be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that these places of the poultice be washed after the poulticing with rose water, or with cold water, or with solative water, or with gourd water, or with purslane water: and their similars.
He whose blood is of much humidity, should wash the vents with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumach: and similar things.
Whose superfluities are gross, should wash his vents with old wine, or with water of samsuc, or decoction of anet, or camomile: and similar things.
And it is fitting that the ventization should be done in a bath, or in a dresssed chamber of a bath, and it is necessary that it should be administered after exiting the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not fitting that anyone should sleep after ventization.
What is it that one should be governed by, either the one to be purged or the bloodletter before purging.
And after that it is fitting that you consider first: then if the one to be purged or the bloodletter is choleric, and his blood is acute with inflammation: then it is necessary that he receive cooling things, such as cold granules: and also an enema with vinegar and lettuce, and secancabin, and iuleb: and similar things.
And let his food be soft-boiled, and the flesh of boiled eggs, and seasoned foods with verjuice: and similar things.
And whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he take in a drink syrup of honey, or of almond, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and let him take fragrant wine moderate, which is between old and new: and let him be prescribed to use food in small quantity. And let his food be soft-boiled, and cabbage: and pease, that is, small birds: and boiled or cooked meat of pigeons.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of purging and bloodletting be more than the food: and it is necessary that there be given in a drink to certain men at the third hour alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is, muscat, or alesselithe before purging: and before bloodletting, or after: so that the principal members be comforted, and the blood be refined. And it is not suitable for them to take it in a hot drink.
On inflammation of the blood vessels without scarification. Inflammations of the blood vessels which are without scarification, are those that are applied to the liver, and spleen, and gout, and on the navel, and umbilicus, and the region of the kidneys, and the hump of the ankle: because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought through them, unless there is an attraction of blood from one member to another member: as we apply a plaster on the breasts in the disease of flowing nosebleed. And we use them to resolve a cold and viscous inflammation from a member to another member: as we apply a plaster on the abdomen, and navel. For it rarefies the member, and heats it, and removes the pain for this reason, because it resolves that inflammation.
And it is also applied on the kidneys, when there occurs in them a blockage or stone. For by virtue of its attractive power it perhaps opens up the blockage, or eradicates the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when it is applied on the liver and spleen for a third type of inflammation in both of them.
And these plasters should be administered with the juice alone, without cutting. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water for diseases of the pleura: and that is, so that the plaster may be filled, and be large, with hot water alone, or water in which herbs that are suitable have been decocted.
The form of a plaster administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two fingers, according to which we form it: and its quantity in depth be half a palm: and let there be on its edge, in the place which is around the middle of it, a small hole, according to the quantity that the needle enters: let it be made from bronze or citrus, with thick, smooth, equal, polished edges: so that it does not harm the member at its application upon it: and let there be in its middle a transverse rod of bronze or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this large spongy vein is made, greater than we have described, and a little less, according to the illnesses and age of the one who uses it.
For the spongy veins of children and thin people are different from those of men and fat bodies.
The quality of placing this spongy vein with fire on a membrane is to light a linen thread with fire from a candle or a small wax taper and place it above the middle of the rod that is across in the middle of the spongy vein, so that the fire is lit around the lower part of the spongy vein, so that the body of the weak person does not get burned.
Then it should be placed on the membrane, and the finger should be above the opening that I mentioned, until when we hold the spongy vein: while we press, we remove the finger, and vapor will exit above that opening, and the spongy vein will dissolve immediately.
Then light a thread according to its measure and apply it, if you press on it.
In the spongy vein that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, there is no cross rod nor opening: and it is not administered except that it may fill with water and is placed on the membrane only.
And this is its form.
And the larger this spongy vein is, so that it may hold much water, the better it is.
Of the hanging of bloodletting cups.
Bloodletting cups are not administered on many parts, except on those members where it is not possible to place spongy veins, because of their smallness, such as the lip and gums, and similar things. Or on a member bare of flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similar things.
And the quality of using them is: that they are taken from bloodletting cups which are in sweet waters, clean from impurities.
Then they should be immersed day and night in fresh water, until they are softened, and nothing remains in their stomach. Then the body should be treated at first with bloodletting, and with applications to the abdomen. Then the weak member should be cleaned, until it becomes red. Afterwards they will be placed on top of it.
When they fill and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with an application, then it is most useful for healing: and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and rubbed, and squeezed out.
What if the flow of blood is prolonged after a fall of blood vessels, and it is that which is flowing back: then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on top, until the flowing back is stopped.
What if the blood increases, then powder over it with a powdered zeolite, or gall, and similar things from astringents: until the blood is stopped.
Or they will be placed on the place, crushed broad beans, and left until the beans stick to the spot, for the blood is stopped.
And it is necessary if a repetition of bleeding is needed, when it is possible, to change them.
If however the blood vessels are forbidden from suspension, then the place will be cleaned with fresh blood. Or a needle is thrust into the places, until something comes out of the blood. Then they will be placed, for as soon as they feel something from the blood, they stick at once.
When they are used so that they fall, powder over them with something from powdered aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall at once.
This chapter is also many times necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures, and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know, O sons, that the foolish among the physicians and the common people throw themselves into this chapter, stupidly, and who have never inspected the book of the ancients, nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason it happens that this method is deprived of the sciences in our land. And I did not find anything good in it at all, and I would not have attained what I attained except for the length of reading the books of the ancients, and study above understanding them, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And now I have described to you from it in this Chapter all that my science contains: and on which my experimentation has passed, after I had abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of length, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and shown it at the end of declination: and formed in it many forms of the forms of instruments which are administered in it, since it is from the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is fitting that we say in the prologue of this Chapter, the sums of speech, and chapters, to whose understanding is compelled at first the artisan to stand on the truth of it: namely that you, and who are prepared, may know, or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall happens to someone, then it is proper first to perform bloodletting on him and to administer a purging treatment, or both at the same time, if nothing prevents it, such as lack of strength, or if he is one of those persons who has a condition in childhood, or an old decrepit person, or if it is a time of intense heat or intense cold.
Then he should be content with his food being cool, and with fowl that is chilled, and with birds' meat, and with fish: and he should prohibit wine, and fatty meats, and filling foods and every food that fills the veins with blood. Until he is safe from the hot abscess, and does not bring about an outflow of matter to the member: then the weak person should return to his first regime with which the habit of his body was running.
When, therefore, the fractured bone begins to be restored, then it is proper that the weak person should be fed with nutritious foods of much nourishment, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as dishes made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and cabbage, and feet and innards and livers of beasts, and eggs, and fresh fish: and rough wine, and similar things. For with this regime the clotting of the fracture happens more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in persons who are in early old age and decrepit, it is not possible that they should knit together and consolidate according to their nature always, on account of the dryness of their membranes: and they do consolidate and knit together which ones of them are at the end of tenderness, such as bones of small children.
However, nature attaches to the fractured bone from every part something similar to glue, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and binds itself, until they knit together and bind together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until something does not hinder its operations: and for this reason it is necessary that you put nourishing food on the weak person, in which there are thickness, viscosity, and grossness, as we said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of the members, since a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone, and similarly all the remaining members are differently joined, and I came with remembrance of every type of fracture exhibited in its distinct Chapter, separate from another. And the types of fractures of bones are diverse even within themselves.
Since there occurs a fracture of it that is curved, besides what happens to it in terms of dislocations. And sometimes there occurs a fracture of it along the length of the bone, and there are fractures of it that are displaced, that is, dislocations, and additions that proceed, as they are in a reed, when it is adapted to a knife for writing. And not proceeding, and there is a fracture with a wound and a disruption in the head, and there is a small splitting fracture.
And every type has a device, or its own proper instrument for restoration, according to which comes the remembrance of it, distinct in its own places.
And from that which the fracture of the bone is recognized, is its twisting, and its own protrusion, and the appearance to the sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore there is not a visible twisting in the place, nor a sound upon touch with your hand when you touch the bone with movement, nor does the weak one find great pain, then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there is a twisting or a small split, and therefore it is not necessary to move it with the hand and compression at all, but rather put on top of it from the medicines, whose remembrance came after the moment that which suits the place, then let it be bound with a subtle bandage.
And you should know that the place when it is curved and split into two, besides what dislocations happen to it, nevertheless every part is moved from its comparison, then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to rectify it, equalizing it before a hot abscess happens to it.
If a hot abscess happens to him, then leave it for some days, until the abscess subsides. Then treat it equally according to whatever method is possible from gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it and its equalization is easier than the bones, in which there occur displacements.
Then bind it, according to what the memory of it suggests to you.
If there are displacements in the bone, then extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, if it is the hand or foot: or with your hand, if it is a small member: or with two cords, or with a cord and hand.
And let your positioning be where you place the member on an equal spot, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, that you make those additions return with all skill, and according to whatever method you can in their places: and beware according to your strength, lest pain or injury happen to the weak one through your operation: and try according to your strength, that you apply one of the two bones with its companion, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary at that time, that you feel and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the quantity of your ability.
And beware violent extension and strong compression, as many foolish ones do. For they often cause a hot abscess to happen through their operation, or contraction in the member: as we have already seen that from their operations many times.
Then connect after equalization, and decent operation, and the binding of that member, and quiet, and tranquility: and warn the weak one concerning it. And let it rest, so that it does not move during its hours of watchfulness, and its sleep according to its revolution, and its agitation, and at its evacuation, and all its movements by its final strength. And let it rest, so that the position of the limb is not a position in which pain follows. Which is, that when it feels pain or a lesion in the disposition of the limb's position, then it is necessary to change it to another disposition from the one with which it does not feel pain.
And let it rest with that, so that its position is equal and straight, so that no twisting occurs in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the fracture of the broken limb is according to which I will describe.
Know that fractured limbs are differentiated in their smallness and largeness, and their shape.
Those therefore which are small among them, such as the arm, and finger, and elbow, and similar to them, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft, fine cloth. Those however which are thick among them, such as the hip and leg, it is necessary that there be on them a wrapping of broad, strong cloth.
For a wide bandage connects the large limb and binds it from every side with equal tension, so that it does not press upon it unevenly.
Then after your dressing, put on a plaster suitable to it, over the linen cloth, on the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap a bandage over the place of the fracture itself with three or four wraps, according to what the limb deserves, and tighten your hand for a short time with the bandage.
Then go up to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and tighten less than your previous tension, with which you tightened the fractured place. Then stretch yourself with an involution from the place of the fracture for a short time, and gradually soften the stiffness, until you take a large thing from the healthy place.
Then take another poultice, and involution it again over the fractured place with involutions. Afterwards dress with an involution to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be on the tightening of the involution and its softening, according to what we said in the first involution above.
Then put between the involutions a dressing of linen or cloth, with which the crookedness of the fracture is straightened, if there is crookedness in it: and if not, you do not put anything in it.
Then involution another poultice over it. Afterwards place equal to these involutions stars made from plaster immediately, if there is not in the place inflammation, nor hot aposteme.
If there is however in it inflammation or an aposteme, then put on it what settles that aposteme and takes away the inflammation: and leave it for some days. Then bind over it then the plasters.
And let the plasters be from the middle of a split cane, shaved, wisely formed: or let them be from wood from which cribs are made, which are made from pine or gerah, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and let the width of all plasters be according to this form, and this same figure.
Truly it is necessary, that the plaster which is put over the fracture be thicker and wider for a while, than the other plasters: and the length of the plaster be according to what is suitable for the member from its size and smallness.
Then bind over the plasters with another poultice, according to the first tightening, the same. Then bind from above with twisted threads, according to what we have said concerning the bandage: and it is, that your bandage should be above the place of the fracture by more: and the more it is elongated from the fracture, the less the bandage.
And it is fitting, that the threads should be moderate in thickness and fineness, and should be made from soft flax.
For if the threads are thick, such as I have seen from the work of foolish surgeons placing their threads made from twisted flax cords, it is a great mistake: for the bandage falls with them beyond the quality.
And very fine threads are also not suitable: for you will not achieve through the bandage with them that which you wish.
And it is not fitting, that there should be between one star and another less than a finger.
What if a weak person is injured by the ends of the stars after the bandage on healthy places: then put under them from soft lint or woolen cloth, until nothing is injured from that.
When, however, there is a fracture with a wound, and a disruption occurs in the skin, I will discuss it with consideration of its specifics in the second chapter.
And know that not every broken member needs to be tied with stars from the first day. Which is, that when a member is large, it is not fitting to put stars on it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters, with which the ancients restored, which are put on a fracture and dislocation.
The method of a common plaster abbreviated, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially for women and children: since it is from that which neither heat nor cold overcomes.
And it is, that you take from the dust of the millstone, and it is the inner part of the flour which hangs in the sides of the millstone near the motion of the mill: and knead it as it is, except that you sift it with the whites of an egg: and put its confection not thick, nor fine. Then use it.
Another method of plaster for restoring a fracture and a dislocation and a twist. Take mess, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugath, and juice of all in equal amount X myrrh, and aloes of each an equal amount V, and alethil XX, let all be pounded, and sifted, and mixed with water of alethil: or with the white of an egg, if the application to the weak person is warmed. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, it restores broken bones quickly, and confirms many men.
Another method of plaster, which also confirms fractures and twists. Take mugath, and mess, and white alteae, of all in equal amount X myrrh, and aloes of each an equal amount V acacia VI, and boli armeni XX, let all be pounded with much rubbing, and sifted, and mixed with water, or the white of an egg: and administer.
Another method of plaster for joints, and bones separated from their places: and it calms the accidental pain to them, and the division of bone, and the fracture. Let a woolen cloth be dipped, and submerged in vinegar, and oil cooked, and put on the place.
And in this plaster there is not a virtue of restoration, but it is good for calming hot abscesses: and it drives out pains properly.
Another method of plaster, which restores the broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig tree, and the leaves of the papaver of the forest: and pound all, and make a plaster from both.
Another method of short plaster, administered for the restoration of a fracture of bone: and when you use it for the resolution of the remainder of an abscess. Take the root of marshmallow and chamomile and flowers of violets and powder of herb, all in one portion: let them all be ground and mixed with wine, if the member is not heated.
If the member is heated, then mix it with water of moist coriander or with water and apply it thereto.
Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution than this first one, when there occurs a hard aposteme during the restoration of a member. Take the root of marshmallow and seed of flax, and pomegranate, and melilot, and samsuch, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in one portion: let them all be ground and mixed with willow water, or sweet water, or wine. All that according to the heat of the member, and the quietness of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be applied on a fractured member for its restoration, except a cerate made from wax and oil: none other: and he said it is a mean between grossness and subtlety.
To Galen however it seemed, that things which have an exciting of heat, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and the like, should be applied on a fractured member for its restoration.
A method of plaster that relieves lesion and pain. Take mugwort and cress and cut human hair or bird's feathers and marshmallow and salt in equal parts: let them be ground and sifted and mixed: and make from it a plaster.
The quantity however according to which it is necessary that the bandage remains, then is solved, is that you consider then, if there does not occur weakness or pain, nor itching, nor is the fractured bone moved from its place: then do not resolve it for many days. If it happens to him in the place a severe itching, or an annoying pain, or a swelling: then apply and dissolve it at that hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft marine sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the spot with it, until the itching calms, and the pain subsides.
If it happens to him in the place a severe itching, or an annoying pain, or a swelling: then apply and dissolve it at that hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft marine sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the spot with it, until the itching calms, and the pain subsides. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then put on it a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind it over the place for one night, until you are secure from a hot abscess, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is relieved.
Then repeat it to a subtle tightening, and a small plaster: and do not bind it with your first constriction, but subtly, until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all the accidents have been entirely removed, and you apply plaster and binding, then repeat it as you did at first equally.
If nothing happens to the limb from those things that we have said, then do not dissolve it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is left for twenty days, all that according to what appears to you from the solution of the limb, as we have said, until when the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of the flesh approaches over it: then add also at that time in the binding more than your entire first binding: and also add in the nourishment of the weak body, according to what the previous recollection of it was.
If you see the place of the fracture already becoming dry and thin more than it should: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore moisten it with warm water at every turn where you dissolve it, and let it be for three days, and loosen the binding a little.
Through this I perform the operation, nourishment runs to the member, and it heals quickly.
What foolish restorers do from a fracture of a member, when it is not restored at first, according to what is proper, and is restored according to the twisting, is an error from their operation and a great fear: and if it were correct, the ancients would have said that in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of them at all in that, and it is more correct that it should not be done.
On the making of an accident on the head.
The species of fractures are diverse, and its figures are many: and the causes of it are distinct.
For there is a fracture which occurs from a blow with a sword: and the blow takes away the bone as far as it reaches to the siphac, which is under the bone, just as an axe does in wood: and on account of that this species of fracture is named Axial.
Or the sword strikes a part of the bone, and strikes its surface, and the cut does not penetrate to the utmost of it: and this species of fracture is named Kalan, that is, Absolute Removal.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is a crushing or an attrition: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which now approaches the periosteum, which is under the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and there is a wound of these two fractures also, either small or large.
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone to the thinness of a hair: and it is a small crack, and on account of that this species of fracture is named Capillary.
And from them is a fracture that occurs due to a fall or a blow with a stone, and similar things, which cause the splitting of a bone to go inside, and it happens in the place of the concavity: just as it happens to the brewers of brass, when a blow occurs to them, and a part of them goes inside.
And this happens most often in the heads of moist bones, such as are the heads of children.
And there occur to all these kinds of fractures separate displacements, and I will discuss with recollection the entirety of it in its own place.
And we recognize all these kinds of fractures through detection over them, and inquiry of them with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh that is on them.
The species of the hair-like fracture is recognized by this, that it is detected over the bone, and wiped away, and anointed over it with a plaster: for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the weak person: then if you see from the accidents that which signifies manifest signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of intellect, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar things to these from the accidents in many dispositions, without doubt it will not be cured: and if you see accidents not terrifying you, and you hope for health: then begin the cure of it.
That is, if the wounded person comes to you immediately after being wounded: and it happens in winter days, then it is necessary that you should strive for the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in summer days, then it is necessary that you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before it becomes corrupted what is under the bone from the padding, and those accidents occur which we have described.
What if the fracture of the bone has now penetrated to the membrane touching the brain, and is with bruising and attraction then it is necessary that you cut the comminuted and attracted part according to what I will tell you.
And it is that you shave the head of the wounded and uncover the bone according to whatever mode is possible for you and according to the shape of the wound and what is weak above the infirm.
What if it happens to you upon the uncovering of the bone a flow of blood or a hot aposteme then apply to it what is necessary. And it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil and make the wound rest until the aposteme settles and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin in the cure of the bone and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method indeed is, that you cut the bone with a strict edge incisor and this is its form.
Then administer another incisor wider than the first one for a short while and this is its form.
Then administer also another incisor even wider also than the second.
And the second method is, that you have with you a number of different incisors, of which some are wider than others, and some of them shorter than others, and let them be at the end sharpened to a point, and made from iron or steel, and use facility in striking on the incisor, so that it does not strike the head and harm it.
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you perforate around it before you administer the incisors, with awls which are called non-penetrating awls, and they are not called thus except that they themselves do not penetrate beyond the end of the bony term into what is behind it, because the awl has a round extremity above what is under the head of its point, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents sinking and penetrating the thickness of the bone.
And it is suitable for you to take from these trephines a large number of which each one is suitable for the quantity of the thickness of the bone, until there is present to you on the whole skull a trephine, whose quantity of sharpness in length and width is according to the quantity of the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of trephines, or trepans.
The quality of making a hole around the broken bone is: that you put the trephine on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone has already been penetrated. Then change the trephine to another place, and put what is around the entire hole the quantity of the thickness of the radius, or around it.
Then cut with the incisors what is around the entire hole in the bone: and make it thinner than you can on the surface of the fineness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, either with your hand or with some other of those instruments which you have prepared for that: such as tenailles and subtle forceps.
And it is necessary that you proceed with all caution, lest the trephine or incisor touch anything of the brain.
When you have cut around the bone by making a hole, and it has been separated from the brain, if it was continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary that you scrape, and equal the edge of what remains in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor. Truly it is necessary, that it be thin and more subtle than other incisors.
What if something remains of the small bones, and fragments: then take them with ease, with that which is with you of instruments. Then treat the wound afterwards with linen bandages, and ointments which we have said.
And another method of the operation is easy, remote from fear, which Galen said and praised it with great praise, and this is his statement. It is necessary for you first to begin to expose the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most violent and most apparent, until when you have exposed that part and placed under it the extremity of this lentiform incision, whose shape is this.
And the lentiform part does not cut anything gently, and its pointed part enters on both sides of it in length, as you see, so that the lentiform part is applied to the saw, with its pointed face cutting into the bone.
Then strike on the incisor from one side with a small hammer, until you cut the whole bone with ease, as it turns out, and you will be secure from the accident that you fear.
And if the physician were not the most foolish of men and more ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the pannicle in certain places, he would cut it away from it with the extremity of the lentiform incisor, and free it from it with ease. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the pannicle, and that which is cut away from the bone is its face, and there remains in it roughness and subtle scratches: then it is necessary, that you scrape away that roughness, and eradicate those scratches with subtle rasps, which you have prepared in a number of different quantities, so that it is possible for you to administer from them in every place the most convenient of them, and the most correct, according to what the operation leads you to, and the bone itself, fractured, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer in your scraping, which first scrapes the bone, wider than those of the rasps. Then use a finer one after it.
And it is necessary that you administer in your scraping, which first scrapes the bone, wider than those of the rasps. Then use a finer one after it. And do not stop doing that according to continuity, until you reach the thinnest and finest of all.
In each of the remaining small fissures and fine fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a thing which is not hidden above all, to whom in this art there is any study, and it stands on what we have written, and we show in great fractures.
If indeed the periosteum is detected and retained, when you extract the bone: then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and put it on the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth: and make that as easily as you can over it, so that it does not press on the spleen.
Then administer over it a broad ligature: and do not bind it, except by the quantity that the wound holds so much: and leave it with this care for one day, or two days, until you are secure from a hot abscess. Then undo it, and administer after that medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as the roots of lily, and flour of herb, and powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar to these: and it is, that you make from these medicines a powder, which is powdered over the wounds as they are dry.
And universally administer on it every medicine of a property whose is that it cleanses and does not bite. And beware according to your virtue, that the wound in your cure is clear: and is not in it dirt of ointment, nor filth.
And beware according to your virtue, that the wound in your cure is clear: and is not in it dirt of ointment, nor filth. And do not allow the pus to accumulate in it at all, since when pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and a great malice befalls the weak after that; and now it befalls the cerebral siphrac, when the mouth is cleansed from it, especially when the care of it is neglected, blackness on its surface.
Consider then, if weaknesses befall, which we have mentioned, you should know that it is perilous without a doubt.
And if blackness does not occur, unless from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine, that it makes that blackness: then you should take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and anoint the cloth with them. Then place it on the siphrac: afterwards treat it with the species of cures that are suitable, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
You should know that the nose is not fractured except when both of its upper parts are broken at the same time, or one of them: because it itself has two bones: since the lower part of it is cartilaginous, it does not fracture, and nothing happens to it except bruising, and twisting, and skewing.
If one of its two parts is fractured, then you should insert a small finger into the nostril, and straighten that fracture with your index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and this should be done with art and facility. And beware, lest pain occurs through your operation on the weak part.
For if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it: then you should straighten it with the end of a ruler, on which there is a small thickness.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make similar to that: and restore it promptly on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, in the quiet of a warm apostume.
Then insert into the nostril a pledget of linen from a cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two pledgets if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be in the pledget a thickness of such quantity, which fills the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said, that the pledgets should be soaked in butter, and changed every day. That indeed does not seem to me, but rather it is necessary, that the pledget be soaked in the white of an egg, mixed with powder of meal. Then leave the pledget alone, until the bone becomes firm, and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes a feather of a goose is inserted into the nose in place of the pledget, after which a linen cloth is wrapped over it: and it is done so that it itself holds the fracture of the nose more vigorously, and so that it does not prevent the weak from inhalation.
And this thing is not necessary. If you use it, do that: and if you wish, make pledgets.
What if it happens to the nose again while you are operating with a warm apostume, plaster the nose with cerate, or with coten infused in rose oil, or with a little of diacalendine.
If however the warm apostume does not happen, then it is necessary, that you plaster it with flour of sesame, and powder of frankincense mixed with the white of an egg. Then put on top of it a linen swab, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture, or are shattered, then it is necessary, that you cut above them, and extract them with instruments which are suitable for them. Then I dissect and cure it with what promotes flesh and consolidates from suitable plasters or ointments.
What if the wound occurs between the nostrils, then you should cure it with bandages and administer a tube of lead until it is healed.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken apart.
When the lower jaw is broken and its fracture is not with a wound, consider then if its fracture is only on the outside and does not break into two, and is bent inwardly, then its treatment is easy.
It is necessary therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert the index finger of your left hand into the mouth of the weak person: similarly if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand: and push with it the curvature of the fracture from within with ease to the outside with your other hand from the interior part of the bone, and straighten it with that.
What if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary that you administer extension from both parts, according to straightness: until its equalization is possible.
If indeed a commotion or disruption has already occurred to the teeth, then bind them with threads of gold, silver, or silk. Then put a bandage over the fractured jaw. Then put over it a double cloth, and put over the cloth a large strap made from leather: or a piece of skin sole, equal in length to the jaw.
Then tie it up from above, according to the preparation of its bandage, and suitable application, until it is not destroyed: and order the weak person to rest and quiet: and give their food in gentle sips.
If you think that something has already changed in some shape or manner, then apply a poultice and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has been changed, and plaster it with a poultice made from the powder of fenugreek, with the white of an egg, or with flour of barley, after you have removed the dandruff: and put a soft wool over the plaster.
While therefore the poultice remains on it, and the arrangement of the bone is not changed, do not remove it, nor dissolve it, until it is healed: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound for three weeks.
What if meanwhile a hot abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times for its treatment, until the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, take care. For now a fragment is separated from the bone, or by a cut: then be subtle in this, so that you remove those fragments of the cut with what suits you in removing them with instruments.
If indeed the opening of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then when you have removed those cuts, and none of them remain, or then the opening of the wound, if it is large: and if not, put on it a plaster that suits it, and incarnates it, until it is healed.
Of the restoration of the Jaw, when it is fractured.
The jaw is frequently fractured from the front part of the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is either fractured and separated into two, besides the cuts that occur in it: and it is easier to restore.
Or that which occurs in the fracture of the jawbone: and is more difficult to restore.
Or it is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation on it when there is a fracture without a wound, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one of them may hold the support that follows the fractured clavicle, and the other stretch the neck towards the affected side.
Then adjust the fracture with your fingers, until its shape is as it should be, and that it is not in an elevated or depressed state.
What if you diagnose an excessive extension, then it is necessary that you place under the weak arm a sphere of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need: and extend and elevate the clavicle, and constrict the sphere with your hand, until it is equal to the fracture, as it should be.
What if you cannot draw the extremity of the clavicle to the outside: because it penetrates to the depth: then it is necessary that the weak one leans upon his neck: and you place under his shoulder a moderate-sized pillow, and an assistant presses his shoulder downwards, until the bone of the clavicle which is in the depth rises upwards: and then you set right the fracture, and adjust it with your fingers.
If you feel a displacement from the clavicle, and it moves: then it is necessary that you fix above it, and extract the same displacement with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then make an incision of it with one of the incisors that you have prepared for it, after you have placed under the clavicle an instrument that serves as a splint: and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It becomes similar to an ear that has no depression.
And its width is according to that which you measure for it from the size of the bone, and its smallness. Its length is also according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And it has two extremities, as you see: and one extremity is wide, and the other is narrow.
If the disruption of the wound that you cut when you extracted the sequestration of the bone is wide, and you are distant from the hot aposteme: then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or there is a hot aposteme: then fill the wound with cloths, and poultices according to the quantity of the division of the wound.
What if there occurs a hot aposteme, then wet a cloth in rose oil, and vinegar, and wine, and put it on top.
The narrowing of the bone when it is without a wound, and without a cut, is, as you put on the bone a plaster made from wheat flour with the white of an egg. And put a soft dressing over it. Then put a ball under its nipple, if you intend that. Then take the hemp, that is, the rope which the Saracens hold, which should be long indeed: and its width should be a palm, or about that. Then put a double poultice over the dressing and plaster. Then take a splint from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and in length similarly. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the splint in the place of the bandage that falls on the fracture and the place. Then put the bandage on the fracture as it is wrapped, and wrap it around its neck, and under its healthy nipple, and under its weak nipple: and bind it all around, and as you see that the tightening holds the fracture with a decent tightening: and it is that which is not hidden from you, and all, so that the splint is not removed from above the broken bone. And for this reason it is necessary that you examine the weak person throughout the whole day. As often as the ligament is softened, and you see that the splint is already being removed: then correct it, and tighten the ligament.
Then put the bandage of the weak person on his back, and put under his armpit near his bandage a small pillow at night, so that his helper may be raised from his side. The fracture of the forearm is therefore elevated by elevation of the shoulder.
Or tie his arm to his neck: and do not untie the bandage, unless an accident occurs in the place from itching or from an abscess, until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see its surface to that. And add to the tightening, and leave it alone, until it is restored and coagulated.
And a fracture of the forearm is tightened and comforted according to the majority within twenty days: and sometimes it happens in certain men in less than that.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the Shoulder blade.
The shoulder blade is rarely fractured, and in the broad place of it: and they are not fractured from it except its edges.
When therefore the place is fractured from it and is fractured in its middle, and it is not recognized except by touch: then according to what is the shape of the fracture, prepare its treatment. And reduce it to its natural figure in every way of ingenuity, which is possible for you.
Then put on the place powder of rose with white of egg, and a soft cloth, and put over it a small pillow from folded linen. Then put on it a broad splint made from thin wood according to the quantity of the whole shoulder blade, or a little larger than it.
If the ulcer is under the sole and there is a concavity in some location of the Spatula, then equal that concavity with a linen poultice, until the sole descends according to equality.
Then tie above with a long ahimemati bandage, of decent constraint and firmness of the sole, until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the ligature every day. As often as the ligature is loosened and softened, tighten it, and equal the sole if it is moved from its place: and let the weak one lie on his healthy side.
And the Spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When therefore this number is completed, then untie the ligature: and you will be in security. For it is one of the bones whose union is not feared, nor their separation.
If however a fragment proceeds from the bone and pricks under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said regarding the fracture of the fork from the application of a warm poultice, if anything happens from it.
On the restoration of the fracture of the Chest.
The chest is rarely broken in its middle, and it rarely happens to it. Its extremities however are most often broken and united from its accidents.
When its middle is broken, which declines to the lower parts, and there happens to it a severe pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps it vomits blood, and it is declared a concavity in the fractured bone, and it is not hidden from feeling, The restoration of it is, that the weak one should be placed on his back: and put between the Spatulas of his shoulder a pillow.
Then press his shoulders, and gather the ribs from both sides or the sides with the hands: and shape it in its equality, according to every mode which is possible for it and is suitable, until the bone figure returns, according to what is proper.
Then put on it a plaster and a dressing, and put over it a splint made from a thin board of willow or hazel, or similar things in lightness, after you have wrapped it in a cloth. Then shape the dressing by binding it over the broken bone, so that it is not removed: and go with the binding according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten it with a decent tightening.
Then consider the dressing every hour, and as often as it becomes loose, tighten it: and if necessity demands its solution on account of itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or abscess: then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and rectify what has occurred with the method of its cure.
Then replace the plaster, if you see it to be good: and add to it a dressing, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the Ribs, when they are broken.
Know that a break of the ribs does not happen, except in thick places which follow the back, and from the ends of them on the front side. And damage does not happen to them, except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling on examination with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way, that you equal the break with the fingers according to the possible mode, until it equals the figure, according to what is proper. Then apply a plaster, and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declined to the interior, then there occurs to the weak a violent pain and puncture, just like the puncture that occurs to one who has pleurisy: because the bone punctures the membrane, and also there occurs to them difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And now the ancients have contrived in it with many contrivances: and among them there are those who say, that you should apply foods to the weak person which generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflamed, and extended, and the fracture driven outward.
We indeed disapprove, that a cause for making a hot aposteme does not happen, if it does not occur. If however it has already occurred, then he adds to it.
And some of them have said: let a bandage be placed on the swollen place, then let it be sucked with force, and it is similar to reasoning. Nevertheless, it is feared that the swelling may attract superfluities to the place, on account of the disposition of weakness.
And some of them have said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been soaked in hot oil: and little balls shall be placed between the ribs, until it is filled: so that there may be an equal bandage when you wrap it around according to its roundness.
Then let the weak person be treated with a treatment for pleurisy, from food and medicine.
For if the severe thing constrains the weak person, which it does not tolerate, and the bone punctures the membrane with a painful puncture, and we fear for the weak person: then it is necessary that we cut over the place, and uncover the fractured rib. Then let us put on it an instrument that preserves the health, whose mention has preceded: and let us cut the bone with ease, and cut it out.
Then we shall bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and we shall treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
What if a hot aposteme happens in the meantime, then apply it, and pour in powders mixed with rose oil, and put on the place: and let the weak part be treated with what is suitable for an aposteme.
Meanwhile also a plaster shall be put on the side on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
When a fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and rarely an attrition happens to them, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. When then this thing happens to someone, and you want to know, whether it will be healed or not healed, then consider. For if you see his hands already made soft, and numbed, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor clench them: and when you clench them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that it will not be healed, and in many cases it is mortal.
For if he moves them, and feels in them the clenching with fingers and the pricking: then know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the weak person will be healed with treatment.
For if it happens to the vertebrae of the back similarly to that, and you want to know whether it will be healed or not: then consider his feet: then if you see that they are made soft, and there happens to them what happened to the hands: then when he lies on his back, air and flatulence come out without his will: and when he is turned on his stomach, vomiting comes out without his will: and when he is turned on his back, and wants to urinate, and cannot: then know that it is mortal. I do not impose labor in its cure.
If a wound does not become affected by something from it, the matter is lighter.
And the treatment of what happens from it is that you apply a warm dressing to the postule: thus, that you put on the affected spongy part rose oil alone: or with the whites of roasted eggs.
Put on it that same thing several times a day, until when the warm postule is applied: then put on the place one of the strengthening, drying, and constricting plasters, and bind over it with a ligature: and instruct the patient, to use quiet and tranquility. And let him not lie on the side where he finds pain, until it is healed.
What if it happens with an erosion of the bone or something that is already separated from it: then it is necessary, that you cut over the skin, and remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then treat it with some kind of ointment, from the oils, until it is healed.
If the end of the bone is fractured, and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary, that you insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and straighten the broken bone with the other hand, according to what is possible, and according to the straightening.
Then put on it, and take it away: and treat the wound with the treatment that preceded, until it is healed.
Of the restoration of the Ankle.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the ankle are rarely fractured. What if they are fractured, then the fracture of them is not, except a crushing in their extremities: and they split along the length, and decline to the interior: and it happens to the patient pain in the place, and puncture: and the leg which is fractured becomes numb.
And its restoration is that you stretch out your hand over it, until you are above the fracture as is its shape.
If the fracture is only in its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from equalization, until it is assimilated to its natural shape.
If the fracture is in its length, or it has already declined to the interior, then make the weak one lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have equalized it, put a plaster on it, then put on it a splint of wood or of leather: and bind a bandage over it, which you do not fear to change the fracture, nor removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity of them with what fills it, until the bandage takes it according to equality: and instruct the weak one, that he sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
If a hot abscess occurs to him, then cease from extension of it and its restoration, until the hot abscess has settled: and put on it what settles it, according to what has preceded, then return to its restoration: and bind it as is necessary.
If indeed a splinter occurs in the bone, or it is comminuted, extract it.
On the restoration of the fracture of the elbow.
The elbow is that which is from the cubit to the head of the shoulder blade.
If it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: that you take a flat wood of medium thickness, according to this shape, which follows.
And let two bandages be tied on the two extremities.
Then let it be suspended from an elevated place: and let the weak person sit on a seat. Then he should throw his broken arm over a stick, until it reaches his armpit, in the middle of which the curvature of the stick is attached.
Then let something heavy be suspended from above, so that the assistant extends it to the lower parts. Then the physician should equal the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns, according to what is necessary.
And another method is, that the weak person should be raised up on his neck: and his hand should be suspended from his neck with a bandage. Then instruct two assistants, that one of them should hold what is above the fracture with his hands: and that the other should hold the lower part of it, and each of them should stretch to their respective part.
And if you want it to be a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with a bandage, and above it with another bandage: and let each of the two assistants stretch them to their two parts.
If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, then it is necessary that one bandage be placed under the armpit, and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a bandage be placed above that place, and above the elbow itself.
Then equal the fracture with ease without labor, until when the fracture is equal according to what is necessary, and a good application is applied: then bind it, if not a hot abscess occurs.
If indeed a hot abscess occurs, then loosen the binding until the seventh day. And put on it a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until when the abscess subsides: then bind it: and the method of binding it is, that you put a plaster on the fracture.
Then put a dressing made from new cloth over the plaster. Then he should place his arm on the helper and put his open hand on his shoulder.
And put a cloth, and bind it over the helper on the arm, so that the arm stays in place like a star: if nothing prevents you from that, nor is anything altered by you from the fractured bone.
What if you fear that something is altered by you from the fractured bone, then use a star: and it is, that you put on the fracture itself a star that is wider and stronger than the other stars. And put between every star the width of a finger, and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on every side.
Then bind over the stars a bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding on the place of the fracture should be tighter. And the more the fracture stretches, the less tight the binding should be.
If then you see the stars and binding as we have said, at the hour in which you restore the limb immediately, then do it: and if you fear a warm aposteme, then remove the binding and stars until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the ligature for all three days, so that there does not occur at the place an itch, or swelling, or is prevented food from reaching the limb, on account of the constriction caused by the binding. Set it right therefore all that, according to what we have said.
If indeed you are confident, that nothing will happen from it: then do not undo the ligature, unless after three days, or more.
And let the weak person sleep on his back, and his hands on his stomach: and put under the helper a mattress full of wool equally.
And consider at every hour of night or day that the shape of a fractured limb is not disentangled or the bandage loosened. Set it right therefore with all your strength.
And give food to the weak according to the order which we have mentioned above, so that at first it is subtle food, until the mouth begins to close: then it is necessary to thicken his food.
For it is the custom of the hip and the thigh to be constricted for forty days: then therefore it is necessary that it be loosed, and a bath administered, and treated with ointments which correct it.
If the fracture is a foul or bruised one, then you will not loosen the bandage from it and apply a plaster until fifty days, and until two months.
On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones.
Of which one is small: and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed under the small one from the lower side.
Perhaps therefore the larger forearm bone alone breaks, or the smaller one: and perhaps they break at the same time.
When therefore the upper forearm bone breaks, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower forearm bone breaks, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when the two bones break at the same time.
If therefore the bone that breaks is the upper small forearm bone, then it is fitting for the doctor in restoring it to apply a small extension with ease, until it becomes equal.
If indeed the large forearm bone is the one that is broken: then it is necessary to apply a stronger bandage.
And it is necessary that he puts the shape of a hand near its restoration and its own extension extended over the pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers at the top: and let the joint be lower than all the fingers or the rest: and let the weak [person] sit squarely over itself, and let the pillow be before it, or in its direction, in height, so that the weak [person] does not incur labor.
Then the servant will stretch out the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another servant will similarly stretch out from above.
Then the physician reduces the bone, until he brings it back to the best shape that he can.
What if in a fracture of the bone there are fragments, then you should reduce and put back every piece in its place with your strength.
If indeed there appears in it a separated fragment, and it punctures the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then sew over it, and remove it according to the method which we mentioned in those things that were previously stated.
If however the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter about that, so take the cure of it from there.
What if at the beginning of your restoration a hot aposteme occurs, then anoint a cloth with a paste made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be a medium between thickness and thinness: and bind the cloth over it with a subtle bandage, until when the aposteme has settled: then remove the paste, and put on a prepared plaster made from powdered flour with the white of an egg. Then put on splints, and let the splint that is put over the fracture itself be somewhat wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most arrangements: whether the fracture is in one forearm or in two forearms at the same time.
Then put your bandage over the place of the fracture, stronger and tighter, and somewhat more with the bandage towards the upper part of the fracture, or towards the lower part of it: or put a softer bandage for a short time, according to what was mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be gentle cloths, moist: and not hard, rough. And let the thread with which it is tied be made from linen properly, moderate between subtle and coarse, as we have described.
And consider the limb and the ligature after some days. What if something happens that needs correction, such as an itching that happens to the limb: then it is necessary that you bathe the limb with warm water, until that itching calms down, and you release the limb not constricted, until it calms down, then repeat the bandage.
What if the bandage is already softened, and the wound is already healed, and similar things to those: then correct that whole thing with your skill, and examine again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, on account of the excessiveness of the bandage, then it is necessary that you soften it for a little while, and release it for some days, until nourishment runs to it, then tie it.
If however nothing happens to the weak person among those things that we have said, then it is not necessary that it be undone, unless after twenty days, or around that time.
Then let the hand of the weak person be suspended at his neck. And let his neck be equal, and be guarded by its strength against agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. The whole of it is secondary to the disposition of the complexions, and the dispositions of the virtues.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that a fracture of the bones of the hand and the joints of the fingers rarely occurs. And it does not happen to them unless as a result of repeated trauma.
When therefore a fracture of the sole or a trauma occurs, then it is necessary that the weak person should sit and in front of him should be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand on it extended.
Then the assistant extends the fractured bones and the physician equalizes them until they join with a good union.
Then it is necessary that he should apply a plaster and a dressing, if not a hot abscess occurs. Then place a bandage over it according to the quantity of the location, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is towards the lower part around the belly of the sole, then make a shape like a sphere from cloth, and order the weak person to bind it over his fractured sole, then tie it with a long cloth.
And let the bandage be from leather, in which there is gentleness, so that the leather may be applied to the body of the sole, and tie it according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary that you place a bandage over it and another bandage underneath on the sole, and let the hand be straight and open. Then apply a tightening, as the hand turns, and extend between the fingers with a bandage.
For if there is a fracture of any of the nodes of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, equalize it according to what is necessary. Then tie it with the sole, and if you love him, place for him a straight bandage, small, so that the fracture may be elevated and not moved.
If the fracture is of the remaining fingers, such as the middle, and index, or ring, and little finger, then it should be put in place, and bound with the healthy finger that follows it: or all should be bound together according to continuity: and it is better. Or put on top of it a small star, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the application of a warm poultice: and apply with it what is necessary, when something happens from that, according to which the account of it is repeated.
On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh.
The hip bone is often fractured and is revealed to sensation: since it turns to the inner and back part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that a ligament is tied above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And a plaster is spread over its surface.
Then every ministering bandage should be stretched out to its own part according to equality: and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let the bandage be on the side of the chest, so that the extension falls upwards: and another bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee, so that the extension is downwards.
Then the physician balances the bone with both his hands, until he reduces it according to the likeness of its natural shape: and the bone is joined with a good union.
Then it is necessary that you put on a plaster and a bandage, if an aposteme does not happen to the limb. For if an aposteme happens in it: then leave it for some days, until the warm aposteme subsides, then return to your cure.
The narrowing of it should be thus. It is necessary that you apply a hard bandage over the fracture, that is, a binding: and fold it twice or thrice: and let some of it remain as an excess. Then bind the leg, until the heel reaches the root of the buttocks.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread emerge from the upper part of the two parts. Then wrap over the leg and thigh what remains in excess of the bandage.
Then put over the thigh at the place of the fracture a small stick, and put one of them as a stick over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the emptiness between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that it may equal the narrowing.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four windings. And the more you stretch it with a bandage away from the place of the fracture, let your binding be the less and softer and gentler.
Then tie to the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and leg. Bind therefore with each of the three sticks that are above. Then tie with the two ends of the thread downwards, until you reach the heel of the foot. And bind also with each of them the ends of the sticks from the other side, so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Then leave the bandage over that, while it remains, so that there does not occur to the limb a corrosion, nor an abscess, nor an inflammation, and similar things. If anything of that should happen. Treat it therefore with its remedy, and correct what has happened there entirely, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a fragment of bone in the bone that punctures: then it is necessary, that you should reduce it, if it is possible for you. And if not, find above it and remove it: and treat with that which the aforementioned treatment has reminded, until it is healed.
And when this fracture of the hip is tightened, besides that the sides are added to it, as we have said in the case of the shoulder and arm.
Truly however in the restoration of such a fracture, lameness does not happen to the weak. And if it is restored alone, besides that the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary, that he whose it is, will always be lame.
And know that the hip is tightened in fifty days, or a little more or a little less: all that is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee.
Know that the knee rarely suffers a fracture, but it often suffers an injury.
If indeed a fracture happens to it, then it is not except for a fissure or a hole in its parts. And it is with a wound, and without a wound. And let all of that be treated with sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that it should unite what has been disrupted from its parts with the fingers, until it aggregates and is joined according to what is possible from equality and facility and fabrication.
Then put a plaster made from the flour of sesames, or of meal, with the white of egg: and put on top of it a round piece of wood, if you apply it: and tie above it a bandage fitting to that.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have narrated concerning other fractures: such as a hot poultice, and similar things: so that you oppose every accident with what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
On the restoration of a fracture of the neck
You should know that the neck has two bones, one of which is thick and is named with the name of neck: and the other subtle, and is named gullet.
And it happens to both species of fracture that which happens to the two bones of the arm: and because of that its restoration is made, just like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
Which if the two bones are broken at the same time, the leg turns to all parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg turns to the front part.
And if the thick bone is broken, you find that below: and it is one of those things which are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and alignment, and binding of the stars according to that equally.
Truly it is necessary, if the fracture of the neck is a foul fracture, having many sores: that there should be less extension, and a lighter alleviation by you.
And in the neck there is something from the operation beyond the arm: and it is, when you equal the stars, and complete all your operation, then take two splints of pine wood, which is administered in the fabrication of cots that are placed under the tables: and they are made from palm splints: and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and not be among the smallest: and let their length be according to the length of the neck from the knee down below.
Then wrap over each one a cloth with two wrappings according to its length. And put one part of the neck on one side, and the other on the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the foot below.
Then bind two splints in three places with two extremities and the middle. For when the constriction is prohibited, the leg declines to the right and left, and it stands in a good position.
And now let a wooden splint be administered according to the length of the leg, and let the leg be placed in it, so that it conserves it from motion.
And it is very necessary, that you should do that in the fracture when there is a wound with it.
Then examine the leg every day, and study it with utmost care for signs of abscess, or inflammation, or other remainders. If therefore anything of those things happens, then oppose to it what is necessary, until it is healed, if God wills.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
A fracture indeed does not deeply affect the heel bone.
The bones of the foot are subject to fracture, and the toes also are subject to fracture; and it does not happen to them except due to trauma in many instances.
If a fracture happens to the bones of the foot, and you see those bones displaced above each other, then let the weak foot be placed on the prepared ground, as when walking.
Then stand and place your foot on what is elevated by those bones: afterwards press, or tread on it: and make it even, until it returns to its places.
Then apply a plaster, and put a dressing over it: and place under the sole of the foot a small board, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it with the foot by a suitable ligature, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things which it needs.
When therefore three or four days have passed for them, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones even, whether they were fractured, or dislocated. The operation therefore is in them, as you see.
If some of the fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them equal according to what I have told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then put a bar on your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than that: then place under the foot this board which I have described to you, and tighten it with a decent strap.
If indeed that which is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then put on top of each finger a bar of its own quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth: and tighten the board under the foot: and let it stand on one end of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you, that you do not forget, but consider all things that I have told you regarding the remaining fractures from accidents which we have mentioned: and apply to each accident what is appropriate.
Concerning the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the breastbone, and the rod of a man.
When the vulva of a woman is broken, then make her sit squarely. Then bend her slightly to the back part of the same, and let it be held from behind.
Then fill up the vulva with a sponge, until it fills it: and let it become in the vulva like a sphere.
Then strike the woman, and raise her back little by little. For that sponge comes out, until it becomes before the entrance of the vulva like a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then put a pillow on her back. When she gets up to urinate, remove the sponge with ease, then she urinates: and put it back according to the manner in which you first introduced it: then let her return to her first pillow.
It should be done for seven days, or thereabout, because the mouth itself is restored.
And if you need to, take a vesica of a reed, and tie a thread of papyrus over its opening, and insert the entire vesica into its vulva. Then blow into the tube with force, until the vesica is inflated inside the vulva, for the fracture will be restored.
Then let it be filled with a paste, and let it stand for some days, according to what we have narrated, until it is healed.
And when the jawbone of a man or a woman is fractured, then administer its restoration, and its alignment according to what we have narrated concerning the bone of the ankle.
And let not the rectitude be hidden in these near fractures, which little touch, especially to one who has something of study, or use.
And understand my book, which is much, for the fracture itself shows you in many dispositions the right way in its restoration, and its alignment: understand therefore.
When a man's rod is fractured, take the gullet of a goose, and insert the rod into it. Then put over it a dressing made from cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days, or about that time, and it will heal, if God wills.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones, when there is with a wound.
It is fitting for one to whom a fracture with a wound happens, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or the like, that bloodletting be applied immediately: if the conditions of bloodletting are attested to you, as we have previously stated.
For if the wound flows with blood, then it is necessary, that you proceed to the cutting of it, so that you powder over it a little powdered zeolite: if there is not present to you another thing.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not postpone it, if an abscess does not occur.
If a hot abscess occurs, then desist from the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause bad accidents to happen to it.
If the fractured bone is protruding above the skin, then it is necessary that you should gently reduce it and adjust it with your hands with ease and slight extension.
If the extension of it and its adjustment with your hands is not prepared, then reduce it with this instrument. And there is an instrument made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingerbreadths, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And on account of that it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the quantity that he needs for the cure in every type of fracture.
And let it be round and let there be a small thickness in it so that it does not double at the time of compression during the operation: and let it have a sharp point, which has a margin at its extremities. And let its upper part be thick from the middle of it to the lower parts.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that the pointed curved end of it be placed over the end of the prominent bone: and drive it with one blow, until when the bone returns and is adjusted by some adjustment.
Therefore, take care to adjust the ends of the fracture to each other.
If the fractured ends are thin and do not take the instrument with a good grip, then it is necessary that you should cut the end of the bone until the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce the bone with what we have described, then cut it with what is suitable for it from the incisions that we mentioned: or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then scrape what remains in the bone from roughness and small cortices.
When therefore the bone is reduced and the weak one finds after its reduction a vehement and piercing pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do it therefore. For you confer on the weak one a great benefit, when your restoration is completed which you do to the bone.
Then submerge a cloth in black styptic wine. And especially if it is in summer. And do not apply a cerate over the wound, nor anything in which there is oil, so that it does not cause to happen in it putrefaction and corruption.
Then administer the stars at the hour of completion of your restoration of the bone. And uncover the wound: thus, that you cut with a fork a hole in the bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware with all caution, lest you bind the wound with a fracture. For many foolish doctors have done this: and have caused to happen to their patients either death, or corruption, or ichor, that is, pus. And let your dressing be soft, gentle, different from the dressings of fractures and other things.
For if the wound is bad, or it is a great wound, and you find on it certain bad accidents which we have described, and you find pain in the suspended place: then it is not fitting that you apply the stars to it. And make for them bandages from hard cloths in the place of the stars, and bind it with them.
When it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove from above the dressing that you placed on it with wine. Then apply plasters and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds, such as the four-drug ointment and similar ones.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every day morning and evening, until it heals and becomes whole.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that pus runs out of it downwards with ease.
If many days pass for the wound and it does not heal, nor is the pus separated from it: then know that there are small pieces of bone there. Therefore it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. Whatever of those small pieces of bone are separated, remove them and extract them. And those of them that are not separated and prick the member and cause pain, try to cut around them and remove them in every way that is possible for you.
If there occurs to the wound zuchen or ekileten, that is, eschar, or another species of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary that you oppose each one of them with what is suitable for it from the cure, the account of which has been given in its own chapter.
And from that in which it is necessary that my speech stands, and to which you should direct your attention when the bone is fractured, and protrudes over the member, such as the hip bone, and the shoulder, and similar ones of the large members, it is that you should not attempt to reduce the fracture, for many times death occurs from this, rather leave it alone until it becomes putrid.
The dressing will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then attend to the cure of the wound, if it seems so to you: and if not, leave it alone.
On the cure of swelling in a fracture.
This swelling often occurs in the healing of a fracture. Especially one that is near the joints, and is disfigured from the shape of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Consider then if the swelling is recent: administer to it medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and gum arabic, and similar things.
Take some or all of these, and mix them with astringent wine, or with the whites of eggs, or with vinegar: and apply them to the swelling in a poultice, and bind them tightly around it.
And leave the dressing on, and do not remove it for many days. Then untie it, and apply another, until the swelling is removed.
Or bind over it a strip of lead sheeting. For lead has the property of removing every swelling from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone, and is hard, and necessity urgently demands its removal: then cut into it from the top part of it, and incise the prominent excess: or shave it with certain razors, until it is removed: and treat it, until it is healed.
On the cure when restoration occurs, and a limb remains after that subtle, not according to its own nature.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains after that weak and subtle: then this does not happen except for many reasons. One of them is the multitude of the solution of the ligament and its ligation not according to what is necessary: either because of the excess of tightness of the ligaments, until nourishment is prohibited from running to the member: or because of the multitude of superfluous embrocation at not its hour: or because of the paucity of blood in the body of the infirm, and its debility.
And the cure of it is to feed the infirm, and to make tender its body, until blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And bring joy and gladness upon him.
Then put pitch on the member: that it may attract much nourishment to itself. And repeat its embrocation with warm water, until nourishment runs and it returns to its natural figure.
Of the cure of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly.
When it happens to a member already restored after its healing that crookedness and prominence of the fractured bone or knot occur, and the form of the member is disfigured by it, nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its natural operation: then it is not necessary that you take the advice of him who thinks that the member should be broken again.
And now there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is very reprehensible, leading to death, or great fear, as if it were mortal.
But if the lameness and knot are recent: then it is necessary that an embrocation be made with warm water, in which are decocted softening herbs, such as the leaves of marshmallow, and its root, and melilot, and similar things. And let a plaster be made for it with a softening plaster, such as diachylon well prepared.
Let there be applied a poultice of the root of altea, and let it be mixed with hen's fat or with oil of sesanum, and let it be plastered on.
Let there be applied fat figs, and let them be rubbed with dove's dung, and similar things which are named from medicines that diminish consolidation.
And when the knot is dissolved with continuous, gentle, and soft rubbing, which is done with moist hands. And let movement of the limb be administered to every part at all hours.
If however the twisting has already come beforehand, and it has become strong, and it has turned into a stone, and necessity has been provoked for its treatment with iron: then it is necessary that the above of it be cut, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and that which exceeds from the knot or bone be cut out with subtle incisions: and let facility be administered to it with solicitude and study.
On speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of a joint from its place. For which it is prohibited from its movement, and the shape of the limb is deformed. And it causes pains to occur on the weak part, and vehement injuries.
When therefore a dislocation occurs to someone, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration: and let it not be delayed at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes putrid, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
On account of this therefore it is not necessary that it be moved, nor extended at the time of its putridness. Since often it causes spasms to occur, and painful injuries.
But when that occurs, then it is necessary that you proceed to bloodletting of the weak part. Then let it be applied, until the aposteme quiets.
Then let the limb be anointed with warm water and oil. Then let it be reduced with ease.
And the whole limb should be treated with that which will bring back its memory to its own place.
I have already discussed the chapters on dislocation, and also according to what preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated at the same time.
And the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. Or they are removed from their places by a slight movement, and become slightly softened. Or they are dislocated by a complete dislocation, until they become softened to the part of the chest, until the saliva of the weak one runs, and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is involved with speech.
When however the dislocation of it is slight, then it returns in many cases by itself with little trouble.
If indeed the dislocation is complete and entire: then it is necessary that its reduction be administered quickly, and not delayed at all: and it is that the assistant should hold the head of the weak one: and the physician should insert the thumb of his hand into the root of the dislocated jaw between his teeth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should insert both thumbs at the same time, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the other fingers of his hands are outside, which he uses to pull.
And instruct the weak one, that he should clean his jaws, and loosen them for chewing in every direction. And the physician pulls the jaw, and pushes the jaw, until it returns to its place.
What if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are together, then administer vapor with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When the jaws go back and become even, and the weak mouth is closed and not softened: then put over them cotton pads with cerate made from wax and rose oil.
Then it should be bound with ease with soft ligaments.
And the weak person should sleep on their back and their head should be steady between two pillows, so that it does not move to the right or left: and it should not be forced, or compelled to chew anything: instead soft food should be given to them to eat, until when the pain is relieved, and the jaw is knotted: then they should eat what they want, and it should be administered with ease.
He should not exert himself over the operation of his mouth in eating and drinking, and spitting, until the jaw is knotted and healed.
What if the reduction of two jaws is difficult, when they become dislocated at some hour, and do not return to their places: then often there occur from it fevers and constant sweating: and perhaps the weak bowel is loosened, and perhaps pure bile is vomited.
When you see that, then know that it is a loss, and often he to whom it happens dies within ten days.
On the reduction of dislocation of the elbow, and the extremity of the shoulder.
The elbow indeed is not dislocated from the inner side, on account of its continuity with the chest. And it becomes dislocated sometimes to the outside: and that is made clear by sensation.
And its restoration is, for the weak person to lie on their back, and to stretch out their arms. Then press the constricted place with your palm, for it will return to its original state.
Then put on it a plaster, and poultices, and bind it tightly.
The extremities of the bones which follow the elbow and are connected with it are not dislocated except rarely. What if it becomes dislocated on the same day: then it should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said, and what is prepared for you.
Then put on it a plaster, and poultices, and a bandage. And instruct the weak person to adhere to stillness and quiet, until he is healed.
And with this same treatment the extremity of the shoulder is reduced when it is also separated from its place.
On the reduction of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways.
Of which one is, that it is dislocated to the armpit downwards. The second is, that it is dislocated towards the breast. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the shoulder, and that happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back, because of the blade. And it is not dislocated to the front, because of the nerve.
And most often it is dislocated and protrudes downwards towards the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is scant. For it protrudes quickly in them, and also goes back quickly.
In those, however, whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, namely that it protrudes with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men a blow or a fall, and the shoulder is struck with a warm poultice, and it is thought on account of that, that it is already dislocated.
It is necessary, therefore, that you should test that, until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And a dislocation is recognized when it turns to the lower part of the shoulder, and you will distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you will find between them a clear difference, and you will find at the head of the shoulder a concavity, and below the shoulder joint on touching the head of the humerus as if it were an egg: and the weak one cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if the shoulder is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, then you will find a palpable feeling, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this type of dislocation is easy, when it is recent, or the patient is a child.
And its reduction is, that one elevates the hand of the patient upwards. Then place your thumbs under the shoulder joint, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place: and the patient lifts his hand, and extends it upwards. Then he puts it down below, for he returns quickly himself.
If however it does not return by what we have said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary that the patient should bathe in warm water, and an embrocation which softens and soothes, such as if they decoct roots of alteae, and fenugreek, and melilot in water, and administer.
Then the patient should be raised on his back: and let a sphere and wool be placed under the shoulder joint, which is equal between softness and tightness.
Then let the physician place his heel on the sphere, and lift the head of the humerus with strength, and draw the patient's hand downwards.
And if you do, draw him back according to this method: and it is, that you make the strong man be present who is longer than the weak one, and stand at his side, and insert his shoulder under the armpit of the weak one: and lift up his armpit to the upper parts, until the weak one is suspended in the air. And let another person pull the hand of the weak one to the lower parts of his belly. If the weak person is lightweight: then it is necessary, that something else be suspended with him, so that it weighs him down: for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also drawn back according to another method: and it is, that a long piece of wood be fixed in the ground, whose head is round in shape: like a mason's bucket: which is neither thick nor thin. Then let there be placed under the weak one, after they have been put on top of the head of the wood, soft cloths: and let the weak one stand according to the length of the wood.
Then let his hand be extended to the lower parts from the other side, and let his body be extended from the other side with strength: for the joint returns to its place with speed.
What if the reduction of it is difficult through all that we have said, then use this cure: and it is, that you take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entrance is alleviated into the depth of the armpit, according to this form.
Then let soft cloths be tied around the round head, so that the wood does not harm the weak one.
Then let it be placed under the armpit of the weak one, so that the hand or arm extends over the wood to the lower parts: and let the wood be tied above as an aid to the arm and extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed above the step of the ladder in width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side. For the joint immediately enters.
When I raise it completes its entrance in whatever way is possible: then it is necessary, that you put under the armpit a sphere of equal quantity made of wool. Then put a plaster prepared from powder of millet with benzoin and the white of an egg all over the shoulder, as it turns out from above.
Then bind under the armpit a tight bandage: and turn the dressing around the plaster from above: and tie his hand to his neck, and let it be, nor move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that weak food be given, until the member is comforted: for it is more speedy to its healing.
Then a larger one is put on after seven days, or five, and it is exercised with movement. If then it becomes firm and is not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated many times, on account of humidity which happened to it, or on account of another cause: then it is necessary that a cautery be administered to it with three openings, according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cautery.
What if all this is done, and the bandage is loosed after seven days, and the joint is not confirmed, and the plaster and dressing are put on it many times, and it does not become firm, and it falls, and it cannot be lifted to the upper parts: then know that the nerves which are at the head of the shoulder are already cut, or stretched, or softened: and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
But dislocation which occurs towards the chest and breast, or reduction to the back, is done with pushing and extending with the hands: until it returns, and the rest of the dressing and care are administered to it, until it is healed.
What if after healing heaviness occurs in the limb and slowness in its movement then let the weak one use a bath many times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its first nature.
On the cure of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and likewise returns with difficulty also: and it dislocates to all parts, and especially to the front or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: since it falls under sight and under touch, according to whatever figure it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it is shown to you plainly. For the joint is shortened and cannot double the arm, nor touch with it its own shoulder.
And it is necessary that you hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a warm aposteme happens to it.
For if a warm aposteme happens to it, its reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it is not healed at all, especially when it is to the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocation, and a more vehement pain is to them: and many times death descends with it.
And its restoration when it is among those things which are possible to reduce, is that the hand of it is extended with two hands: and its arm is stretched out, and the hands of the physician are above the elbow and below it, and he himself pushes the joint with his thumbs simultaneously, or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or indeed the dislocation is to the front: then it returns thus, that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
What if it does not obey dislocation to reduction, then administer a vehement extension, a strong one; and it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and two assistants should hold it too, so that it is not moved during extension.
Then the arm should be turned to any part after a double cloth or a broad bandage has been wrapped over the hand.
And when the physician touches his joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil: so that it is one of those things which help with the slipperiness of the joint and with ease. Then he should push the joint with a strong push until it returns.
And after its reduction, it is necessary that a plaster be placed over it, in which there is astringency and excitation with the whites of eggs: and that it be bound with a decent bandage. And let the arm be suspended from the neck of the invalid, and let it be left for some days.
Then let it be loosened. If then the joint is stabilized in its place, then undo the bandage from it, and leave it.
And if you see the joint not being well bound, then apply another plaster, and bandage, and leave it for some days, until it is bound. Then loosen it.
If however heaviness occurs to it after the reduction of the joint, and the arrangement is in motion: then administer a moistening in bathing, and subtle rubbing, and compression, until it is soothed, or place on the joint of the ilium, that is, the fat of the hog's belly. Then let it be bound, and leave it over it for a day and a night. Then remove it, and put it into a bath. When it sweats, then rub the joint with a moderate rubbing. Then anoint it again with the same ointment one time, and a second, and a third with the entrance of the bath, until it is softened.
And if you wish, put on it a warm and moist poultice of dung, heated with butter, and bind it over.
Do that several times. It itself becomes soft, and returns to its own condition.
Of the cure of the dislocation of Almahassem.
The shoulder is often dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. On the contrary, of the rest of the joints. But truly it is necessary, that there be speed in the reduction of its dislocation in the hour in which it becomes dislocated, before the place becomes infected: or an infection of heat occurs in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation in it is, that you put the dislocated shoulder on a table, and an assistant extends the hand of it: and the physician puts his palm on the prominence of the joint, and presses it, until it returns.
But truly it is necessary, that it be considered, if the palm has already receded to the thumb of the hand: then let the weak one put the back of his hand on the table at the extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand be turned inside on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand be put on the table, so that the hand of the physician falls on the same prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a plaster to calm the infection: and leave it, and do not repeat it.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you achieve reduction of it, after the days have passed, truly the joint remains according to its deformity: and nothing hurts the weak one, except that the hand becomes softened, and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or injured.
There is therefore no ingenuity in it, except that it should be seared with a cautery near the fall of it. And perhaps it does not bring together that something.
When therefore Almahassem does not cause to return, then put on it the plaster which we have described. Then let it be seared and left for five days: afterwards let it be undone and left, and the hand exercised.
If however the motion of it is deprived, and there occurs to it something heavy: then let it be soothed with warm water, and rubbed several times, until it is soothed.
On the cure of dislocations of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated to any part, or a finger to the back of the palm, or its belly: then extend the finger, and push back the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend it in the opposite direction to that in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it, until it becomes straight on its own day.
When therefore it has been night, bind it according to the same description: and do not cease to unbind it by day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it by night.
Do that for some days, until it becomes seared.
And do similarly with it, if it is dislocated to the palm of the hand: and bind it to the same part, and perform your first operation with it, until it is healed.
And do similarly with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
On the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When there occurs to anyone a dislocation of the vertebrae of the back, or a dislocation of the neck, either complete or with many vertebrae out of their places: then there is no cure for it, because death quickly follows the infirmity.
And the sign of it is that the weak evacuation comes out without control, and it cannot hold it: and often some of its members become soft because of it, or two of its legs, or two of its arms, or one of them: or one vertebra is displaced from its place.
For often it is moved, because often a dislocation to the four parts is made.
That therefore which is dislocated to the back, is called Gibbosity.
The treatment of it is, that you should consider then, if the gibbosity occurs from youth: then there is no treatment for it, nor is there any healing from it.
In that, however, which occurs from a fall, or a blow, or similar things to those, the ancients have already spoken of the methods of treatment in lengthy discourse. Whose benefit is not returned with profit.
I have already abbreviated from that which excuses little because of its great length from my closeness to the intention: and my exposition, which I have expounded it, and formed the instrument of it in a different manner than that which they showed it, and expounded.
I say therefore, that in the gibbosity which occurs from the front part, there is no device, nor healing from it.
And likewise in that which occurs to the two sides also.
And it is not treated from them, unless that which occurs in the back properly, with what I tell: and it is, that the weak person is stretched out on his face on a level platform near the wall: and a moist cloth is spread under him, so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight stick is fixed in a hole in the ground, at the end of the platform, near his head: and another stick near his feet at the other end of the platform: and an assistant holds the stick, and it is not fixed in the hole. And one servant should hold the other.
Then tie above the head of the weak person, and under its pillows a linen bandage, firm, and extend the extremity of the bandage to the stick which is near its head, and tie it on that.
Then bind another bandage above its hips, and above its knees, and at its ankles. Then gather all the bandages together, and tie them on another stick which is near its feet.
Then each servant should pull the bandage to the part of the stick, and the two sticks should not be moved from their places where they are fixed: nevertheless they should not be tightened, as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the spine with force, until it returns to its place, or he should place a board on it. Then he should attach his feet on the board, until it returns to its place.
If however it does not return to its place through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three cubits. And bore into the wall which we spoke of, that is near the weak person, a place for the extremity of the board to enter. Then place the middle of the board on the spine. And the physician should put his feet on the other extremity. And he should pull firmly, until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with the lathe that turns with your hand: and it is, as if you fix in the ground near the head of the weak person at the end of the bed two sticks, whose length is one cubit: and near its head at the end of the bed two sticks.
And let the length that is between each stick be one palm: and now a hole has been made in every place where the lathe runs: and each stick should be firmly fixed in the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And a round stick is inserted: and it is turned on which the ligature revolves in two holes of two sticks.
And at its end is a hole, in which the stick is fixed, whose length is a palm with what revolves: and in two other sticks there is similarly one of them.
Then tighten the ligatures that you tightened on the chest with the turnstile that is at its head: and the ligatures that you tightened on its shins with the turnstile that is at its feet.
Then let a servant stand at each turnstile, who twists his hand with the cloth, with which the turnstile revolves: and the physician adjusts the Spondilem, according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turnstile, which follows.
Then after the Spondilis returns, and the place is adjusted, then it is necessary that you put an excitatory plaster with egg white. Then a dressing. Afterwards put on top of the plaster a splint made from a board, whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length such quantity as to cover the place of the gibbosity, and over the healthy part of the Spondilem.
Then let it be tied with a ligature that we have said. And let the weak person use subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
What if something of elevation remains in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, with the administration of a board as we have described for a long time. And now let it be applied on that plate of lead.
And when there occurs an elevation in the last vertebrae of the back: and it is thought to be through that a dislocation, and it is that bone which now protrudes. It is not suitable that a supposition should be made for him with this medicine: perhaps it will cause death.
On the cure of a dislocated shoulder.
You should know that the joints of the shoulder and the joints of the arm do not undergo anything except dislocation, nor does what happens to other joints from slight movement and concavity happen to them.
And the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in four directions. That is, it dislocates to the front and to the back.
And most often it dislocates inwardly, and a little to the front and to the back.
And the treatment of its dislocation inwardly is: that when you join the weak leg to the healthy one, it is longer: and its knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the weak one cannot bend its foot at the groin: and the place which follows the groin is anointed with a warm apostema, because the head of the hip has already reached there.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation outwardly happens is that its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation forwardly happens is that it stretches out the healthy leg according to its full length: nevertheless it does not bend it without pain which is in the knee: and if it tries to walk, it cannot step forward on it: and its urine is retained, and its groin is anointed, and upon walking there is a gait with the foot over the heel.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation backwardly happens is that it does not stretch out the knee, nor can it bend it before it bends the groin: and its leg is also shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this dislocation of the species is to be considered, as you would consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already become ancient with the one having it. Then, if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is not in it a cure at all. Not so it is fitting, that a deep probing should be made to it.
In that one however whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation: then it is proper to this, that you should move the joint, and extend it to the interior and to the exterior, and move it to the right and to the left: for perhaps it returns, and does not need another cure.
If however it does not return in this manner, then it is fitting, that you should prepare a strong minister, and he should extend the leg of it from the lower part: either with his hands, or with a ligature, which is tied above its leg above the knee: and another minister extends his hand above, so that he inserts his hands under its armpits. Then he should tie with a soft ligature above the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other ligature.
And its extension is either from the front part of the groin to the part of the armpit, or from the back to the part of the back.
And let its extension be for all of them as one, until the weak one is lifted with its body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this indeed is a species of extension which is a common species of the four species.
If then the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for every species that which I will say about its own cure.
In the reduction of it indeed, when the dislocation is to the interior, it is fitting that the weak one should be placed on his healthy side. Then he should put a ligature on the root of the hip, where it is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then he should extend the ligature upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the thigh.
Then another strong servant should take his arms and cut the thick part of the weak hip and stretch it to the outer extension of the dislocation. For it has now returned to its place.
And this type is easier than the other types of treatment by which this member is reduced.
But if it protrudes above you and does not obey you at the entrance with this type of treatment altogether, then it is necessary that the two weak feet be bound together with a strong ligature, gentle, over the two ankles and over the two knees: and let the length of each be from its fellow as much as four fingers, and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the weak one should be suspended over a wooden beam that is in the house: and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
Then instruct a strong youth to support the head of the hip: and let another youth be suspended with the weak one: and let another youth push, supporting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the reduction of it to its proper place, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lie on a couch, according to what we have described in the case of having a hump. And let a ligature be tied over his leg, weak by nature, and over his chest.
Then two wooden beams should be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then an additional wooden beam should be placed in the middle of the couch, fixed well: over which wet cloths should be wrapped, so that it does not harm the weak one: and let the beam be between his hips, so that it is not pulled downwards at the extension.
Then the assistant should stretch out to his own side, and the physician should achieve reduction with his own hand.
If then it cuts to the turning back, it will be good.
And if not, put on it a plate, and press on it, as we said in the case of hunchback, equally. However it is suitable, that the weak one should lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is suitable that the weak leg should be stretched out quickly: and it is according to this same narrative on the couch: and the physician should put the palm of his right hand on the weak groin. Then he should hold it with his other hand, and with that holding put it extended downwards to the knee joint.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not suitable that the weak one should be stretched out downwards and be raised above the ground: but rather it is suitable that he should be placed on a hard surface, as it is also suitable if his hip dislocates outwardly, according to what we said about him lying on both hips: and it is on his face, and the ligaments are extended: according to what we said just before.
And it is suitable that compression should be administered with a plate also on the place from which the joint protrudes, when the reduction is completed according to what is suitable.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is that you should stretch out the two weak legs: and when you see them equal, and the weak one draws in his leg, and stretches it out without effort: then you should know that the limb has returned according to what is suitable: then you should join the two hips, and put on a plaster, and bind with a wrap, that is, a bandage: so that it may not move the hip to any side: and let the weak one adhere to quiet for three days, or four.
Then untie the bandage, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in condition, then you will know that the displacement has already been fixed: therefore set the weak one to walking.
And if you see something of softening: then return and plaster it, and bind it according to your first binding: and leave it for three days.
Then untie it and make it walk slowly on both for some days, until it is well comforted.
Of the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outside, to the inside, and to the bottom, namely to the back.
And it is not dislocated to the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will make the weak one apply his leg to his hip. If it does not stick to the hip, then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is, that you make the weak one sit upright, so that it now extends its leg if it can over that, and you stick your back to his face: and put his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee stick to your palms, and straighten them between your fingers over his knee. Then apply with your palm the two sides of his knee with force. And another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of the return is, that the leg sticks to the hip with gentleness, not laboriously.
Then plaster it, and make the leg stick to the hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days, or four. Then loosen them.
And he should not walk at all for some days, until he is cured.
If however the reduction of it refuses you, then administer a strong extension with bandages, the description of which has preceded in the cure of hernia, until it returns.
On the cure of dislocation of the heel.
The heel is sometimes put back with a little manipulation, and sometimes it is displaced according to its completion. And its dislocation occurs, either to the inside or to the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, bulging out towards the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its reduction is easy: and it is that it should be extended with ease by the hands, and adjusted, until it returns.
In the cure of it when it is dislocated according to its completion, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright: and a strong assistant should hold him firmly from behind, in the middle of his back.
Then you should hold with your right hand his foot from the top of it, and with your left hand from the bottom of his foot at the place of the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand. Then with the left hand in two places.
Then extend it with the left, and push the bottom of the foot with the right, turning the leg without effort.
Do that twice, as we have described.
Then push the bottom of the foot to the leg in a third place, and you pull the ankle.
If indeed it returns to one place, or to two places according to this method, and you see the foot equal, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on it, since it will return.
If then the reduction of it is prohibited to you with what we have narrated: then make the weak person lie on his back on the ground, and fix a strong stake in the earth, so that it falls between his hips: and you have now wrapped around it a cloth, so that it does not harm the weak person.
Then let the assistant take his thigh: afterwards the assistant should stretch the other leg, either with his hands, or with a bandage that binds above the ankle of the foot. Then let the assistant stretch everything in opposition to the stretching of his companion: and the stake should stand between the two hips of the weak person, holding it, so that his body is not drawn downwards at the bottom during the stretching.
Then the physician adjusts the dislocation with his hands, and the other assistant should hold the healthy leg below. For the dislocation returns with swiftness.
When then the dislocation returns, and the health of its return is declared to you: then put on a plaster and a poultice, and bind it with strong bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you beware or avoid the nerves which are above the posterior heel, so that the bandage is not tight over them and harms them.
Then leave it for two days, or three. What if the bandage becomes loosened, bind it: then untie it on the third or fourth day: and prohibit the weak person from walking for forty days. If indeed he tries to walk before that time, there will not be security unless the dislocation is dissolved over it, and becomes corrupted, and it does not receive a cure afterwards.
What if a hot abscess happens to him: then it is necessary that you administer to his sitting that which our narration previously mentioned in another place concerning the cure, and an embrocation, until it is removed.
On the dislocation of the toes and their treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated should be reduced with a few extensions without labor, and that indeed is not difficult, rather it is easy.
If the dislocation is in certain nodes of the sole of the foot, then it is necessary that the weak person sits with his foot on a level place on the ground or on a board, and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then tread on it with your foot with strength, until it returns, and you will see that it is already evened, and the protrusion does not appear in its place.
Then put under the sole of his foot a board which can hold the whole foot, which has two ends. Then bind it with a bandage for three days suitably. Then untie it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and secured from the dislocation.
On the types of dislocation with wound or fracture.
When something of that kind happens, and you consider its treatment and restoration, death often occurs, and because of this it is not fitting to presume upon the treatment of such a thing, except for one who is prudent in the art with long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous: and so that he use in his treatment medicines which quieten hot apostems only: and commit the weak person to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for health from destruction with mildness of sickness, and in which something of hope appears. Therefore consider the reduction of it at once in the beginning of the thing, before a hot apostem happens.
If then the member is restored, second to which the will, then administer the regime that calms the abscess: and cure the wound with that which agrees to it from dried ointments.
What if it is a dislocation with a fracture, and they occur in the separated bone of the knee, then conjoin the separation of them, and do in that which we said in simple ailments from what preceded in their places.
And beware according to your ability, and guard yourself from the entrance into the way of fear: according to what my preceding warning has said to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more healthy to your body among them in your time.
