After I completed for you, oh sons, this book, which is the last of the science of medicine with its complement, and I reached the end in it, from its explanations and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery by hand.
Since the operation by hand has been neglected in our region and time, and has been completely abandoned; until perhaps its science has perished and its track has been cut off, and nothing of it remains except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have been altered by hands, and error and hesitation occurred to them, until its intentions were closed and its use was prolonged. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the composition of this Treatise concerning it, according to the method of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation, and that I should come with the forms of cauterization and the rest of the instruments of work, with the addition of declarations and the preparation of what is necessary.
The reason for which a good artisan of it with his hand is not found in our time, is: that the art of medicine is long, and its author ought to exercise himself beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen described, until he knows the functions of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has cognition of the bones, and nerves, and muscles, and their number, and their going out, and the pulses of the veins, and the quiet ones, and the places of their exits.
And because of that, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with a work is little, and especially in the art of hand.
We have already spoken about this at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not knowledgeable about what we said concerning anatomy, does not understand, and already falls into error, by which men are harmed: just as I have seen many of them, who boast about this science, and throw themselves into it without knowledge, and without experience.
What happened is that I saw a physician make an incision into a scrofulous aposteme on the neck of a woman and he cut certain arteries in the neck, from which the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead at his hands.
And I saw another physician who presumed to extract a stone from a man which had progressed in his bladder, and the stone was large. He therefore approached him, and extracted it with a fragment of the bladder. For which the man died on the third day.
And I indeed had already been called to extract it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the weak man that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving a stipend from a certain Duke of our land because of medicine, and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him that he got a fracture in his leg near the heel, and the physician hastened with his ignorance, and pressed the fracture above the wound with poultices, and applied a tight bandage, and did not allow the wound an expiration.
Then he treated him according to his desires. Afterwards he left him for several days and instructed him not to undo the bandage, and it remained thus until his leg became an aposteme and his foot, and it reached a state of destruction.
I was therefore called to him, and I hastened to undo the bandage, and tranquility followed, and he was relieved from his pains.
Truly the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not restrain it.
Then the corruption ceased to spread through the limb until he died.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it became an ulcer after some days, until the evil of it was increased with the lord of the patient.
What is, that when it is pure cancer from melancholic humor, then it is not suitable to be pierced with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it can be cut off.
And because of that, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation to which health is associated, and an operation in which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already stirred up in every place of this book, where the operation comes, in which there is terror and fear.
For it is necessary for you to beware of that, and dismiss it: so that the stupid ones do not find a way to speak and to discredit.
Receive therefore the measure with solicitude and protection, and your weak ones with facility and firmness, and use the better way, obtaining grace from God for salvation and praiseworthy succession: and dismiss terrible distresses of difficult healing: and lift your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation enters into your faith and your commodity.
For it is more remaining to your glory, and more elevated in this world, and afterwards to your quantities.
For Galen has already said in certain of his warnings. Do not treat the evil disease: lest you be named bad doctors.
Now, however, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
The first Chapter.
On cauterization with fire and sharp medicine, the chapter, and ordered from head to foot, and forms of instruments, and iron tools of cauterization: and all that is necessary in the operation.
The second Chapter.
On cutting and piercing, bloodletting and puncture, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things to that: and the whole chapter, ordered with forms of instruments.
The third chapter.
Of restoration and dislocation and the cure of torsion and similar things to it: chapters, arranged from head to foot, and forms of instruments.
But before I mention the operation with it, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of its cauterizations and its nuisances: and in which complexions they are exhibited.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of cauterization and its nuisance is a discourse complex and subtle, of science and a hidden secret.
And many wise men have also spoken about it and disagreed on it: and for myself I am satisfied with few of their discourses, fearing prolixity.
I say therefore, that cauterization is suitable universally for every complexion, which is with matter and without matter: excepting two complexions, which are a hot complexion without matter and a dry complexion without matter.
In the hot and dry complexions with matter they disagree. For some have said that cauterization is suitable for them. And others have said the opposite of that, namely that cauterization is not suitable for an illness which is from heat and dryness: since the nature of fire is heat: and it is unsuitable, that a hot and dry illness be healed with something hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite of that said: that through cauterization healing is done in every hot and dry illness which occurs in the bodies of men: since when you compare the body of a man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
And I say this through his speech: that from the experiment he has already shown me that several times.
However, it is not fitting that he should proceed with that, unless he has already been tested and practiced in the chapter of Cautery's final exercise, and has recognized the diversity of the complexions of men, and the disposition of their illnesses, and the causes of them, and the accidents of them, and the span of time of them.
From the remaining complexions, however, there is no fear regarding use: and especially in cold and moist illnesses. For all physicians have already agreed on these, and they do not disagree with the judgment of using Cautery for them.
And know this, my sons, that the secret of curing by Cautery with fire, and its goodness over Cautery with burning medicine is that the fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized: and it does not harm another member joined to it, except with a little harm.
The action of the burning medicine penetrates to that which extends from the members: and perhaps it makes happen in a member an illness difficult to heal, and perhaps it kills.
The fire, however, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it overflows.
Now, however, that has become known to us through experiment, because of the length of service and study with art, and staying on the truth of things: and because of that I will excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not so, because it is not permitted to this book of mine, I would tell you a secret occult in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies of expelling, which expels illnesses, explained by philosophical speech, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And you should know what they themselves disagree about at the time when a cauterization is to be made, and they put on a better time for the chest.
And I say that a cauterization is suitable at every time, because the harm that occurs on account of the time is submerged in the benefit that is attracted with the cauterization. And especially if the cauterization is on account of necessary pains and strong, violent pains, which do not tolerate delay: because there is fear of a greater evil happening from them, than the small harm that occurs on account of time.
And do not let it fall into your minds, O sons, that which only the common and foolish physicians think, namely that for the ailment which is healed by a cauterization, there is not always a relapse: and they put that as a consequence, and the thing is not as they suppose: because the cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and evacuates the humors which are the causes, from which the pains happen.
Truly, however, the cauterization surpasses medicine by the speed of its health, and the virtue of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion: and it is possible that the ailment returns at some hour of time according to the complexion of the infirm, and the location of its ailment, and its virtue: and what is prepared in his body from an aggregation of superfluities in it: and what pervades to it in its acquisition from foods, and similar things from causes, unless the ailment is made, in which the cauterization is administered.
A subtle ailment in a member with few superfluities and humors, such as the cauterization of a tooth, on account of pain, and similar things to it, it is possible that the pain does not return in it. But that suits few.
And the common speech of the people is that cauterization is the last resource of medicine, which is a true speech, not for that which they themselves intend in it: since they believe that there is no cure which agrees with medicine, nor with anything else after the application of the cauter.
But the thing is contrary to this, and the intention that cauterization is the last resource of medicine is not so, except that when we administer methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not work: then we administer cauterization at the end, and it works: thence it follows that cauterization is the last resource of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold, and the loftiness of its substance: and they said that it does not produce pus in the place of the cauter. But it is not true absolutely: since I have already proven that, and found that it does not do so in certain bodies without others.
And cauterization with gold is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However when you make a cauter of gold in the fire, it is not shown to you when it is ignited according to the quantity that you need, because of the redness of the gold: and when it attains its full heat, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into plates.
Wherefore the artisan fails from that in his work: and because of this iron cauter is made by us more quickly and nearer to perfection for the operation.
And I have already arranged this Chapter on Cauterization, according to the chapters: and arranged them from head to foot: so that they may alleviate whoever seeks what he wants from it.
Head II
This cauterization is beneficial for dominating humidity and coldness above the brain: which two are the causes of numbness, and the multitude of flux of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat ache: and universally all illness that occurs from coldness, such as paralysis, and numbness, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar to those illnesses.
The method of cauterization is that you should first prepare the weak: so that it may be evacuated in the beginning with a medicine that cleanses and purifies the head for three nights, or four, according to what the strength of the weak person demands, and their age, and their habit.
Then command them to shave their head with a razor. Then make them sit between your hands, with their hands placed on their chest, so that they have already put their hands on their breast.
Then put the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their eyes. Wherever your middle finger touches, mark that place with an incision or branding iron.
Then prepare the cauterization of olive oil: whose form is this.
Then put it on the marked place with the incision, while your hand contracts slowly, and you turn it. Then lift your hand quickly, and inspect the place.
If you see that it has already drawn out from the bone a quantity of head alkali, or a quantity of theriac, then lift your hand. And if not, return your hand with the iron itself, or with another one by itself if it cools: until you see the bones that I told you.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the cotton in it, and apply it to the place; and leave it for three days.
Then apply over it cotton soaked in butter, and leave it on the place until the eschar is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with the ointment tetrapharmacon, until it is healed.
For they have said that the more a wound remains open, the more it emits pus, which is better and of greater benefit.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone, and that the cauterization should be applied until it reaches something of the thickness of bone.
Then scrape away what has been burned from the bone, then treat it.
And others say that it is necessary to pierce through with a cauterization iron to the extreme, until it impresses on the bone an impression of a fetid smell, so that the bone falls away, which is formed like a crater: or an instrument that women put in the infusion of the alphabet of the puerperal: and they extract, what they exhale from this place vapors of the head, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then let it be treated, until it becomes consolidated.
To me, however, these two types of cauterization do not seem suitable except in certain men according to the way of fear.
And leaving it alone is better for me with its own health.
For the head is weakened from the solution of its natural continuity: as we have testified in the other members: and especially when the head is weak by nature: and a certain species of Cauterization is more salutary and better for me, and I use it: therefore I operate with it for health.
Chapter Three.
When a chronic pain occurs in the whole head, and it is prolonged in the weak person, and it is treated with henna, and cichorium, and head purges, and oils, and plasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with a single cauterization that we have described, and none of those things are of benefit to it: then consider. For if the head of the weak person is of strong natural creation, and it is not feeble, and it finds intense cold: then cauterize with another cauterizer under that a little. Then cauterize it itself over every horn of its head with a cauterizer, so that the skin is not pierced, and a quantity is discovered from the bone, which we have described. And cauterize it itself with a single cauterizer on the back of its head, in the place that is called "uas", and it is the place where the ventouse is put: and raise your target in this, and do not discover the bone. For the weak person finds relief because of that vehement pain, and it is different from the pain of the other cauterizations of the whole head.
And I will say that this cauterization is in its own place: and it is necessary that it be a cauterizer, with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and its occiput more subtly than the cauterizer with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter Four.
When pain and swelling occur in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and the rest of the treatment that I mentioned in the divisions of diseases is administered, and none of those things are of benefit: then cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with medicine burnt by fire, or with iron.
Cauterization with a sharp caustic medicine is such that you take one tooth of a badger, and scrape it, and cut off its extremities on both sides. Then cut the place of pain at the time with a broad lancet, until a place is made under the skin, in which the dens is captured.
Insert it therefore under the skin, until it is hidden: then bind over it with a bandage of decent constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours; then untie it, and extract the badger, and leave the wound two days, or three; afterwards put on it a plaster submerged in butter, until the place makes pus: then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to make it with certain sharp medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on caustic medicines.
Cauterization of it with iron is according to this method. Fire cauterization, whose form is this.
And it is named a Clavulus: because the form of its head is like the form of a nail, in which there is something curved, and in the middle of it is a certain small prominence.
Then put it on the place, and hold your hand: and you withdraw the iron little by little with swiftness: and let the quantity that is cauterized be from the thickness of the skin, as its middle. And lift your hand, so that the artery which is below is not cauterized, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then soak the plaster in salt water, and put it on the place, and leave it for three days: then put a plaster with butter: afterwards cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, cauterize this half of the skull with the edge of a second cauterizing knife. And beware of the incision of an artery in this half of the skull, not formerly its own.
On the method of cauterizing in old hemicrania.
When you treat hemicrania, with what we said from the preceding cure, and what we said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not work: and you see from the disease that what we said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire is not enough for it, then it is necessary to make a burning cauterization, until it becomes white after you apply a sign above the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or about that: and put your hand in place of one, and press it until you cut an artery, and penetrate up to the bone.
Truly it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which moves during mastication, lest the side or nerve that moves it be burned, whence spasms happen.
And this is above caution, and warning about the flow of blood from an artery which has been cut. For in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is not diligent, nor experienced: and he gives up the operation with that at the beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the management of the flow of blood which happens from an artery according to its mode, and in the proper place of this book.
What if you see from the disease that this cauterization is not enough for it, and you see the weak body tolerating a cauterization on the middle of the head, as we have narrated, treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you use it, administer the cauterization that we said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cauterizer having two knives. For cauterization is better than this and more beneficial.
On the method of cauterizing in ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold, and it is treated with solutions, and the rest of the treatment that we mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then cauterization by fire: and this is what is called a point, whose shape is this.
Then puncture with it after its ignition around the entire ear, as it revolves: or around both, if pain is in both. And stretch yourself with the cauterizing instrument from the root of the ear for a short while, after you have marked the place with ink, and let the quantity of cauterization be ten punctures on all the ear, or thereabouts.
Then treat the places until they heal.
On the method of cauterizing for Twisting.
Chapter Seven.
Twisting that is treated with cauterization, is not unless from species which occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And it demands cauterization of the species that occurs from dryness and nerve spasm.
When you treat this species of twisting with hienas, and head purges, and gargles, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the weak place with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below its temple, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And put your cauterization on the opposite side of the weak part. For softening does not occur, except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterizing instrument at the top extremity of the ear, a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And put your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the Cautery, and it is a species from a knife, whose form is previously described: nevertheless it is not more subtle than that little, as you see: and it should be a knife with a bit of superfluous thickness.
Then heal the place, with what has preceded, until it is cured.
On the method of cauterizing in old Apoplexy.
When the Apoplexy has become old and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication is not effective, and the weak person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cauterization on the back of the head, according to what has preceded: and the method of the cauterization should be according to what has preceded.
And it is also cauterized with a Cautery over the bone of the stomach: and this is more extreme.
Then let it be cured, with what has preceded.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that at first the weak person should be given to drink great draughts, and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then shave the entire head of the weak person, and put on its back a plaster of the snail described in the treatise on plasters: and apply it several times.
This indeed is the method of the Cautery: and do that according to the same order which I have mentioned there.
If therefore he is cured by it, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back part of his head, which extend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and put between each cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cauterization, with what has preceded.
If indeed you use an application, and he is weak and cannot tolerate it: then apply a cauterization in the middle. What if you use an application: then cauterize it over the two horns.
Then treat it, until it is healed: and let the cauterization be according to the form that has been described beforehand.
On the method of cauterizing for paralysis and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is fitting that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with care, and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the weak person: afterwards cauterize it with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and with a cauterization over every horn of the head, and with a cauterization over its back, and with three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If indeed you immerse in the disease of softening of the body many of them, and he is weak and cannot tolerate it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cauterization, until it is greatly burned from its skin, and lift your hand. Then treat it, until it is healed: and thus the cauterization of olive oil.
On the method of cauterizing for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, unless it is one whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary therefore that you cleanse his brain first with care, and with the rest of the treatment which we have spoken of in division: when the weak person is great, or is tolerant of the reception of medicines.
If indeed he is a boy, who does not tolerate medicines, then administer a gargle, and cleansing mastics for the brain, before that for many days with a strengthening of foods.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle of the head, according to what has preceded in manner: and cauterize another on his occiput, and over every horn of his head with a cauterization. What if he is weak and unable to tolerate, then cauterize him with the cauterizations that I mentioned in one having palsy, and softening of the body on the spondiles of the neck, and the spondiles of the back: and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the method which has preceded.
If however he is a weak child, then apply a subtle cauterization, according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and gross phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauterizations that we mentioned in one having palsy.
And if the cause of melancholy is a surplus of declivity to melancholy, and the body of the weak is moist, then give him in drink what will cleanse his brain, according to that which has preceded in division: then shave the head of the weak, and afterwards make a tortella skillfully made from linen, like a circle.
Then put it on the middle of the head: and let the weak person sitting squarely be held from every side.
Then apply an ointment. And it is worthy made from old butter. And heat it over a fire with tempered heating to a measure that the finger can tolerate, when it is inserted into it. Then apply it on the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools.
Do that to the weak person once a week, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is cured.
Or if you use it, apply a cautery to it making many small points, besides which you should hold the hand with the cautery and smell it.
This type of cautery moistens the brain with a quality.
Then put on top of it a cotton pad soaked in butter or hen's fat.
On the method of applying a cautery to the descending water of the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the beginning of the water in the eye is declared to you by signs, which I mentioned in the division, then begin and drink the weak one, with what purifies its head.
And guard it from all moistures, and make it sit in a bath, in fasting for some days.
Then command it to shave its head, and apply a cautery to the middle of its head. Then apply a cautery to it on the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a descending water in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if there is a water in one eye: and cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long across the width of the temples: and beware of the flow of blood.
What if you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of the arteries, and cutting them, and caution from the flow of blood.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to the neck, under the two bones, with two cauteries produced from the back.
On the method of applying a cautery to old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and constant: and they are above the veins and arteries which are in the manifest head exteriorly, it is verified that this is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities: then apply a cautery with the same cautery that I narrated for the descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries in the neck under the two bones. And if you notice an increase, then cauterize it on every side with a cautious eye, above the eyebrow with a small cauterizer.
On the method of cauterizing in the nostrils.
When you treat it with what we have said in the division and the treatment is not effective then hasten and give in drink a weak potion for three nights then shave his head and cauterize it with a moderate cauterizer with an olive oil cauterizer. Then cauterize it with a clamp-like cauterizer, with two cauterizers, above the two eyebrows under the hair a little.
And beware of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the clamp-like cauterizer.
On the method of cauterizing for softening of the Eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture then cauterize the eyelid with one cauterizer, with this crescent-shaped cauterizer.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauterizers on every side and they will stretch out from both temples and let the length of every cauterizer be according to the lengths of the eyebrow and do not extend your hand with the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that is burned by the third eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when inverted lashes prick the eye.
The cauterization is according to two methods: either cauterization with fire or cauterization with burning medicine.
With the fire cauterizer, however, instruct the weak one beforehand, that he let his eyelashes fall out, if he is one of those who clean them, until they become longer and even. If they then prick him at his own throat: then bind his eyes with a cloth, so that they do not move, until they are healed.
When therefore the ulcers have formed and levelled, then put the head of the weak person in your bosom: afterwards mark over the eyelid of his eyes with a caustic, a mark which is according to the shape of myrtle leaves: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then put a cloth dipped in vinegar on the white of the eye: or in a mucilage of psyllium over the eye.
Then apply a cautery, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the figure that you marked little by little on many a vein, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of myrtle leaves, appearing wholly proper.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and hairs elevated at the puncture of the eye.
Lift your hand then: and leave it for three days.
Then put over it a cloth with butter, until the scab is eradicated. Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
Which if some of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then apply a cautery again over that place, as you did at first.
If however the hairs are on the underside: then cauterize it, until they are elevated to their natural place: and are evened so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is that you advise the weak person to leave the hairs alone, until they grow out and are evened. Make from a piece of cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap, and from non-absorbed lime one ounce or about that; then rub those together with good friction, and make it with haste, so that it does not get cold. Then spread from the paste over the cloth which you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyelid of one eye or two. And put under the eye a small piece moistened with egg white: and let the head of the weak person be on your lap.
And put your index finger on the medicine, and press it gently for a little while. And you should move it as often as the weak person feels the biting of the medicine: for its biting penetrates like fire.
While therefore it persists, what it itself has found, the biting, then remove the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting has ceased, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid lifted, as it is lifted with contraction from fire, or with incision, it is good: and if not, then apply again on it medicine on the place where the medicine does not press and does not blacken, until your operation is equal, and the eye is contracted.
Then put over it a small piece with butter, until the skin of the burn is peeled off. Then treat it with ointment called diaphenicum, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to guard with utmost care, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
What if the eyelid becomes soft after some days, and something from the hair strikes against the eye, then apply again medicine on that place which becomes soft from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then treat it, until it heals.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness. Therefore your consideration should be according to that, and the way of correctness will not be hidden from him who has a desire for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in the tear duct.
When you treat a fistula, with what we have said regarding the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Order the weak person to place his head on your lap, and let your assistant hold his head between his hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with his head.
Then put a cushion underneath in the white of the eye or in the mucus of the psil on the eye of him, then ignite the cauterization instrument whose shape is this.
Let it be hollow, like the shape of a quill pen from one end, with which cauterization is done, and if you want it to penetrate to the other end, and if you want it raised thus.
However, this hollow one is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and extract from it the sanies, and cleanse it, and if it is not open, then open it, and extract its pus.
Then put on it the cauterization instrument, which is made ignited strongly.
And hold your hand for a short time with the cauterization instrument near the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand is not tremulous, nor the weak person disturbed, and you put the cauterization instrument in the fat of the eye, and destroy it.
If I perforate at the beginning of your cauterization up to the mouth, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the cauterization once or twice, if you need it: and leave it for three days.
Then put a plug with butter, and treat it with excitatory ointment, until it is healed.
What if forty days pass and it is not healed: then put on it a sharp corroding medicine, until the mouth is revealed: and shave it according to what is described in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some of the first ones have described. Direct to the place of the fistula and find it: then put into its fissure a thin canula, that is, a subtle little reed, whose shape is this. And pour into it a quantity of drachm of melted lead, and hold your hand with the cane in good retention, and let not the weak one move at all, so that the melted lead does not run or perforate to its eye.
And it is necessary that you put on the weak eye a plug under the white of the eye, or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful healing.
What if the fistula is healed, with what we have said concerning cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what will come in its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing in the fissures of the lips.
Many times there occur in the lip fissures, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat their fissures, with what we have said in the division of ailments, and the treatment does not work, then apply a small cautery to the knife, according to this method.
And let it be sharpened according to the fineness of the knife.
Then put the ignited thing quickly into the same fissures, until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with a dressing, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula of the mouth.
When a boil occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus, and bursts: afterwards it becomes chronic, and the pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then you treat it, and if the treatment does not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity that the fistula can contain. Then insert the ignited thing into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the ignited iron penetrates to its depth and end: do this once, or two times.
Then treat it afterwards, with what we have said concerning treatment, until it is cured.
If the pus is then cut off, and healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to probe the place, and remove the corrupted bone according to what is found in its head.
On the method of cauterizing the gum and softening teeth.
When the gum becomes softened because of humidity, and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, and it does not work: then put the head of the weak one on your lap.
Then apply a cautery, whose form will be described after this, so that you put a tube over the tooth: and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the weak one feels the heat of the fire has already penetrated to the root of the tooth.
And raise your hand: then repeat the cauterization several times, according to what you need.
Then let the weak bone fill itself with salt water, and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For a dense movement is strengthened, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
On the method of cauterizing in toothache.
When the toothache is due to cold, or there is cold or worm in it, and treatment with medicines is not effective: then cauterization on it is according to two methods: either cauterization with butter, or cauterization with fire.
The cauterization of it with butter is, that you take cow's butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a pan. Then take the scum, and apply it to the extremity of the affected tooth. Then dip it into the boiling butter: and put it quickly on the aching tooth, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip a thread, or scum into cold butter, and put it on the painful tooth: and place over it a heated iron, until the fire penetrates to the deep part of the hollow tooth.
The cauterization of it with fire is, that you apply to a bronze or iron tube. And let there be in its body something of thickness, so that the sharpness of the fire does not penetrate to the weak tooth.
Then apply the fire cauterization, which shape comes: and put it on that tooth: and hold your hand, until the cauterization cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day, or on another day.
And it is suitable in the application of that cauterization, that it should fill the weak bone with good pus, and hold it for one hour; then it will spit it out.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you use, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the Cannula.
On the method of cauterizing in Strictures.
When the Strictures are from phlegm and from cold humidities, and they do not obey digestion by means of medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion: then apply a concave cauterization of fire, whose form is this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke can exit from the cauterization at the other extremity: and put the ignited thing over the aposteme once, and a second time, if you need it, until it penetrates to the depth of the aposteme.
Which if the aposteme is small: then put the cauterization according to the quantity of the aposteme.
Then leave it for three days, and put on top of it a plaster made with butter, until the burnt material is removed by the fire.
Then treat it with toothpaste ointment, until it heals in the form of a tube.
On the method of cauterizing for roughness of the voice and constriction of breathing.
When the humidities descend upon the canal of the lung, and especially when it is with a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the weak one should first be treated with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it in the Adam's apple at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and beware, lest you penetrate with the cauterization to the throat, nor into the skin, except for a little of it.
Then cauterize it with a cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra, and let the cautery be according to the method which has preceded.
Then treat it with what has preceded, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for diseases of the Lung and Cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are from cold humidities, and the weak person has no fever, nor consumption, and not an old disease: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the fork in depressed, gentle, empty places. And cauterize with another on the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be of a tube according to the form which has preceded.
And if you need to cauterize by pricking with a cautery, which is called a Point, whose form has preceded in the pricking of ear pain: and let the points be from thirty points up to almost a hundred.
Then treat it with what has preceded, until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form. For it will be lightened with that cautery, when you make with it one of three cauteries.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the arm is dislocated due to a cause of humidities, and it does not return to its place in the hour of its return from its dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it dislocates from a slight movement, which happens as we have already shown, then it is necessary that you reduce the dislocation first. Then let the weak person lie on his back, or on his healthy side. Then elevate the cut which is inside the inner thigh to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand and if the joint becomes dislocated inwardly.
Then apply cauterization to it with two irons. Its shape is this.
Then cauterize the cut until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization comes with four cauterizations.
And when the cauterization is made with a cauterizer having three irons, then the figure of the cauterization is made with six cauterizations and they are irons according to the subtlety of the sensation.
And this is the shape of the cauterizer having three irons.
And when one is added in this manner, then there are eight cauterizations.
Then put on the cauterization ground pork with salt. Then apply a dressing to the wound for tranquility, so that it is not moved for some time, until it becomes strong.
And if the dislocation is upward and it rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a cauterizer for the shoulder or with many punctures.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed, and the weakness is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When there occur in the stomach many colds and humidities, until they extract it from its combination, and multiply the catarrhs to it, and assiduous methods of cure, and do not strengthen: then it is necessary that the weak person lies on his back, and stretches out his legs, and hands. Then cauterize with three cauterizations, one cauterizer under the shoulder of the chest the size of one finger, with a shoulder cauterizer, and two cauterizations below by the two sides of one cauterizer, until the figure of the cauterizations comes in a triangle. And let it stretch between both so that they do not join, when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cauterization be a quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without addition, and if you want to cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle of the stomach according to this form, and let the cauterization that is made be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking him who trembles from this cauterization: and it is, that you mark on the stomach a point according to the quantity, which you want with the encaustic, then cauterize it with the cauterizer of the point: then cure it with the treatment, which preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a cold liver.
When there occurs in the liver pain from cold and moisture, or from a thick flatulence, until it goes out from its natural passage, and the weak person is cured with what we have said, and it does not benefit him: then it is necessary that the weak person be placed on his back, and marked with encaustic three cauterizations according to this figure, and of the same quantity on the lower liver below the hypocondriac region, where the elbow of the man reaches: and let the space that is between each cauterization be according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cauterization be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand much with the cauterizer.
And let the quantity of what is cauterized be from the thickness of the skin, the quantity of half of it not added: and let the weak person stand on his feet.
If however he is not standing, then let him be lying, who has already extended his legs and lifted his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a knife cautery, when there is subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware, lest you proceed to the utmost in cauterization, and the thickness of the whole skin is burned, where the whole body is burned, and it penetrates to the intestines: for the skin there is subtle, therefore know that.
On the method of cauterizing apostems of the liver.
When there is a flow of matter, and you want to know if that apostem is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, a weak pain and heaviness come on without sharpness: and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is vehement sharpness: and you see already, which has wearied the physicians with its cure.
It is necessary therefore that the weak man breathes upon his neck. Then figure the place of the apostem with a searing cautery: then ignite a cautery that is similar to a radius. And this is its form. And cauterize with it one cautery, until the whole skin is burned, and it penetrates to the siphac, until all the sanies come out: then cure it with the cure of flowing ulcers, until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that this species of cautery be used, except by one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hands these diseases run with experiment many times: then therefore he dares to undertake an operation of this kind.
But to omit it, is better in my opinion.
On the method of cauterizing in the Pleura.
The ancients said, a cautery with the roots of aristolochia for a cold Pleurisy in this manner. And it is, that you take from the roots of the dry long aristolochia, one root which is longer, that is found on it, and let it be the size of a finger. Then submerge it in oil: and set it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery at what is between the junction of the jaw and the neck, and with two small cauteries under the guidance of a little declining towards the part that is under the beard.
And also with two cauteries at what is between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining towards the back a little: and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries at the back: one at what is between the two shoulder blades: and with two cauteries on the two sides of the chest, below the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand with the cautery, but rather that it be on the manifest skin smelling.
And some of the ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron like a probe: and they ignite it, and insert it inside between the ribs, until they reach with it to the same abscess, and the pus comes out: as we have said in the chapter on Abscesses.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear that either the weak person dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place, for which there is no healing.
On the method of cauterizing the Spleen Chapter XXXII.
When you treat an illness of the spleen, with what we have said about curation in the division of illnesses, and your treatment is not effective, then a cautery on it is according to three methods, all of which are correct.
Of which one is, that you make three or four cauteries in a line along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of Epatus, whose figure has preceded.
And let there be between the cauterization a quantity of the thickness of a finger, or a little more.
And let the method of cauterization be that which we have mentioned in the cauterization of the liver equally.
And do not press your hand with the cauterizer, and let the patient lean weakly on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: as we have said in the chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder, that there are two cauteries for the ignias, and raise the skin which is in line with the spleen, where the weak left elbow meets: and let your elevation be such that you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two ignited cauteries by force, until you penetrate the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cauterizer: thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cauterizer having three rods.
Then take care that the cauterization, after you apply it, discharges pus for many days: for it is more beneficial than all the rest that have preceded in the cure.
Of the method of cauterizing in Dropsy.
The cauterization does not fall into Dropsy, except for the hardened ascleros.
When you treat a dropsical person with the methods of cure which we have mentioned in the division, and the cure is not effective, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one cauterizer on the stomach, and another cauterizer on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the shoulders, and one in line with the breast, and another in line with the stomach: and let the quantity of the depth of the cauterization be near to the thickness of the skin.
Then diminish the open cauterization so that it emits pus over a long period.
And it does not evacuate the weak from cure after cauterization with it, for which two intentions are required to be added to it: and the healing will hasten with the aid of God.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized, should be a clamp, according to the form that preceded it: and that with which the back is cauterized, should be an olive, according to the form that preceded it.
On the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When there are apostemations on a hydropic patient, and they are filled with citrine water: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocturnal, which is between the ear and the ring finger: and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For the citrine water will flow out, and let the cautery be according to this form.
Then make on the two legs two cauteries, one on each leg, and let the cautery be made with the extremity of a knife-shaped cautery: and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another lower than that, around the middle of the leg: and on every hip make two cauteries: and diminish the open cautery without cure for a long time: so that some water flows out from it: then cure it with the remaining things that we have said.
On the method of cauterizing for the relief of the belly.
Chapter 35.
When there is a solution of the belly from cold and humidities, until it debilitates the retaining and digesting virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with modes of cure, and not healed: and you see the weak tolerating the cautery of exuberant virtue, then cauterize it with a great cautery on its stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a ring-shaped cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle clamp-shaped cautery: and a great cautery above the hips, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moistures and the weak tolerance of that, then cauterize it with a cauterizing iron on the chest, and cauterize all of it with a cauterizing iron: and perhaps you will add two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one.
It is indeed a profitable treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from gross, cold, or corrupt humors, and they are treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment is not effective: then cauterize with three cauterizations above the lower vertebra of the back under the almeidati for a short time in a triangular fashion, and cauterize under the navel almost two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face breaking out in pimples, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cauterizing iron, according to what came before: and cauterize on his liver, and another on his spleen, with a cauterizing iron on the hip: and leave the cauterized place open for some time: then treat him until he is cured.
Chapter 37.
When you excise the tonsils, then ignite a cauterizing iron that resembles a staff. Then insert the ignited iron into the excised tonsil: and with your last hand, until the cauterizing iron reaches the opening of the vein, from which blood runs: do that once, or twice.
If therefore there are many tonsils, then cauterize each one with a cauterizing iron according to what we have narrated. Then treat them with what constricts them from ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cauterization on the alcatin, it is the greatest in treatment of the injury.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the weak one does not undergo the operation and treatment that we described in its own place, and is deterred by it, perhaps it will be healed with a cauterization.
When therefore a fistula occurs to someone, and it becomes chronic, corrupt pus runs out of it, and rotten moistures. It is more worthy therefore that which ought to be, that you should probe it with a subtle sound. Then know the quantity of its depth with the probe.
Then apply a cauterization iron, which is similar to a probe. Then insert the ignited instrument itself into the same fistula and the quantity in which the nail entered.
And repeat over it the cauterization, until all those rotten bodies are burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And beware of the burning of the nerve, if it is there, or of the large vein: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all these places.
And do not do that, unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then treat the place until it is healed.
If however the place is closed, and matter is cut off from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then know that it is already healed completely.
And if matter is not cut off from it, then know that it is penetrating, or in its depth there is a rotten mouth, or something like that: whose reminder will come into its own place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidney.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or gross flatulence and it weakens because of that, then it is necessary to cauterize it on the alumethen over the kidneys, with a cauterizing iron over each kidney, using an iron clamp, whose description has preceded.
And perhaps we will cauterize it a second time on the same alumethen. Three lined scars appear. Therefore they will be more in the lower part of the back.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When debility occurs in the bladder and softening from cold and humidities, until it does not retain weak urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the sumen above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and with a cauterizing iron to the right of the sumen, and another to the left of it: and let the length of this cauterization be according to the quantity of a knot of the thumb: and cauterize it with an inferior back cauterizing iron, or two cauterizing irons, if you need them: and let it be according to what preceded, the clavicular cauterizing iron.
On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and humidities occur in the womb and it is prohibited from pregnancy because of that, and its menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs to it at their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize with three cauterizing irons around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and a cauterizing iron above the inferior back, or two cauterizing irons: and let the cauterizing iron be clavicular.
On the method of cauterizing an ankle in a state of dislocation.
When the mucous humidities are poured out at the ankle joint, and they become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of it is that one leg is prolonged over the other, when they are compared to each other: and the place of dislocation is found empty.
Therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the weak part over the ankle joint itself with a similar circular cauterization: after which you mark with a branding iron around the circumference of the joint, as it turns: and so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle.
If this cauterization is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauterizations, with a large olive-shaped cauterization: and let the depth of the cauterization be according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole skin.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and its causes are cold and humidities: and it is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and it becomes chronic: then it is necessary that you loosen the weak part from gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things. Then cauterize it.
And the method of cauterization for it is according to two methods: either cauterization with adhering medicines, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many methods.
Of which one is, that you cauterize over the ankle joint itself with three triangular cauterizations, according to this shape. And make for them a good depth, or a bad one. And let the space that is between all cautery be of the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be of olive.
Sometimes indeed the cauterization is made in the middle on the head of the same ankle. There are four cauteries.
And if you apply a cauterization with a circle, whose form has preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, one: so that the little circle contains the whole ankle.
And burn the thickness of the whole skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the ankle itself, and does not extend to the hip and thigh.
If it extends to the hip and thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the hip, above the place to which that weakness points, in which is the pain, and your cauterization above the haunch four fingers towards the woody part for a little while: and let the cauterization be of a knife.
And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
Which if the weakness indicates that the pain extends almost to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where it points with a cauterization of one point, or three, or four, or more, if it needs it.
And if it points to pain being under the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize it there with one knife-shaped cauterization.
And beware in every cauterization of yours, that you do not touch with the cauterization to the point that you burn a nerve, or a large artery, and drag through it above the weak nuisance evil, or contraction.
And I indeed have already seen one and another, of those who cauterized above the haunch, and finished in cauterization, and the thigh was inflamed, until a tumor followed to the foot, and the whole was perforated, and the whole foot was corrupted: then there occurred a loosening of the bowel, and death after that.
What if there is pain in two parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this method.
And certain wise men have said concerning the cauterization of the ankle, that the manner of this cauterization is thus. Make a drill similar to an iron one, whose diameter is half a palm, and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a date pit, or a little less: and inside that drill let there be a third drill.
And let the space that is between all the drills be by the quantity of a thumb knot: and let the drills be open on two sides: and let their height be as a knot, or two knots: and make for them a handle from iron decently fitted to the drills.
Then let it be ignited in fire, until it becomes red, and throws out sparks: then let it be placed upon the weak ankle, reclining on the healthy side. Cauterize it therefore with three round cauterizations in one place.
Then leave it for three days. Afterwards apply a plaster with butter: and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with ointment, until it is healed.
Albucasis says, we have used this type of cauterization little, on account of the terror of its appearance: and because we find few who dare to undertake it.
However, it is one of the good cauterizations for him who suffers it, and finds with it its place.
The cauterization with adhering medicines is, that you make two drills having a perforated armlet, into which descends a hinge of its door made from brass or iron, the length of a wall: of which in height there are two knots, or about that.
And let there be a space which is between the two quantities of the thickness of the finger, and let it be open below and above: and let that which they contain be next to one another, according to this form.
Then put it upon the axle of the instrument, while the weak part lies on the healthy side. And press your hand strongly upon the axle of the instrument. Then pour between the two circles from warm water, which has been heated with fire for a short time, and hold it for the quantity of an hour's time: and let the weak part tolerate its biting and burning, for it itself finds the biting as fire, until the biting subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the warm water from the entire axle with sweet water: then leave it for three days.
And put upon it butter, until the blackness of the burn is removed: and leave it for some days, and pus will be cured from it. It is indeed the last in joining.
Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
What if the pain extends to the hip or the leg: make for it a plaster that contains water, according to what you did equally with the axle.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take of alkaline substance and unslaked lime each one part: grind both, and put them in a new flask, whose lower part is perforated with one small hole, according to the quantity that the radius can enter: and put under the bottom of the flask another flask: and throw upon the alkaline substance and lime sweet water, which submerges both by a finger: after which you press it with your hand with good compression: and leave the flask until sharp water descends in the lower part of the flask.
Then gather all that water and pour it over another lime, and boil, until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strongly sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterization of the remaining members. Since it performs the operation of fire itself.
And there are medicines with which they cauterize, also such as tesie and mel of anacard, and lime with soap, so that both may be mixed together.
And Galen told of a certain man of the ancients, whose cure was such that it cured the pain of the hip and the vein of the thigh: and he declared its value to be great. And he said that it did not need another cure, and that he was healed by one means, until he told that he perhaps entered a warm bath, and came out of it already healthy.
And it is, that it be taken from the juice of the green, and if the green is not found, let the dry recent one be taken, and let much of it be rubbed with some fat, and put on the hip, where there is pain, or the leg, or in the hip, and let it be tied, and left for the quantity of three hours, or as long as he feels a weakening of the sensation of burning. Then put him into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes very sweaty, put him into the sun. For the pain returns, and is healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use a cauterization with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that the dung of capers, when with it the vein of the thigh is cauterized, is of service to it: and makes a cauterization in this manner. Let wool be taken and soaked in old oil, and put on the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot, and the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take dry dung of a goat and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then put it on a cloth and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat it. Do not cease to do that until the sensation is felt up to the knee and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the cauterization of the cow.
Of the cauterization of pain in the back.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and humid matter: and cauterization is not suitable, except in this single case, which occurs from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary therefore after the evacuation of the weak with fetid pills, and similar things, so that they are made on the back, where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the alum treatment itself, afterwards you mark with a cautery on each line five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity which comes from the tolerance of the weak by virtue of it: and let the cauterization be done with cauterized points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations, with a medial clavicular cautery, according to this method.
Of the method of cauterizing for the cure of gibbosity.
This disease often happens to small infants.
And the sign of this disease in children is: that it happens with a constriction in breathing at the time of elevation and movement: and you find on the last vertebra of the back and its knot, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When I raise that and make it a tool, then I cauterize it with a cauterizer which is a circle in this form.
And let the cauterization take hold equally over every part of the vertebrae: and if you cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cauterizer two or three lines: and let the points be close to one another.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we have said.
And beware, lest you apply the cauterizer on the hump that forms during a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing for gout and pains of the joints.
When the pains of the joints are from cold humidities that flow to whichever members of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that specifically gout.
When therefore gout caused by cold is being treated with methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then the cauterizer removes them.
And it is that you should cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauterizers: and let the cauterizer be olive-shaped.
And if you indicate that there are points on the surface of the foot, then make with the cauterizer points. Which if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and it often happens, then cauterize it on every knee with three cauterizers or four on every side, with this same cauterizer for the hip.
If however many are needed for you by this cauterizer, then cauterize it. And do not insert your hand with the cauterizer, but rather to the thickness of the skin as much.
If however pains ascend to the knees and the back: then administer what we have said from cauterization in its chapter.
What if the pains are only in the hands, then punctures around the focuses, as two lines turn.
If however there remains from pain in the fingers, then puncture them, a puncture above every knot and above the palm of the hand.
If however pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the weak from a good regime, from the reception of medicines. For if a good regime is made, and the phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God together with this cauterization.
On the method of cauterizing for Hernias.
When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the intestine descends or the navel to the testicle, and it is that which begins nearby: then it is necessary to prescribe for the weak to omit eating on their day. And let them use lenients, so that feces may descend from their belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and prescribe to him, that he hold his breath, until it comes out, or the navel or intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a cauterizing iron under the hernia above the bone of the breast, with a mark whose extremities are similar to the middle of a circle at the top of the body.
Then ignite the cauterization iron, which is of this form, until it becomes white, and throws out sparks. Then reduce the intestine or navel to its concavity. Then let the servant put his hand over the place, so that the intestine does not come out: and you have now opened between the thighs of the weak, and placed under it a pillow, and one servant over his thighs, and another over his breast who holds the hands.
Then apply the cautery on that same sign, your hand with the cautery standing upright. And hold it, until you achieve the mouth with it: or turn it with it twice, if you have not achieved it at first even to the mouth.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and it comes out through that above into weakness or gangrene, or great evil.
And know that when you do not achieve the mouth with the cautery, your operation is of no use.
And it is fitting that the cautery for infants be subtle, according to their measure.
Then treat with the remaining ointment, until it is healed.
And let him be weak, lying on his back for forty days, until the wound is sewn.
And it is fitting that you put its nourishment for the length of time of its cure, which will soothe its stomach: so that the intestine does not come out at the anus and vomiting.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a properly made bandage, and let him hold it for forty more days.
And he should be sparing of labor, and filling with food and drink, and violent voices.
For when he uses this regimen, thus will he be healed with a complete healing.
And I will speak of the cure for hernias with an incision in its own chapter.
When however hernias occur in the remaining belly, and are beginning, and it is seen that they do not increase, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let what is burned be one third of it. Then treat it, with that which we have said: and it will not increase.
And now some of the first ones have said: that a hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with a cautery, and a line is applied along the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line is applied to the lower part. And put your hand in the middle with the cautery on the clavicle.
But the first cautery is easiest and best.
On the method of applying a cautery for pains caused by a fall or a blow.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in certain members from a fall or a blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines is of no benefit, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery of each member be a second cautery according to its size, and its smallness, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twisting and pain from it.
If therefore it is healed by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then repeat over the same place with a cautery.
For it is a custom of these pains that they change from one member to the one that is nearest to it. Wherefore it is necessary to follow them with a cautery until the weak part is healed.
On the method of applying a cautery for leprosy.
The leprous are sometimes helped by a very large cautery. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the corruption of phlegm and melancholy: when therefore you use a cautery to treat it.
If therefore the leprosy is beginning, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it does not decrease, nor does it stop: and you apply on top of the weak part that comprehends the corruption over the entire complexion of it: then apply a cautery to him on the head with five cauteries: one on the middle knot of the head, and a second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally put your hand with the cautery briefly, until it impresses a small impression on the mouth, and the cortices will be dislocated from it: so that the expiration of gross vapors is eased from it, and cauterize with the cautery also over the spleen itself, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the weak part, and appears manifestly: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauterizations, which we mentioned in the head, and cauterize over the end of the nose, and with two cauterizations over the two jaws, and with two cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck, and six over the vertebrae of the back, and one large one over the bone near the base of the tail and one over it, in the same almeidati: and two over the hips: namely one over each hip, and two over the knees: one over each knee, and two over the shoulders, and two over the elbows, and two over the tendernesses of his chest: and cauterize it over every joint, of the joints of the fingers of his hands and his feet: and cauterize over every heel of his feet, and the soles of his hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the heel, that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the chest, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater is the help, and the more beneficial it is.
And know that the weak person does not find pain in the cautery, as the healthy ones do: because his body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations be of a size, and smallness according to the limbs and joints: according to what has preceded regarding the types of irons.
Then treat with a cauterization made from the powder of the herb with honey, and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in a stupor.
When any member is in a stupor, and is treated with medicines, and oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then cauterize the stupified member with cauterizations, according to what the size of the member merits or its smallness.
And let your cauterization be shallow into the thickness of the skin for a little while. Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
And when cauterization is applied for a stupor that occurs to the hand and foot, in the vertebrae of the back at the exit of the nerves which move that member: and the stupor is removed.
But truly let no one presume upon it, except he who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves moving the body.
Chapter 51.
When Barbers becomes chronic and nothing helps it from the resources of medicine: then cauterize on it with a deep cauterization for a little while, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then treat it with the powder of the herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and pigeon's blood, and hyrundin's blood: let one part be of each: mix all these things, and apply them to a cloth, and stick to the place, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning and you want to restrain it: then cauterize it with a circular cauterization around its circumference, as it revolves.
Wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
It does not seem to me, for I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that happen many times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle, as we have said, or with many cauteries.
On the method of cauterizing in those who are bald.
When someone has alopecia and it is slow to mature, either because of excessive flux causing it, or because of the weakness of old age, when he is decrepit and has little blood, or because of time and the need to hasten the maturation of alopecia, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, puncturing many times. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten the maturation by itself.
If you want to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, which is of this form.
And place it in the middle of the alopecia, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be from that which follows, weak, so that the flow of pus may be alleviated.
Then treat it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for a corrosive evil.
Chapter 54.
A corrosive is nothing but a corruption in a member that spreads, and it gnaws away the member itself: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate a cautery with fire, then prepare many cauteries, small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it on every side until you eradicate the entire corruption, and none of it remains in any way.
Then diminish it for three days, and apply over the cauterized location burnt sulphur with oil, until all eschars are eradicated, and all corruption.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days healthy flesh is born without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization over that which remains from the corrupted places.
The corroding is treated whenever with sharp medicine. It itself arises in place of the cautery.
But indeed the cautery with fire is of swifter cure: and I have already spoken of its cauterization with sharp medicine in division: therefore take it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing in pimples and warts.
Chapter 55.
It often happens in the lower parts of the feet this disease: and it is a coarse, foul thing, which harms the foot.
And the cautery indeed for them is in two ways: the cautery with fire, and the cautery with hot water.
As for that with fire, it is like a hollow cautery similar to a feather of a vulture: which is made from iron, according to the quantity that the nail contains on all sides: and let it be subtle in its margins.
Then apply it ignited over the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail: and diminish it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then plaster it with woodland marshes, pounded with salt: and diminish the plaster over it at night. For it will be eradicated from its own roots.
Then treat the place with a generating ointment of flesh, until it is healed.
What if they are not turned and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then you will administer to them a cautery with hot water: and it is, that you take a small tube made of bronze, or iron, or of a bird's quill: and put it on the nail, or the outer skin. Then throw into the tube a small quantity of hot water: hold your hand, and you turn it with compression of your hand for a short time, so that the margin of the tube is imprinted on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the weak one wait for a while on the biting of the hot water for one hour.
Then dispatch it, for the nail is eradicated with its roots.
Do this with them one after another, until you come to all of them that are on the body.
Then treat them after they have been eradicated, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing for Tremors.
When Tremors occur to someone from cold in a nerve, or from quartan fever, or something else: then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and between all the vertebrae a cautery, and on his chest a cautery, and above his stomach a cautery.
For Tremors are quieted with an oily cautery, and hasten the health of cold ague.
On the method of cauterizing for the Albahtir (possibly a disease or condition).
Chapter 57.
When foul Albahtir are expelled from the body, that is, pimples, which are made from corrupted thick materials.
It is necessary therefore in the beginning when they appear, that the pustules on the entire head be cauterized with a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, whose extremities have been ignited with fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cauterizer.
And when they are cauterized with a small point, at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method: and it does not increase: and the surplus is disrupted making them, and it heals from them.
Nevertheless it is necessary that it be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
It often happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut near a wound, which happens externally, or at the time of an incision of an aposteme, or of a cauterization of a limb, and similar things to these: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When therefore it happens to anyone, then quickly with your hand to the mouth of the artery, and put on it your index finger: and press it strongly, until the blood is blocked under your finger, and does not go out from it at all.
Then put on the fire small olive cauterizers, and a large number of them: and blow upon them, until they are strongly ignited.
Then take from them one, or a small one, or a large one, according to the wound and the place, in which the artery is disrupted, and put the cauterizer on the vein itself, after which you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cauterizer, until the blood is stopped.
Which if it is expelled when the finger is lifted from the mouth of the artery, and the cauterizer is extinguished, then take another cauterizer quickly, from the cauterizers which are prepared in the fire.
You must not stop doing that one thing after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you confuse the nerve that is there, and the injury falls upon a weaker part.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to cut it off: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends are contracted, and the blood is cut off. Or let it be tied with a strong thread of ligation. Or let medicines of the proper nature be applied to it, which are to cut off blood, and let it be tied with a dressing of suitable constriction.
He who administers the cutting off of it with a ligature, and a dressing with a bandage, or an application of burning things, and similar, does not benefit him thoroughly, except rarely.
If it happens to anyone, and there is not a doctor present to him, nor medicine: then let him begin with the application of the index finger on the opening of the vein itself, as we have narrated, and a strong constriction of it, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger is not removed from upon it, but rather with cold water of vehement coldness always, until the blood congeals, and coagulates, and is cut off.
And meanwhile let him consider what it needs from a cautery, or from medicine.
Of Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
We have stated in the first chapter, all inflammation in which it is suitable to use with fire a cauterization and burning medicine, and its occasions, its causes, and its instruments, and forms of cauterizations.
And I have placed chapters from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter with the same method: so that the searched-for thing is alleviated regarding the thing being searched for.
And before I begin that, it is necessary that you learn, O sons, that in this chapter is from the fear of what is in the first chapter concerning cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary that caution be more vehement, since in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, by which life stands at the aperture of a vein, or incision over an aposteme, or aperture of an exit, or cure of an ulcer, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which are associated trembling, and fear, and death often occurs in many of them.
And I warn you, that there not befall you that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes men of a certain kind fall to men of a certain kind with modes of infirmities. For there is one who becomes angry with his own illness, and death is light to him: on account of the vehemence of what he finds from his infirmity and the length of his suffering. And the illness is from fear which signifies death.
And there is one who gives his physician, and says to you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is pernicious.
Therefore, it is not necessary that you agree to him who comes to you of this kind. And let your caution be more vehement than your greed and rapaciousness. And do not assume anything from it, unless after certain knowledge, which proves to you that which leads to praiseworthy success.
And that you use judgment in the cure of all your weaknesses, and the prediction and indication of that to which health is most conveniently suited.
For in it is your aid for acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His intellect, and may He not withhold from you guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck down to the feet: so that may be alleviated for you what you want from it, and what you need.
On the cure of water that gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter One.
Know that this weakness often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife pulls the head of the child with excessive force.
And it also happens sometimes from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I have indeed not seen this sickness in others than in children: and for every one of them whom I saw, death came quickly: therefore it seemed to me that it was wise to desist from the operation on it.
And I have indeed seen one of them, a child, whose head was filled with water, and the head was increasing in size every day, until he could not sit up by himself, because of the size of his head: and the moisture kept increasing, until he died.
And this moisture indeed either gathers between the skin and the bone, or gathers under the bone above the periosteum.
And the operation on it, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a single incision in the middle of the head, in width: and let the length of the incision be about two knots, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the form of a spatula.
If then the humidity is greatly increased and the aposteme is greater, then put two fissures in accordance with this form.
And if the humidity is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the skull open on all sides, and water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand to the interior, and it is not hidden from you: then it is necessary that you make three fissures in the middle of the skull, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the humidity. Then tighten the fissures with bandages and poultices. Then anoint it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then undo the ligature, and cure the wound with dressings and ointments.
And do not cease to bind the head with evenness. And feed the weak person all dry food of little humidity, until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is that you consider where the greatness of the aposteme appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or on one side, or to the right, or to the left.
Go up therefore with the incision where it appears to you that the aposteme and collection of water are, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And beware lest you cut the artery, and there occurs a flow of blood, and the weak person dies from that flow with an evacuation of humidity.
Concerning the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter Two.
When there occur to someone catarrhs to the eyes, or to the chest, and that is aged, and the cure of medicines does not help: then the greatest cure is in that, the incision of these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when one wishes to make an incision on them, that the weak head should be shaved. Then rub the place with a coarse cloth, so that the arteries appear. Then let the weak one constrict his neck, with any cloth of his. Then consider where the vein beats. And the places of both are places which are behind the ears depressed: and is rarely hidden, except in certain men.
Then mark with a branding iron above both: and let an incision be made on both sides with a sharp instrument, the incision extending to the mouth: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, introduce the instrument under the artery, and make an incision upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers joined.
For when the vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps to the inside with a frequent leap.
If however the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers. Then mark with a branding iron, and extend to the mouth.
And what is necessary to emit from the blood, is six ounces and perhaps you emit more or less from it. All that according to the quantity which appears to you from the virtue of the weak one and the fullness of his artery.
Then consider the ulcer. Then if something remains at the mouth from the flow, then cut it, so that hot aposteme does not occur: then constrict the ulcer with ligatures made from linen cloth.
Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter Three.
When an old headache occurs to a man, or sharp catarrh because of acidic moistures and heat in the temples, or an old abscess, and similar things: and it is treated with modes of curative medicine, and it does not work: then we are experienced in these diseases in the extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the method of operation in extracting them, is that the weak [operator] should shave the hairs which are on the temples, and direct it to the apparent artery in the temple. It itself shows you from its own pulse, and is rarely hidden except in few men, or by the forgetfulness of cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the weak one should bind his head with any bandage of his: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or fumigate the place with warm water, until it appears to you with a clear appearance. Then take the spatula, which I formed a little before. Then scratch the skin with it with ease, until you reach the artery. Then throw into it a hook, and pull it upwards, until you pull it out of the skin, and make it protrude from the tunics that are under it on every side.
If the artery is slender, then envelop it with the extremity of the hook. Then cut from it a part according to the quantity by which its extremities stretch and contract, and there does not occur a flow of blood. For if it is not cut, and if it is not severed, the blood does not ascend inwardly.
Then let out from the blood a sixth of an ounce, up to three.
If the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double thread, strong, of silk: or of Alhohod cord, so that putrefaction does not come to it before consolidation of the wound, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then cut away the redundancy which is between the two ligaments. Do that at that hour or after another hour.
And if you use it, cauterize it with a cauterizing iron to the mouth, with a razor-shaped cauterizer, until its extremities are cut and it stands in the place of the same operation.
And it is a better work, unless the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion. For the cauterizer is one of those things which help to end moistures. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And after the extraction of the arteries, the place should be filled with old cotton, and powders properly made should be placed on it.
And after the healing, it should be treated with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with bandages, until it is healed.
What if meanwhile while you are operating there occurs a flow of blood from the artery, then hasten to cut it with a cauterizer, or to fill the place with cotton, and constrict your hand until the blood is stopped. What if none of those things are at hand, then place your finger over the spot until the blood coagulates. And moisten the spot with water of vehement cold, until the acute pain subsides, and is constricted according to what is necessary.
And from that which is lighter and easier than the extraction of an artery, it is to cauterize a vein with this cauterizer having two razor-like edges, and let the sharpness be similar to the file of a double-edged instrument. However they are much less sharp than two razor-like edges. For if they are sharp like two razor-like edges, the flesh hastens to become cold, and they do not cut with swiftness. When there is some thickness in them, heat of fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: when this work is done it is better than any work, and lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
And let the space that is between two cauteries be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with cauterization: and apply both heated irons until they reach the mouth, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between the extremities will be pulled out. For they are not consolidated with this cauterization thoroughly.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of a flow of tears that flows constantly from the eyes.
When there are constant tears and there is a flow of them from the veins that are on the outside above the skull of the head: and no treatment with medicine or medicines helps them, and you see the face of the weak already reddened, and he feels in his forehead a crawling, as is the crawling of ants: and his eyes are strained, moist, so that already the lashes have been eaten away by corrosion: and his eyelids have been heated up from the sharpness of tears: then the ancients discovered this operation for their treatment, and they called it treatment with Ense.
And it is that you should instruct the weak person to shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then cut three equally distant fissures in the forehead according to its length: and let the length of the fissure be about two fingers, and one fissure be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second following the length a little from the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries that are in both sides: and stretch out your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all incision be the quantity of three joined fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge, or many dried cloths, with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert a sharp spatula between the two extremities, whose next mole is in the form. From the incision which is on the temporal side, up to the second incision: and excise with it all the skin, which is between the two incisions, with the sifac, which is above the mouth. Then do that also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this spatula, and insert into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp cultellum, sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And put its sharp side towards the flesh joined with the skin, and its blunt side towards the mouth: and drive it, until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all the vessels, which descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues up to that which appears of the skin.
Then do that in the middle fissure up to the other fissure.
And after a quantity of blood has flowed out equal, press out the places from clots of coagulated blood.
Then put in all the fissures a dressing from old cloth, and put over them poultices soaked in wine, and oil, or vinegar. And see that a hot aposteme does not occur.
And on the third day loosen the ligament, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat it with royal ointment, and other things which are used to treat wounds: until it heals.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of sharp tears and discharges from the eyes from the interiors of the head.
When sharp and bitter catarrhs occur to someone, and you see their eyes weakened, pale, and already their sight is debilitated: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and in the depth of the head there is sharp pain, aching, and consequent sneezing: then take from these accidents, that those matters and catarrhs do not come, except from many veins.
And better treatment in them is this. And it is that you should order the weak to scratch their own forehead. Then cut in it a single fissure in the middle of the forehead, or another one across the width, and start with the fissure from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the bone: and stretch out your hand from the muscles of the temples, which move during mastication: until when the bone is laid bare: and you will dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a cloth of old fabric, or with a linen thread. Then bind from above with small balls: and soak the small balls with wine and oil, so that no hot aposteme occurs.
And when you loosen it, and you see that the hot aposteme has already diminished: then it is necessary to rub the bone, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then treat it with an excitative regimen that makes flesh grow: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare from them a plaster, and administer to the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
On the treatment of that which falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or similar to a stone, such as iron and vitriol: or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans: or it is a fluxible thing, such as water and vinegar, and things similar to them: or some animal.
When therefore a stone or a kind of stone falls into the ear from those that do not adhere nor grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun: if therefore you see the stone, then drip into the ear something of violet oil, or of sisamum. Then administer the extraction of it, and make sneeze with clysters, and stop the nostrils at the approach of sneezing, after you put in the circle of the ears pieces of cloth, or wool, and stretch the ear upwards.
For it often comes out with this treatment.
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction of it with Gestum, that is, finely ground Pizigarolis: whose form is this.
If therefore it comes out with gestum, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a finely ground hook of a small double quantity.
If therefore it does not come out through that, then make a tube from bronze, and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear deeply, and block what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there is no passage except for the tube: then extract with your forced blowing attraction.
For it often comes out with what we have described. If it does not come out in this manner: then take a small amount of helkalimbat, or of uisco, that is, prepared glue, with which birds are caught, and put it at the end of the style after you have wrapped around it a cloth decently positioned: then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, after you have cleaned the ear from humidity.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have described, then proceed to cut, before there occurs a warm aposteme, or spasm.
And the manner of cutting is, like a phlebotomy of the weak in the beginning in the head: and let out from it blood according to the measure of its virtue. Then make the weak one sit between your hands, and turn its ear upwards, and find a small cut in the root of the ear at its fat in the depressed place itself: and let the cut be of a lunar figure, until you reach the stone: then remove it with what is possible for you from instruments.
Then heal the fissure from your hour with speed and cure it until it is healed.
What if a thing falls into the ear is one of the grains which grow and become inflamed then administer its extraction.
If it does not come out for you at the exit, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this form.
And administer with it the cutting off of that species of grains which fall into the ear and do not do that when you think that grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear until you put many a poultice: then extract them with forceps or with a subtle instrument or with suction as we have said for its extraction will be alleviated.
In the water which enters into the ear, it is necessary that he use a weak snorting with condiments at first: and now his ear has been filled with some old cotyle: and it lies on that ear in which there is water. If then it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, gentle, and warm them with fire for a little while, and let him put one of them into the opening of his ear: and let him step on one of them with his foot from that side, and strike with another stone above the stone which is in the ear. He should not therefore cease to do that with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out thus, that you take from a pomegranate or from a juniper one, and put one end of it into the ear: and burn the other end with fire until most of it is consumed. Then take another juniper and do that many times until all the water comes out: and extract it with a tube according to what was previously said regarding the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is of small body, such as a flea, and its like, treat it as I have said in the division.
But if it is of large body, which appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks: and its affair is easier than all those that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment does not work: then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun. If, therefore, anything appears there of worms, then extract it with forceps, or with subtle hooks.
If, however, nothing appears there, then take a cannula, whose shape is this, narrow below, wide above: and introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the weak part tolerates: then suck with a strong suction. Do it many times, until all the worms come out.
If, however, they do not obey you to come out, then stop up the ends of the cannula with wax, as I have said concerning the stone.
What if they do not come out with what we have said: then administer the distillations which the ancients have already experienced in the affliction of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your pouring be what you pour in oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver, or of copper, narrow below, in which there is a small hole, wide above.
Let it be so that the thing which is in the concavity of the cannula, is made from copper, turned on a lathe. And if you use it, take a rod, and anoint the extremity of it with cotton of a suitable anointing: then pour oil, or juice, or what you wish of these medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then introduce the rod with the cotton on top, and express it by your hand with tempered compression, until the oil is poured into the concavity of the hearing, and the weak part feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear, let it be previously warmed with fire for a little while: and beware lest there be something that is distilled in the cold valve: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of an injury to the ear.
Sometimes infants come out of their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it has already happened to some men that an obstruction occurred in the passage of the ear from a wound or flesh born in it.
And this obstruction is sometimes made in the deep hole of the ear, which sight does not reach: and sometimes it happens at the outer part of the hole, and sight reaches it.
The one, therefore, that happens in the deep ear, and which sight does not comprehend, is in many cases difficult to cure.
And in the one that sight reaches, it is necessary to put the ear of the infirm person in the sun, and look at it: then if you see the apparent obstruction, open it with a spatulum subtle, whose form is this which follows, let its extremity be where there is some little width, whose part is acute: and let the rest of the spatulum be smooth on both sides: so that it does not harm the ear.
If the obstruction is flesh born in the ear's passage, then hold it with a subtle hook, and cut it with a vehement facility, until all the flesh is removed.
What if the obstruction is in the deep ear: then take a subtle and smooth rod, and heat it with fire for a little while: then put it into the ear's passage.
If you feel the obstruction with this, that the infirm person meets with heaviness of hearing, try to open it with facility: and beware, lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put in the ear a plug according to the quantity of the width of the hole, which you wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for some days, until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Take a piece of linen cloth, and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered sugar over it.
If you see that the abscess has already formed a postule, then it is necessary to extract the linen cloth, and let it out with another cloth, which you will have wrapped in cotton soaked in rose oil, until the hot aposteme subsides: then cure it until it heals.
And if a flow of blood happens: then submerge a sponge or cloths in cold water and put them on the ear: and use the remaining treatment that stops the flow of blood as described in the chapter on distillations.
Of the treatment for ulcers of the eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These are the ulcers that occur on the eyelids of the eye, when they are moist and when they are dry.
It is necessary therefore to pull them with forceps, or with a hook, and to cut them with scissors from their roots. Then put powdered sugar on the places.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lancet.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the treatment for pimples of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
It often happens on the eyelids something that resembles a nut in its hardness and density, and because of this it is called a pimple: and it is a collection of thick humidity on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
The operation for them is therefore to consider then if it is a pimple that proceeds from what appears on the eyelid and moves to every part, and its treatment is easy.
Find then an incision above it in width. Then scratch it on every side with ease, until it is hollowed out. Then hang it with a hook, and cut it off.
If however the cutting away of it is not prepared for you, unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it will harm the weak one in something.
What if the incision is large: then bring it together with a suture: and treat it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no evil will come to you from it. For an ointment restores it and fleshes it over.
And if a gland is inclined towards the interior of the ear turned to the inner surface, then turn the eyelid, and hang the gland with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it from every side.
What if the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, it does not harm it in anything.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the gland with salt water: and treat the place with that which fleshes it over, until the weak one is healed.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a tumor that forms in the upper eyelids: and it most often happens to children: and it weighs on their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears rush to them, and on account of this you see them rub their faces constantly, and they sleep with them, and their eyelids are moist under the eyebrows, which an inflammation has already covered: and a visible bulge of Axirnath appears to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.
And the method of its operation is that the weak person puts his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare on it ligatures, and make from that ligature a circle according to the quantity that the Achilles contains on all sides. Then put it above it, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Achilles gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that humidity with a spatula making an incision through the width, and let the incision not be greater than what is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you make a cut through the entire skin, until you reach the Achilles, for in many dispositions the Achilles proceeds from an incision according to the form of a fragment of white fat.
Extract it therefore with the cloth that you had placed between your fingers on the outside, and you move your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed, and beware lest you add to the incision, so that you do not penetrate with the spatula to the eye and harm it.
If however the Achilles does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you add a little to the incision with ease, until the Achilles proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and put them on the place, and bind it with bandages.
And there are men who apply salt, and put it in the cavity of the incision, so that it dissolves what remains of that humidity.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however a hot abscess occurs in the place, then treat it with cooling plasters, until it is healed.
On the ways of relaxing the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes softened, whence it happens that it protrudes as it should not.
Chapter 11.
When hairs grow in the eyelids of the eye besides the normal course of hairs, and become long: then they harm the eye, and cause various ailments, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and a white spot, until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eye.
And the cataract of the eye is treated in four ways. Either by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or cataract is treated by incision and suture. Or with a needle, as I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the afflicted person on your lap. Then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is thus turned back, it is good. And if not: introduce the needle into it, where the thread is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it back with the needle.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid under the additional hairs with the spatula inserting from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.
Then extract the thread, and put under the eyelid a small cotton pad from a cloth or a pouch: then mark above the eyelid with cauterization, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Truly it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: because it is already diversified in men.
For there are some who require that a large quantity be cut from the eyelid, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find above the two lines that you marked, and start from the larger tear to the smaller tear, and let there be one incision near the natural hairs, as is the thickness of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape out the whole thing. Then bring together with a suture the two lips, with a needle and thread of fine wool: and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what overflows from the threads above the two eyebrows, with certain things that cause scar formation, if you want to do that: and if not, do not trouble.
Then leave the suture and threads until three days, or four: afterwards attend to it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and treat it with that which dries and tightens. For the eyelid is elevated at the time of the wound's inflammation and its aggregation: but the future will be better.
This method of treating, the ancient ones taught Ataxmir.
But truly in it is solicitude for the weak, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method exists also in Ataxmir: and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate hooks, or joined ones, according to this shape which follows, then cut away what is excess with small forceps, according to this shape, with equality of incision.
If however it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not equal that: then take a needle in which there is a thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the larger tear, and a second thread near the smaller tear: and bring together between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then elevate your hand to an equal elevation and elevate the cut above which the scar is marked, as we have narrated.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and cure it, until it heals.
If a tumor or an aposteme occurs at your incision or your fissure: but apply that aposteme with a plaster, and similar things, from sitting ointments.
And when it happens to the eyelids also, so that their hairs are converted.
It is necessary therefore that you use what we have said in the incision: but the suture of both is more artificial. On the treatment of Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is, that you convert the eyelid, and split the fissure which is within, according to what I have narrated. Then skillfully make two rods, or two thin sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them is less than the width of a spatula: and you have already made an incision at the extremities of both from both parts where you hold the threads.
Then bring together both with subtlety above that which overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and bind two rods from both parts with a strong bandage, and leave it there for some days. For the skin will be constricted and will become black and will rot, until it falls off by itself.
If then it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then cure it, until it heals.
When therefore it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated: and the hairs do not protrude.
And this is the shape of the two rods, which you will make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
Chapter Twelve.
On the elevation of protruding hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation on it is that you take a sharp needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, thin. Then you gather its ends and tie each knot with a subtle knot, and the length of the threads is one palm.
Then you put on the Alinxotati another subtle thread under that briefly, and tie its ends if you wish.
Then the weak person puts his head in your lap, and it should be near the sun as the operation is declared: since it is a subtle operation, or a minute one.
Then you insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you extract from above a natural hair.
Then you pull the hair up to the thread of the Alinxotati: and insert into the Alinxotati that hair: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then you pull your hand with it, until the hair goes out with the Alinxotati from the eyelid with the natural hair.
If the Alinxotati is pulled and the hair does not go out with it: you pull the Alinxotati downwards, with the thread that you put in it, until the Alinxotati goes out from the upper hole, and you see it with the sight of the eye: then you pull the Alinxotati, and the thread: and extract both, and close the eye: and keep it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh is born over it.
What if the hair is short, then either associate to it a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that: or leave it until it grows after a space, and then lift it.
Chapter 13.
When this condition occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina or Alxatrati disease of the eye.
And this Alxatrati disease is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of treatment for it is that you find the consolidation and separate its lips and put between them a linen pad and tie it until it heals.
And it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict, for if you do that, the Alxatrati returns worse than it was; instead use in it things that soften, such as fenugreek: and apply with water, in which cooked althea, flaxseed, and an ointment dyaquilon, which is melted with some oil: and anoint with it a linen pad, and treat with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you strive with all ingenuity, so that it does not consolidate, according to the shape it had initially.
And this operation that we mentioned is not other than a kind of correction of the Alxatrati, so that the shape of the place does not return according to what it was entirely.
On the treatment of Alxatrati that occurs on the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This Alxatrati that occurs below is the one that is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a tear, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operation for it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and you insert it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread passes through both extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with a needle, and cut it with a spatula on the side. If then the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is proper, it is good.
And if not, take a needle, and put it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two fissures be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and an angle is formed: until when they are gathered this figure is formed, and it is the letter lauda in Greek.
Then remove that flesh to the amount, which is the sharp lower side of it, from that which follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: sew them with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with what we have spoken of, concerning softening medicines and plasters, until they heal.
And if there is a falling away of the eyelid from the fissure, and the suture, or the cauterization: then it is necessary that you find a flat fissure under the hair of the eyelids, also according to what has preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a plaster, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the speech concerning the treatment of the eyelid, when it is above or below, is that it runs on this operation, according to what is prepared from the form of the eyelid.
For it itself is of many diversities in form: and the skilled artisan prepares his device with whatever mode is possible for him, so that he makes it return to the natural figure, or near to it, and the infirmity itself, according to what is convenient for him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with the conjunctiva, or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many men, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prohibits it from its natural operations.
Therefore you should insert the extremity of the needle under the eyelid and elevate it upwards; or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp in its incision, but rather dull for a short time: so that the weak eye is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is moved and hurts the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you excise the adhesion with facility, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Pour then into the eye salty water, with water wash it: or distill into it from a sieve made of dissolved zinc with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a thread of flax: and put over the eye a woolen cloth soaked in the white of the egg: and after the third day use a sieve, and with poultices, until it is healed.
On the incision of the nail and elevation of the flesh of the tear ducts.
Chapter 16.
Know that the nail is according to two modes. Or it is nerve-like: and is similar to a thin, subtle splinter. Or it is not nerve-like, similar to the humidity of frozen white matter: which when it touches iron, or a hook is used to seize it with a hook, it is cut off, and the hook does not stick into it.
And both types do not begin except from the greater tear duct, whence it proceeds gradually, until it covers the use of it, and prohibits the light and motion of the eye.
And the method of operating on it is: that the weak person should place their head in your lap. Then open their eyes, and elevate the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with the pincers of a pair of forceps, and extend it to the upper parts. Then take a needle, and insert into it a thread from the hairs of a horse, and cow, or goat: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a short while, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it to the upper parts: and scratch the side of the nail which follows the pupil, as if you were to sew it with the thread up to its posterior.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula, or with small forceps: and remove the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that there does not occur from the cutting a constant flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended with pincers alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scratch with a blunt spatula, whose shape is this.
And beware, lest the spatula touch the corneal layer, and there occur a rupture in it, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the cutting, throw into the eye some ground salt, or a compound made from zinc, and let it remain there until another day. Then treat it with what is necessary, until it is healed.
For if the nail is not nerveless, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a pincer be fixed in it, then this type of nail is often treated with medicines, and healed as I have described in the section.
For if you intend to cut it, then open the eye of the weak person, and take a subtle, thin, delicate spatula, with a sharp edge, according to this shape. And scratch the nail from above with subtle scraping. What if you see that it itself becomes rarefied and crushed, and the scraping is imprinted on it, then distill from your hour, into the eye, either a decoction made from lily or from red lead, or from triticated salt: and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation over it, until all of it is removed. Unless there is a hot abscess in your eye to the contrary: then cease that, and cure the abscess, until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation over it with scraping, until it is healed.
The flesh of the tear duct, if it harms the eye with great annoyance, should be suspended with a hook, and a portion of it cut away: and do not make the last cut, so that the flow of tears does not happen.
Then pour into the tear duct either red lead or made from verdigris, until it is healed.
Of the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
There is born in certain eyes of men a red flesh, composed or overlaid, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it is similar to the rose called balas ruby.
And the operation for this also is, that the weak one places his head on your lap. Then open his eyes, and collect all that flesh with hooks suitable for that: and hold it with one forceps or tongs.
Then cut the flesh first, until the whole of it is ended with cutting. And beware of the eye, so that you do not harm it during operation: and let your cutting be with which you cut it, or with a spatula, which we have described in the cutting of the nail: or with small forceps, with which the asphodel is collected, according to what will appear after this chapter.
When the incision is complete and the entire white cataract is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt or pour into it red powder, and similar things from corrosive medicines, and put on top of the eye a plaster made from the whites of eggs to secure it from the hot aposteme.
What if there remains something of the cataract and hot blood dominates you, and a hot aposteme is coming on: then leave the eye, and cure it with what settles the aposteme.
Then repeat over it the treatment until it is healed.
And do similarly with the flesh that grows in the eye from this condition.
Truly it is necessary that you should omit the cure of every weak eye from natural or accidental damage, by operating with iron: and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
Of the collection of pus in the eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus are red veins that gather over the eye and prevent the sight from performing its function, and weaken the eye with the passage of time.
It is necessary therefore for you first to consider if the eye in which there is pus is strong and does not have any illness in it except for the pus: then collect its pus.
And it is that you should order the weak person to put their head on your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook or two according to your judgment and let the hook be subtle and double-edged, according to this shape, or let there be two hooks graduated on one body, according to this shape.
Then collect those veins with subtle forceps with subtlety and wipe away the blood hour after hour until you see those veins removed from the eye and resolved and beware lest you harm the eye with the extremities of the spatula.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and you should be strong in your operation indeed: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have cleansed, then distill into the eye either a green or red substance: so that its sharpness wears away what remains of the cataract.
If however it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for some days, until its pain has subsided: and it is secure from a hot abscess: then repeat over it again according to the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
On the reduction of the nasal fracture.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call it Arissat's fistula, which you will treat with a cautery, or with a sharp burning medicine, according to what its description has previously stated.
And if it does not heal, then there is no ingenuity in it: except that you find a collection of pus at the birth of it, and extract all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.
When therefore the bone is exposed, and you see in it a rottenness or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument, whose form is this.
And it is called the head of the scraper.
Let it be made from Indian iron, and let its head be round like a grindstone, which should be punctuated with the punctuation of a file, or the punctuation of a fine awl: and put it on the corrupted place of the bone.
Then rub it between your fingers, and you press your hand for a little while, until you know that the corruption has already been scraped: and do that several times.
Then restore the place with medicines that are astringent and caustic.
If then the place is consolidated, and flesh is born in it, and the flow of blood is stopped: and it remains for forty days, and is not renewed, and is not burst, and no accident happens to it: then you should know that it is already healed.
And if not, then there is no ingenuity in it, except to reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this method.
And it is, that you scrape the bone with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is scraped, then take an instrument according to this method, let it be a metal extremity, triangular: and its wood be a pyramid extended to the extremity, as you see.
Then put that on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and stretch out your hand a little from the eye. Then turn your hand with the instrument, until it penetrates the bone, and the weak one feels it: by which he finds the breath coming out of it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
Then restore the place with medicines that dry and tighten, as I have taught you.
When then flesh is born, and the place becomes hardened: then the matter that was flowing to the outside, returns to the nose: therefore it is easier on the weak one.
On the reduction of the protrusion of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the Eye protrudes with its entirety, and there is no damage to the sight, nor diminishment: then it is necessary that you release the weak one: then you phlebotomize him: afterwards you put cups on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then put on the Eye an ointment that is made from gum acacia, and aloe, and galbanum, and myrrh. Then tie a bandage over the eye with many poultices on top.
And the method of poultices is that you take many soft cloths and double each cloth four times: make many of them: then put them one on top of another, a second according to the quantity which the eye needs: then tie over them with a hard cloth tightly.
And repeat the applications with suction without scarification.
Then remove the applications, and bind the eye tightly by day and night.
If however the bandage is again softened, then it is necessary that it be tied tightly: then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye already returned to its own coat, it is good: and if not, then repeat the plaster, and poultices, and bandage, and applications, until it is healed.
On the incision of the conjunctiva.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the conjunctiva, then it protrudes and comes out from between the eyelids like a grain of the eye, and the shape of the man is disfigured because of that, and there is need to cut it: then the operation on it is, according to what I relate: and it is, that you insert a needle in the root of the conjunctiva from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread on the tear side, and make it penetrate: and leave the first needle according to its own position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the conjunctiva around the needle: and tie it tightly.
Then pull out the needle, and put over the eye a woolen cloth on the white of the eye: and leave it, until the thread falls away with the conjunctiva.
Then treat the eye with what comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And when the wound is constricted on every side with a circle of cloth, until the eye adds great prominence.
Then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula, which penetrates to the depth of the eye, and the white moisture flows out, and the eye sinks down, and immediately enters: then constrict it, until it is healed.
On the treatment of cataract.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called Alcomnati, is nothing but a humor, that accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is, that you make the weak patient sit on a prepared seat, or a directed one.
Then take the head of it with your hands on both sides, and move it, until you see the cataract pass to the lower parts of the eye. Then it is fixed, and does not come down, and the light is freed: and the weak person sees things as he used to see: and if it does not come down below, know that it is water.
If however the descent of the cataract is not prepared with what we have said, then make the weak person sit between your hands. Then take a subtle spatula, and press with it above the corneal membrane a little at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the corona, until the cataract comes out.
When it comes out, then distill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey: then let it be treated with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have spoken of the types of waters in their division, and those that are suitable for perforation, as the discourse declares and sets forth, then take that same thing according to health.
Then therefore it is necessary that you make the weak one sit between your hands square, opposite to the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye, and hold it strongly: then touch the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then take with your right hand the cataract needle, if the eye is the left one: or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then place the point of the needle near the corona through the thickness of the radius on the white of the eye apparent at the lesser lacrimal corner: then push the needle with strength: and you withdraw your hand with it, until it penetrates into the white of the eye: and you feel that the needle has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the length of the journey of the needle to the depth be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and this is the corona of the eye. For you will see it in the same pupil of the vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then place the needle to the place where the water is. Then press it below little by little one time after another.
If therefore the water descends at once, then the weak one sees that which is above what has opened his vision at once, and the needle in his eye.
Then rest a little. If therefore the water descends, then put it back a second time, except that the needle should come out.
When I elevate the arm, and it does not rise: then extract the arrowhead with ease: and you will free your hand little by little.
Then dissolve something from clear salt of gem in water: and wash the inflamed eye with it. Then place outside the eye a whole pledget or a cloth soaked in rose oil and white of egg: and tie it to the sound eye.
We however, and those who are of our time, put on top a mixture of ground cumin with white of egg.
What if the arrowhead does not pass into the eye for you on account of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then you should take a spatula, which is called Alberid, of this form.
Perform with it the conjunction only so much, and do not put your hand in the opening: and it is not except to make a way to the arrowhead subtle place.
Then insert the arrowhead, according to what we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the weak person a bed decently made, in which they sleep on their back in a dark house: and prohibit them from all movements, and from coughing: and put their food that which soothes their nature: and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the dressing be according to its condition until the third day.
Then undo it in that dark house, and test his vision: and make him see things. Then return to the dressing until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do that at the time of treatment, or immediately after the incision: but rather it is necessary to avoid it: because water rises quickly through violent looking.
If however a hot aposteme occurs: then it is necessary that you loosen the eye before the seventh: and straighten it with what sits on the aposteme, until it sits: then without its use, and put over its face an oral bandage which regulates its use under it for some days, it being in that dark house.
Then he should go out of the house gradually, and stay in his own houses.
And know that the disciple is not to be blamed for looking at the zltea several times: for then he will dare above the operation.
And now indeed there has come to us one of those who are from Alayrach, who said that a perforated magdan was made in Alayrach, through which water is sucked.
For I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that: nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species from the magda, so that he who is ignorant of them will stand upon them.
Let them be made from their own copper: and let their extremities be with the same subtlety triangular, and the extremities pointed.
Chapter 23.
Of the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
Sometimes there are born in the nose diverse fleshes that are added, among which is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet: and from it is a cancerous flesh, of stone, of dark color: and from it is what is a smooth flesh, not of dark color.
In that therefore which is from these fleshes and is smooth, not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary that you make the weak one sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open its nostrils, and throw a hook into those fleshes: then draw them to the outside, and cut what you have comprehended of them with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the whole flesh has already been removed.
What if there remains anything of it whose removal is not possible then rub that with one of the subtle instruments with ease until there does not remain anything of it. If however the blood dominates you, or there occurs a hot abscess, then apply to it what is suitable, or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cauterize him quickly, until the blood is cut off, and all the flesh is taken away.
Then let vinegar and water or wine be thrown into the nose after the incision. If however the nose appears and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then know that he is already healthy.
If however the moisture does not penetrate according to what is suitable, then know that there is flesh born inside it in the upper bones of the nostril, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then therefore it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen which has some thickness and knots on it many knots and put between each knot the quantity of a finger or less and let the weak one ingeniously so that he puts one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or with whatever is possible for him after he made something similar to azar and pull his mucus until it reaches the lowest part and comes out above his throat.
And many boys indeed do something similar to this in schools of Atto, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to.
Then put two ends of the thread, one end which comes out above the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then take a minister to saw the flesh with the knots that are on the thread. Do that until you know that the flesh is already caught with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread and put into the nose after wiping away the blood a dressing that you have dipped in Egyptian ointment, do that for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then put at the end of the thing a lead tube in the nose for some days until it is healed.
If however it needs a treatment which dries, use that one.
To make a head purging device, with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it out of silver or copper: which should be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for making a head purging device should be full, detected: which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat in it oil, or whatever you want from juices and flowing things.
Chapter 25.
Often a polyp grows at the end of the nose and increases and grows with time until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of that it is necessary to cauterize it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then put on the place either a cautery or a medicine that burns which takes its place.
If the cutting of it is delayed until it becomes large, then consider if it is stony, hard, of a dark color, of little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: because it is a cancerous apostema.
For I have often seen that he who cuts a cancerous apostema and because of it a great evil happens to the one who has it.
And if the apostema is of a soft touch, not dark in color, and you see that cutting all of it is possible, then evacuate the weak part, and cut it without fear, without anxiety: and treat the place with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
We should know when there occurs a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, the operation is not very reliable, except in certain men.
It is necessary therefore when anything of that sort happens to someone, that you consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then bring the lips of the wound together with a suture, and afterwards treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of the separation are already separated, and each part has become healthy, then it is necessary that you excavate every part from its own skin until it becomes bloody. Then bring the two lips together with a suture, and tie them, and powder over the blood with dragon's blood and ground frankincense, and put above the powders a piece of plaster of diafion, and one of the other consolidating plasters: and leave it tied for two days, or three. Then untie it, and change the medicine, and leave it until the threads come apart by themselves. Then treat it with ointment, until it heals.
The method of the suture is that you bring together the separation of continuity, either with needles, as we have described in the suture of the belly, or bring together the separation with a thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of knots of the lips.
Many men have occurrences of hard scabs on the insides of their lips similar to grains of a herb, and some are smaller and others larger.
Therefore it is necessary that you turn back the lip, and find above every knot of it, and suspend it with a hook, and cut into it from every side.
Then fill the place after the incision with zegi trot, until the blood is cut off.
Then let it be glued with vinegar, and the place be cured with it, in which there is a contraction, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28.
Of the incision of the flesh born above the gums.
Flesh often grows above the gum, which the ancients call abuluss.
It is necessary therefore that you suspend it with a hook: or that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the blood or serum flow.
Then put over the place zegi trot, or other powders that are astringent and excitant.
For if that flesh returns after the cure, for it often returns, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
Of the scraping of the teeth with iron.
Sometimes there gather on the surfaces of the teeth from the inner and outer part, and between the gums rough, foul, and sometimes blackened cortices, and they become yellow, and green, until corruption comes from that to the gum, and the teeth are made foul by it.
It is necessary therefore that you make the weak person sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape the molar and tooth, in which you see cortices, and things similar to sand: until nothing remains of them, and do similarly with the blackness, and greenness, and yellowness, and other things until they are clean.
If therefore that which is in them from the beginning of the scraping is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the scraping over them a second time, and a third, until the utmost effort reaches what you are using.
And you should know that the tooth requires razors of diverse forms, many figures, according to which your operation is prepared: namely, because the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors should be prepared by you, which you will use.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of toothache.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth for its pain with all ingenuity, and delay in extracting it. For it is not that its place is supplied when it is extracted: because it is a sublime substance: until when there is no excuse for extracting it, then it is necessary when the tooth is weakened to extract it, so that it may be strengthened and certified by you as a painful tooth.
For often the pain deceives the weak tooth, and it seems that it is in the adjacent tooth, and extracts it: then the pain does not cease, until the weak tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the operation of bloodletting physicians.
When therefore the painful tooth itself is certified by you, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until the gum is loosened on all sides: then move it with your fingers or with subtle forceps at first little by little, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in it with a good grip, and hold the head of the weak one between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it is not moved: then pull the tooth according to its straightness, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments, and introduce it under the tooth on all sides with ease, and constrain its movement, as you did at first.
If the dense is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a piece of cloth and tie it with a slender extremity of a radius, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction upon it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you act skillfully with scarification around the gum on all sides abundantly.
And preserve your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and it returns upon the weak part from that evil which is greater than its pain at first.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness over the eradication of it, beyond what we have administered.
For they often cause great weaknesses to come upon men, which are difficult to break, and all the roots of it remain, or some of them: or so that they extract it with certain bones of the jaw: as we have often testified to that.
Then let it be cleansed after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
What if a flow of blood happens from the places (for it often happens), then take something of gum and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if the gum does not adhere to you.
The shape of the slender forceps which moves the dense thing at first, should be of long extremities, with a short handle, thick, so that they do not double when pressed upon the tooth: they should be as you see of thick handles, until when you press with them, they do not bite themselves, nor double: of short extremities, and let them be made from iron or made decently from refined steel, with straight extremities: and in their extremities let there be teeth, which some enter into others, and press with a decent constriction, strongly.
And when there are extremities such as the form of the mouth of a bird which is called a cicatrice, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 31.
Of the eradication of teeth, and the extraction of fractured jaw bones.
When there remains upon the eradication of a tooth which breaks something, then it is necessary that you put on the spot a plaster with butter for one day or two days, until the spot softens: then introduce to it cotton threads or forceps: whose extremities are similar to the mouth of a bird which is called ciconia. The form of this is that of forceps.
Let their extremities be made like the file of teeth: or like a toothpick.
If therefore it does not yield to you for exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you cut above the root, and you remove all the flesh, and you introduce an instrument which is called a small lever, whose form is this.
Let it be of short extremity, somewhat thick: and let it not be imbued, so that it does not break.
If therefore the root goes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to help with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first is triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness.
The form of triangular extremity subtle.
And with other instruments and iron tools which were mentioned previously in the scraping of teeth.
And also let there be help with this instrument which is similar to a large hook, of this form, triangular extremity twisted, in which there is a certain thickness, so that it does not break: and let it not be imbued.
And you should know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the rest of the instruments are not counted, and the skilled artisan, subtle in his art, finds by himself the instrument, according to which he signifies the operation and the diseases themselves.
For there are diseases for which the ancients did not mention an instrument, because of the diversity of their species.
If the bone breaks from the jaw or from other bones of the mouth, or becomes putrid: then probe above it in its place with that which is suitable for it from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and help with a gesture, whose form is this.
Let there be in it something of thickness gradually, so that it may be tightened, or the bone may be held with it, and it does not flee and is stable, until the bone emerges: and restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
If however there is little putridness in the bone, then scrape the bone itself from its putridness, and cure it, until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
On the sawing of prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth do not protrude according to their natural course, a foul form is made by it: and especially when this happens in women, and girls, namely those who are vain.
It is necessary therefore that you should consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth, and does not fit in its place, or it is possible to file or smooth it: then extract it: and if it is connected to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small beak, and is made from Indian iron, of sharp extremity, strongly.
And let your cutting be that which you cut with for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that another of the teeth is not disturbed.
If it is prominent and exposed to its own lime, then the lime itself with lime from indigo, whose form is this.
Let it be all from indigo, and its handle with few points of valda, just as the lime with which needles are made: with which it is smoothed gradually over many days with ease, so that the dens is not disturbed and falls away: then smooth the lime itself in the end, and rub it with certain rasps.
What if it is a dens, from which a part breaks and injures the tongue: then it is necessary to smooth it also, until the roughness of that fracture is removed, and it is made even: and flattened, and does not injure the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
Chapter 33.
On the gold wire retention of teeth.
When there happens to the anterior teeth a concussion and commotion from a blow or fall: and the weak one cannot grasp onto what he eats so that it does not fall: and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and the treatment was of no use: then the ingenious plan for them is to bind with a gold wire: because silver becomes greenish, and putrefies after days: but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of moderate thickness and coarseness according to the quantity which it can hold between the teeth.
And the form of the retention is, that you take the wire and insert double of it between two healthy teeth: then weave with both ends of the wire between the movable teeth, whether one or several, until you come with the web to a healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving until the part from which you began: and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not moved further: and let your constriction by which you tighten the wire be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not protrude.
Then cut the superfluous filaments of the thread with the forceps, and take up both, and turn them with the tongs, and hide them between the sound tooth and the moved tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue: then let it be tightened thus while it remains.
And if it becomes loosened, or is cut, tie them with another thread, and it will stay thus for the whole time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of the retention of two sound teeth, and two moved teeth, as you see.
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their places after a fall, and are retained as we have described, and remain: and this is not done except by an artisan who is prudent and experienced.
And when something is adapted from the bones of the cheeks: and it is made into the form of a tooth, and put in the place, from which the tooth is strengthened and tied, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIII.
Sometimes the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound which has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is, that you open the mouth of the infirm person in your lap, and elevate their tongue: then cut that nervous ligament in width, until the tongue is freed from its retention.
What if in it there is something hard and knotted, and it is from the consolidation of a wound: then introduce an instrument into that, and probe it in width, until you cut the ligament, and the knot is loosened.
And beware, lest there be a fissure in the depth of the flesh, and you cut the artery there, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then let it be dressed in the wound with rose water, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then put under the tongue a plaster of flax, which will hold the weakness for all night, so that it is not consolidated by the second.
If there should be a flow of blood, then put on the place powdered zeolite. If the blood truly conquers you, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cautery, which is suitable for that: then cure it with the remainder of the cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
It sometimes happens under the tongue an apostema which resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural operation: and perhaps it grows so much, until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is, that you open the mouth of the weak person before the sun: and examine the apostema.
If you see it to be of a dark color, or black, and hard, which the weak person does not feel: then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
And if it leans to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then throw on it a poultice, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and free it from every part. What if the blood conquers you during your operation, then put on it powdered zeolite, until the blood is stanched: then return to your operation, until you extract it with its complement.
Then let it be dressed with vinegar and salt: and cure it with the remainder of the cure suitable for that, until it is healed.
On the cure of the apostema of the two tonsils.
Chapter 36.
It sometimes happens in the throat a swelling, that is, glands, which are similar to almond-like swellings, which occur in the jaw: and they are named the two Amygdalae: which when you cure with what we have said in the division, and do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard aposteme, of a dark colour, and of little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red colour, and its root is thick: then do not touch it with iron either, fearing a flow of blood, but rather leave it until it matures. And then you will either bore through it: or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of a white colour, round, and its root is subtle: then it should be cut.
And the operation on it is, that you consider before its operation, if the aposteme has completed its heat quietly, or is diminished by some diminution: then make the weak sit in front of the sun, and its head be in your bosom: and open its mouth, and let the servant receive between his hands, and press its tongue below with an instrument, of this form.
Let it be made from silver, or copper, which is subtle like a knife.
When you press its tongue with it, and the aposteme is shown to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the gum, and pull it outwards as much as you can, except that you draw with it something from the tunics.
Then cut it with an instrument, of this form which follows. It is assimilated to the forceps: nevertheless its extremities are curved, so that the orifice of each one is directly opposite the acute end: hence take care that it be of iron unbroken, or steel steeped.
If however this instrument is not at hand, then cut it with a spatulum, of this form. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one gum, cut the other according to the same species of cutting.
Then afterwards the weak person should gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
And if a flow of blood happens to him, he should gargle with water in which the barks of pomegranates have been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar things from astringents, until the flow of blood is cut off: then treat it, until it is healed.
And when other abscesses form in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them therefore according to what I said in the incision of the two tonsils equally.
And I indeed have already treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat, which was pulling towards the throat, with little sensation, which had almost closed the throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and it had already prohibited her from eating, and drinking water: and she had already come close to death, if she had remained one day, or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had sent out two branches, until they went out above the two nostrils.
I approached quickly and fixed a hook in one of them. Then I pulled it and a large portion was pulled out from it.
Then I cut it off, where it was grasping from the nostril.
Then I did to it what had come out of the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess: then I cut off from it a part of it, and there did not come out from it except a little blood: therefore the throat of the woman was freed, and she immediately began to drink water, and then took nourishment.
I did not therefore cease to cut into that abscess many times for a long time: and the abscess would fill in the place of what I was cutting, until it was prolonged too much and with it.
I cauterized the ingrown and the aposteme between the throat.
It stood firm after the application: then I walked away from that place, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
Of the incision of the aposteme of the eyelid.
Chapter 37.
When the cold descends to the eyelid and it becomes inflamed and is long: then it itself is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it itself is called a pustule.
When it is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not work: and you see that the hot aposteme has quieted from it, and is subtle: then it is necessary to incise it.
And that which from it is gathered round, and is not length to it, and is bloody, or of a dark color, or black, and there is no feeling to it: then it is necessary to avoid the incision of it. For in it is fear concerning the weak.
It is necessary therefore when you see it according to the method which I said from its whiteness and length, that you make the weak one sit before the sun: and press his tongue with an instrument, whose description was previously mentioned: then fix a hook in the eyelid, and pull it downwards: and incise it with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in the incision of the two glands.
And it is necessary that you do not incise from it, except that which is added above the natural limit without addition.
For if you incise from it more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use that which we described in the incision of the two glands: and treat it, until it is healed.
If however the weak one trembles at the incision: then it is necessary that you use cunning in the cauterization of it without fear and dread.
And the manner of cauterization in it is not, unless with sharp water; and it is, as you put the head of the weak one in your bosom. Then press his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned. Then take from the water that I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and prepare with it a lime not extinguished, and put it not thick, nor subtle, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, whose form is this.
Let the extremities of it in which the medicine is placed be concave, like the concavity of a spoon.
And put the instrument with medicine on the wound itself: and let the weak one be lying on his side, so that saliva runs out of his mouth from the inner medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat, and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you apply it to the wound for the first time in the quantity of a half hour, until you see it already blackened, and the biting of the medicine is settled.
And if you want to take a piece of cloth, and wrap it around the extremity of the radius, and pour the cloth with medicine, and insert the radius with the cloth into the canal above, until the cloth adheres to the wound.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound. Then leave it alone: for it will fall off by itself and drop off after three days, or four.
What if you judge that you should repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization cleanse the area around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and clean it with what is in the area of the wound from the medicine: and wash with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This therefore is a more wholesome species of cure by incision and longer from fear.
And when the ulcers are cured also with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision: for they are cured with fumigation, according to this method. Take calamentum, and hyssop, and origan, and rue, and ssach, and chamomile, and abrotan, and similar things from herbs: and gather all those things, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be luted with clay decently: and there should be an opening in the middle of the pot, over which is composed a concave instrument according to this method.
Let it be made from silver or brass: and the extremity, in which is a grain, should be inserted into the mouth of the infirm, until the vapour ascends to the ulcer above the tube, until the ulcer is much obscured.
Then iterate over it many times, until it is scraped away.
And beware, that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the approaching abscess. For a poultice adds to the abscess: and it is not proper to make that unless at the decline of the abscess when it becomes cold.
If however this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane, and compose on the extremity of it a cortex of egg: so that the mouth of the infirm does not burn: for the cortex of egg prohibits vapour from burning the mouth: and this is from good cure with health.
Of the extraction of thorns and bones from the jaw.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Many times it happens that a bone, or a fish spine, or something else sticks in the throat.
It is necessary therefore to extract that which of them appears obvious on which the sight falls, after you press the tongue with an instrument at the seat, and it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the weak vomit before it is digested by food in the stomach. Perhaps the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or the weak person should swallow a piece of nap, or a root of lettuce, or swallow a small dry crumb of bread: or take a piece of soft dry sea sponge: and tie it on a thread, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where there are vertebrae, or bones, and is pulled out, then it comes out.
If it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead in this form.
Let it be thicker than a rod for a little while, and at its end let there be a curvature, which enters into the throat with ease: and let it have its head elevated upwards.
And let it beware of touching its own epiglottis, so that coughing does not happen to it, and let it push the mouth, or bone, or the doctor himself insert it with his hand.
But what the weak person inserts, this is better: on account of his knowledge of the place of the attached thing: and he pushes downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it comes out.
Of the extraction of bloodsuckers.
Chapter 39.
When the bloodsucker is treated with what I have said in the division on curation with medicines, and it does not come out, then examine the throat of the weak person before the sun, or at the sun after you press his tongue with the instrument that I have described to you.
If your sight then falls upon the bloodsucker, extract it with a small hook, or with dexterous fingers.
What if it is not possible with them: then take a curved tube, and insert it into the throat of the weak person up to the throat; afterwards insert into the curvature of the tube ignited iron with fire. Do that many times: and let the weak person abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a full pitcher of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and let him rinse his mouth with it, and not swallow anything of it: and let him move the water one hour after another with his hand. For a leech sticks to it when it feels the water.
If however it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the weak person with bugs, or with rue with an instrument that I described in the fumigation of the ulcer.
Do that many times, because it itself will fall out.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot, in which there are hot coals with fire: and let the pot be covered with a cover, in whose middle there is a hole: and let the extremity of the instrument be placed in that hole.
Then throw in the fumigation, and let the weak person put his mouth on the extremity of the tube, and let him close his mouth, so that the fumigation does not come out, until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall out.
If it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the weak person endure thirst, and eat salty things, and garlic, and not drink water.
It is necessary therefore that it comes out with this treatment.
And this is the form of the instrument with which a leech is extracted from the throat, when it falls on the same uvula.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is introduced into the throat. And its extremities are similar to the mouth of a bird, which is called a cicoria, in which there is roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their cutting, and treatment in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many species of abscesses, of many modes, according to which the treatment of them comes, namely one and one in this book: and they are diverse in the perforation of them, and the cutting of them from two modes.
Of which one is of the species of abscess by itself, and that which it comprehends from humours.
And the second mode is on account of the places, in which it occurs in the body.
For an abscess occurring in the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in the joints: and each of them has its own judgment from the operation.
And of the abscesses there are some which ought not to be perforated, unless after the maturation of the pus in them and its completion: and of them there are, which ought to be perforated, while they are raw, and do not mature according to the completion.
As abscesses that are near the joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint, and its existence is prolonged, until it putrefies what is in the area around it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted: which is a cause more proximate to the contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess near a principal member: for if you delay the perforation of it, until it matures, it will harm either it or through that principal member.
It is next to the anus, perforate it if it is immature: and it is not suitable to perforate a crude aposteme, not fully digested, unless it is next to the anus, so that it does not putrefy the depth, and reaches into the interior of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or becomes in its termination what will not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the aposteme, which has matured according to its completion: and it is at the sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulsation, and acuteness of the head of the aposteme: and other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the perforation in the lowest place of the aposteme, and of the most prominent elevation: and let the perforation be going in the length of the body, if the apostemes are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of the shoulders, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and at last in all equal places, to which there is not a reflection.
In those however that reflect, let it go with the perforation according to that membrane.
When indeed the aposteme is in fleshy places: then it is better that you omit its perforation, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to its completion.
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus is prolonged from it, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps the lips of it will become hardened, and its depth.
And some apostemes are perforated according to the width of the body by necessity: or according to that which the membrane needs.
And it is necessary that you administer to small apostemes a small perforation, and to large apostemes a large perforation: or many sections by the similarity of the size of the aposteme.
And there are of the apostemes, in which it is necessary that the skin be concave: and incised when already made like a cloth, and made at the termination, which already is dead: as that which happens to many, as to the dubre, and buboes.
And of them are those which are cut with a section having three angles. And of them is one, from which an incision is made like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like a groin abscess.
And of them are those in which is administered a round incision, and a lunar incision: and similar to them from the incisions.
That one indeed which has no head, as are lenial superficial abscesses, ought to be pierced by a superficial perforation, or merely a plane.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is thick, and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you not press and extract all the pus at that hour: but rather extract a part of it from it. Then dress the abscess until another day. Then extract something of the pus again.
Do that many times according to the degree, until it comes out: especially if he is weak of strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or a decrepit old man: for the animal spirit is often dissolved with the exit of pus: and perhaps the weak person dies, and you do not perceive.
Beware therefore this chapter with great caution.
And after your perforation, by which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wound: and take care. If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat incision, then administer dressings made from linen, or old cloth. And if the abscess is large, and there are many openings of the incision, it is necessary then that you insert a dressing into every opening, until they reach the bottom.
And if you have cut away a part of the skin in the abscess, or have hollowed it out around the edges: then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth, or as when cloth is woven, or wool is shorn from flax without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then apply it, and treat it with what is suitable from the ointment, until it is healed.
And if a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which the cloth is soaked in it: and you put it on the place of the flow of blood many times.
And if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you administer a treatment, and cure, and powders, which I have described in many places in this our book, and from division.
And if it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves: then it is necessary that you pour in powders with wine, and hot oil: and you put them on the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you put powders soaked in water, and oil, or wine and oil, and all of it cold. Until when it will be the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you loosen the abscess, and wipe it clean, and administer in its cure what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general.
Following the path of division, I have already spoken of every abscess, in what way it is a route to its cure, chapter by chapter, individually.
Chapter 41.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
There occur on the skin of the head small abscesses, and they are of the species of Knots, which are contained in sacs, which are attached to them: as if they themselves were the eggs of a hen.
And there are many species of them.
Some of them are fatty: and some of them contain a humidity similar to slime: and some of them contain a humidity similar to decayed flesh and pus: and similar things, and some of them are hard stony.
And in the cutting of all of them, and their extraction, there is no fear, provided that at the time of their cutting it does not cause a contradictory condition of the arteries.
And the operation in the cutting of them is, that you should try it with an instrument, whose form will be described later, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it by a cut in the length of the superficial cut: according to this form.
And let the cutting begin from line b to line g, when the moisture is evacuated, then scratch out the cyst which contains that moisture, and do not leave any of it behind.
For it returns many times, if anything of it remains.
Then immerse the stump in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For it eats away what remains of the cyst.
Then repeat over the stump with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if you apply it to it, until you are confident that nothing of the cyst remains, then treat the wound with ointment, until it is healed.
What if the apostema contains a fatty knot: then cut it according to this form, having the shape of a cross: and apply poultices between the lips of the incision, and excise it from every side: and show your skill in the extraction of the tunic which contains it.
If however the artery makes a contrary condition for you, then do that which I will tell you afterwards.
And do similarly in the case of a stone, from cutting and cure of the same, according to what we have said.
And the cutting over a stone apostema is easier: since there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain apostemata which are on the head in certain men, with which there is no humidity inside.
Which is: that I cut into an apostema on the head of an old woman, and I found the apostema like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if someone were to strike it by throwing something, it would wound it.
In other accidental apostemata on the head, besides these, namely the apostemata that occur on the heads of children, and at the roots of the ears, the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
Or make a perforation of them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of blood may be alleviated to the lower parts.
Then treat it with what is suitable for it from the treatment.
Of the cutting of strphulons on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These apostemata often occur on the neck and under the armpits and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And above those which occur on the neck, there are one or many: and they generate from among themselves: and every Strophula of them is within its own proper tunic, as it is with knots and apostemata of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many kinds of these Strophulons. And some of them are stony: and some of them contain humidity: and some of them are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
In that one then which of them you see of good disposition to the touch, whose manifest proximity is to the color of the skin, and it moves in every part, and it is not attached with the nerves of the neck, nor with the gullet, nor with the artery, nor is it deep: it should be that you cut it with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line, and along the line, and excavate it from every part: and extend the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks, if you need it, as we have said in the apostemata of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is above the caution, that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula be not sharp, lest you add your hand with the incision, or disturb the weak part, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut the vein, or artery, it prohibits you from operation, then put on the wound zegi powder, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound, and leave it, until the sharpness of the aposteme quiets, and the wound softens: or it begins to putrefy.
For blood is staunched by a tunic of bandage, return therefore to your operation, until you complete it.
Then inquire with your index finger, if anything remains of the small scales: therefore cut them, and clean them.
What if it is in the root of the Strophula a large vein: then it is necessary that you do not cut that Strophula from its root: moreover it is necessary that you tie it with a double strong thread, and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you have already steeped in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the whole Strophula is cut, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew them themselves immediately, after you see that no excess remains.
If you see that excess remains because of the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary that you proceed to cut its root, and extract it: and administer the suture that we mentioned.
And which of the Strophulas contains humidity, make a superficial hole in it: so that the place of its maturation appears to you: and put the hole from that which follows below the body, as we said.
Then administer a dressing with ointment after the perforation, and similar things to it, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until when you see the wound is already clean: then treat it with a generating ointment of flesh, until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the cutting of the epiglottis from an abscess that happens inside the throat.
The ancients spoke of this cutting on the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the writing of their speech.
However, in those who have a strangled or constricted condition, it is necessary that the cutting of the epiglottis be avoided: since no benefit comes from it: because all the veins and lungs are weak.
In those indeed who have a hot abscess in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use the cutting of the epiglottis, to flee from the destruction which comes from the suffocation.
It is necessary therefore when we want that, to cut the epiglottis under three circles of the epiglottis, or four, a small cutting in width, in what is between two circles in quantity, so that it is a cutting in the sifac, not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for cutting, since it is deprived of flesh, and the blood vessels are far from it.
For if the doctor is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then let him pierce the skin, until when he reaches the canal: let him avoid the blood vessels, if he sees any of them.
Then let him cut the sifac which we have described: and it is indicated above the cutting of the canal from the phlegm which comes out of it, with that which is disrupted, and from the separation of the voice.
And leave the open wound for some time.
When the hour arrives in which the prostration is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and suture it by itself without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Said Albucasis. The summary of this discourse which we have narrated is not an exposition, except when they see that one of these apostems has already strangled the throat of the infirm, and the infirm has been lifted up from death, and his breath has been intercepted: they proceed to cut the Epiglottis, so that the infirm may breathe over the place of the wound by some breathing, and be saved from death: and for this reason they have ordered to leave the wound open, until the malignity of the disease is consumed, and its malignity is three days, or nearly; then therefore they have ordered to suture the wound, and to cure it, until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is, that a servant girl took a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung.
And I was called to the cure of it, and I found her dying, as is the dying of one who is about to die.
I probed the wound, and I found blood that had come out from the wound a little. I was confident therefore that she had not cut the vein, nor the windpipe: and air came out from the wound.
I treated the wound therefore, and I cured it, until it was healed: and nothing happened to the servant girl, except hoarseness of voice: and she returned after days to her better disposition.
Therefore I say: that in the cutting of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
On the surgical incision of the throat hernia.
Chapter 44.
This condition called hernia of the throat is a large abscess, second to the color of the body, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is in two modes: for it is either natural or it is accidental.
In the natural one certainly there is no swelling.
The accidental one, however, is in two modes: of which one is similar to fatty knots. And the other mode is similar to an abscess that forms from a knotting of the artery. And in it there is fear, and it is not fitting that an incision be made into it with iron, unless it is small: and you will test it, and investigate it with a probe. If therefore you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not suspended with any vein: then cut it, as knots are cut: and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then thoroughly search all of it. Then treat the place with what is proper for the cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
On the surgical incision of the kinds of knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already spoken about all their kinds in the division: and it is necessary that I describe here the difference between a Knot and an Exitura: since it causes doubt.
I say therefore, that when there is an Exitura, there is heat, and fever, and violent pains, until it is calmed by the boiling of the excess, and completed by putrefaction: then indeed the fever and heat subside.
With a Knot, however, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains them in cysts of the spleen, which is their proper sac, and it is second to the color of the body: and its shape is like a chickpea, and it forms like a bag, and is greater and lesser.
And they are divided into two types: either fatty or containing humidity. And the colors of humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
It is necessary therefore, when you approach the cure of a Knot, that you examine it, and investigate it first with an instrument which is called Intromissum, according to which its form will appear in the chapter which is after this.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses and all Knots is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place which you find in the abscess: and you move your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then you put your hand last according to the measure of the magnitude of the abscess.
Then extract the Intromissum, and consider what goes out in its track.
If therefore a flowing humidity comes out, whatever the color may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said about the remaining abscesses.
And if humidity does not come out in the track of the Intromissum, then know that it is fatty: dry therefore above it with an incision having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and rub away the skin from every side with ease: and keep a plaster if you can over it, so that you extract it healthy with the Knot.
If however the plaster breaks apart during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it healthy, for this often happens, then extract it by force, until nothing of it remains.
For if a little or a lot of it remains, the Knot returns according to the majority.
If it overcomes you and a little of it remains: then fill the wound at the completion of your task with certain corrosive powders: and bind the wound, and put on top of it what sits on the abscess, a warm application, and cure it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
If then it is a large Knot, then sew its two lips, and cure it with that which brings flesh.
If then you have a contrary vein, pulsating or not pulsating: then press, and fill the place of the zegi with a plaster, and keep it tight for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the ebullition of blood subsides: then return to cut that which remains of the Knot.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments for cutting and boring.
These are the forms of the Introductors, and they are of three kinds.
For there is one large, and one medium, and one small among them.
Let them be made from iron of a quadrangular shape with well-finished extremities, so that they hold the entrance in the scabet.
And these are the forms of the Experimenta, which is to say, the perforators: and one of them is called a Beris, that is, a perforator: and they are of three kinds.
For there is one large, and one medium, and one small among them.
They are adapted to investigate through them the abscesses, and the exit wounds, and the fistulas, and the buboes from that which is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and blunt, like large needles with which they sew the sutures, namely of citrus, or of copper, or of iron, or of silver.
And the best of them are those that are made from citrus.
And the Experimenta are also made from black lead, which are adapted to probe through them the fistulas, of which the concavities are reflections, so that they reflect with their bluntness along with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. For there are some of them which are long, some which are medium, and some which are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
The forms of ulcers, and there are many species of them.
For some of these are simple, namely those which have one treatment, and they are of three species, as you see, Great, Middle, and Small.
And of them there are hidden ulcers, and they are of three species.
And of them there are ulcers having two treatments, and they are of three species: and of them there are ulcers having three treatments, and they are of three species: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of surgical scrapers, with which they cut and excise knots and apostemes: and they are of three species: for some of them are great, middle, and small.
Their extremities with which a section is made are acute, the other extremities are not acute: and they are not placed thus, except so that with them there is made a juncture in the excision of knots in fear of cutting the vein or nerve: and so that the weak one may be healed by it, and find tranquility for a time from the burning which it found at the excision of an aposteme.
They are made of brass, and are similar to a razor, with which is made a scrape: and on the flat extremity there is a hidden point of the spatula: and it scrapes towards the interior, and towards the exterior when you wish, as you see.
The form of the spatulas which are hidden between the fingers for the perforation of apostemes: and the weak ones do not perceive them: and they are of three species, great, middle, and small.
The forms of the cauteries with which the flow of blood is stopped: and they are of three species, great, middle, and small.
Let them be made of brass or bronze, round, of a moderate length, as you see: and let them be subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of Ventsarum are with you, both large and small, so that you can cut blood quickly when necessary, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, you should not use them for cutting blood in every part of the body, and you should not use them except in fleshy places: such as the arms, thighs, and hips, and arms, breasts, belly, groin, and similar fleshy and moist ones.
And sometimes small instruments are made from them similar to the blades of lancets, according to their shape: with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the cutting of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this shape.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of breasts in men that resemble women's breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflamed with an accumulation of fluid when they begin to sleep, until they resemble women's breasts, and remain as foul abscesses.
He who abhors this, it is necessary that he cut above the breasts in a lunar section, according to this shape from line b to line g, then scratch out all the fat. Afterwards fill the wound with incarnative medicine. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and treat it, until it heals.
If the breast however declines to the lower parts and becomes soft because of its size, as it happens with women: then it is necessary that two sections similar to the lunar figure be found on its upper sides, each of which is connected to the other at their ends, until there is a larger line containing a smaller one, according to this shape from line b to line g. Afterwards scratch out the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If you do not close the incision of what you need to cut, because of the discomfort of the weak or because of the flow of blood: then you should fill the wound with a submersed corrosive ointment, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then cure it, until it is healed.
On the perforation of a postilence, which happens under the nipple.
Chapter 48.
These postilences that happen under the nipple, are of the kinds of hard Strophulatum, which contain cysts, and of them are those which contain humors.
Which therefore are of those which contain humors, it is necessary that they be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b. to line g., when therefore the whole thing that is in the postilence is evacuated of blood, then fill it with old oil, and leave it until another day.
Then let the plaster be removed, and cured with an ointment suitable to it, until it is healed.
What if the postilence was of the kind of nodes of Strophulatum, then cut above it, as we have said in the section on Strophuluses equally.
If however the wound extends to this that it emits pus, then administer to it a cautery, according to what we have said in what has been previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
On the cutting of a postilence which happens because of an artery and a vein.
When an artery is disrupted and the skin which is above it is consolidated, then very often a postilence happens from it: and similarly it happens to veins also, so that a postilence and inflammation happen.
And the signs by which it is known that a postilence and inflammation are because of an artery and a vein, are: since when a postilence is because of an artery, it is long, gathered in the depth of the body: and when you press on the postilence with your fingers, you feel as if there were a hissing.
And that which is on account of the Vein, is round in the visible body.
And the cutting above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and the groin, and the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is a great fault. It is necessary therefore that the care of it should be withdrawn from iron, and what of them is also in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary that it should be withdrawn.
On that therefore which of them is from the inflation of the opening of the artery, make an incision in the skin in length. Then open the incision with forceps, afterwards the artery: and free it from its coats, until it is exposed.
Then insert under it a needle, and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, according to that which I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place, which is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is resolved.
Then administer a cure that generates pus, until the ligaments fall off: afterwards treat it with ointments suitable to it, until it is healed.
What if the abscess is on account of a section of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible for you from the abscess with the skin. Then insert a needle under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be in it double thread, until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good ligature: according to that which I said to you in the ligature of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread.
If however you wish to extract the thread, then insert another needle with a different thread under the entire suture at the site of the incision of the wound: press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the suture in the middle of itself, until when what is in it comes out: then cut away the excess skin, and release what has been tied from it.
Then put on top of it a poultice which you have steeped in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment, which is done with wraps and ointments, until it heals.
Chapter L (or 50)
Of the suture that happens from the twisting of nerves.
Just as a suture happens in an artery and a vein, similarly a suture happens in nerves: which happens to them from a blow, or happens from excessive labor, and similar things: and it happens most often in the places of the joints, or heel, and in every place where the joints move: and it is a serious suture.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is tied with a bandage, it feels in it a weakness similar to numbness.
And it is not a suture gathered in the depth of the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and it does not proceed to the front, nor forward, nor backward to the rear.
What therefore is in the joints, does not need to be treated with iron. Perhaps indeed a contraction happens.
In that which is on the head, or on the forehead, cut the skin with a spatula. If therefore it is a small suture, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook, and scratch it: then remove it, and gather the wound with a suture: and treat it, until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the cutting of an abscess that happens in the belly.
It happens to certain men many times in their bellies and in the rest of their bodies, these things that are called Fungal infections, on account of their similarity with mushrooms.
Of which the root is subtle, and their head is thick, and their lips are inverted. And there is one of them that is small: and there is one of them that is greatly enlarged.
And I have indeed already seen a man, and in his belly there were two fungal growths, which were more similar to mushrooms than the others: there was no difference between them, they were white, with small roots, and their lips were inverted, and they oozed, and moisture flowed out of them always.
I cut them out, and I found that one of them weighed about 9 ounces and the other about 6 ounces. And the operation for cutting them out is, that you should consider then, if the patient is weak and the color of the fungal growth is white, moist, with a subtle root: then cut it out with a broad spatula, and let cauterizing irons be at hand in the fire.
For often much blood is expelled during the cutting of it: therefore if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see that the patient is weak, fearful and timid of the cutting with iron, then take a thread made from lead, and tie it around the tumor: whose method is what we have said, and leave it on for two days.
Then apply to the constriction a lead plaster. Do not then cease to tie on the lead, as many times as you press on the fungal growth, until it is cut off and falls away by itself without effort.
If the fungal growth is thick-rooted, then there is something to fear and be anxious about in its cutting: especially if it is in the belly.
It is possible to cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then treat it, until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not cut into the blackened part which is of a dark color, of little sensation, and foul appearance: for it is a cancerous aposteme: and I call it with recollection of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of the navel's swelling.
The swelling of the navel occurs from many causes. Or from a tear of the diaphragm, which is above the belly: and there comes out from it either gut or intestine, according to what happens in the remainder of the rupture. Or from blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been previously mentioned. Or from flatulence constricted in it.
If however it is on account of a tear of the diaphragm, and the exit of the gut: then it is a color of an apostema similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in different situations. And if it is on account of the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation is with that which we have described, of more vehement diversity. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a noise with it: and it is greatly increased at the entrance of the bath, and vehement labor.
If indeed it is on account of moisture, it is soft, then it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it increase.
For if it is on account of blood, then with these signs an apostema appears like a blackness from the tumor.
If however it is on account of flesh that has grown: then it is a grave, thick, hard apostema, and it is shaped according to one quantity.
If the swelling is due to obesity, then the touch of it is gentle.
And the operation on it is, that you should consider then, if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the Artery, or Vein, or obesity: then it is necessary that you prohibit the cure of it. For there is fear and terror in it, as I have taught you in the chapter, in which I said that apostema is due to the artery and vein.
Which if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia: then it is necessary that you order the weak person, so that he may hold his breath, and stand standing upright. Then mark with a cauterizing agent around the entire navel. Afterwards order him, that he should be raised up between your hands on his back. Then go around with a wide spatula in the area of the navel above the place that you marked with cauterizing agent. Afterwards extend the middle of the apostema upwards, with a large hook. Then tie it around the strong part with a thread, or with a string of firm silk binding: and let the knot of the binding be secure.
Then open the middle of the apostema that is extended above the binding. If therefore you have found it already caught by the binding: then extract the secured one, and insert into it your index finger, and push the intestine to the interior of the belly: and if you have found a hernia, then take it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If on the other hand the artery or vein is opposite to you: then go around it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert the two needles around the area that you made around the apostema in the shape of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then tie the thread around the abscess in four places above the needle, and if it is necessary, remove the needle, and leave the place until the rotten flesh falls off by itself, or cut it when it becomes subtle and rots.
Then treat it with what is suitable from ointments, until it is healed.
What if there is a protrusion of the navel from the flesh, either from it or from moisture: then it is necessary to concave the abscess, as we have said. And extract the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then treat it with what solidifies the place.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken about the division of the species of cancer, and how it is the way to cure it with medicines: and what is to be avoided in its cure with iron, so that it does not become an ulcer: and we have spoken about cancer generated in the matrix, and the caution in its cure.
And the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, such as cancer which is in the breasts, or in the hip, and similar members located for extraction of all of it, especially when it is beginning and small.
When, however, it becomes old and is large, it is not necessary to approach it.
For I myself was not able to heal anyone from it, nor have I seen another before me who has approached that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede and solve the weak part with black bile several times. Then perform bloodletting on it if you find it with a clear fullness.
Then prepare the weak part for preparation, in which it will be treated with an operation.
Then throw onto the cancer ointments that are suitable for it. After that, press it from all sides with the skin, according to the inspection, until nothing of its roots remains: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but rather express the place, and wipe away all the gross blood with your hand, or with any instrument that is possible there.
If however the flow of gross blood causes a contrary condition for you from the incision of an artery or a vein, then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
On the treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 44. We will now describe in the division of the species of Dropsy, and how the collection of water occurs: and the signs of each species, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron, is not except the single species of ascites: and it does not approach with iron the species of tympanites: nor the species of hypozarca inwardly: for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of Dropsy, tympanites, with medicines, and your treatment has not been effective: then consider. For if weakness has already befallen the patient, or if there is another infirmity with it besides Dropsy: such as if there is with it a cough, or a loosening of the stomach, and similar things: then beware lest you treat him with iron: for that is to be feared.
If however you see the weak person of overflowing strength, and there is no sickness with it besides Dropsy alone: and he is neither a child nor an old man: then the method of operation on him is, that you should lift up the weak person standing between your hands, and the servant behind him presses his stomach with his hand, pushing the water towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spiney spongy  bone, according to this shape. It has two sharp parts, is long, and the extremity is pointed like a spine. But let there be in it something of shortness little by little, so that you do not pass through with it during the operation to the intestine, and harm it.
Then consider. For if there is a generation of dropsy from the intestines, then it is necessary that you should lengthen the incision by the quantity of three fingers from the navel downwards directly above the breast.
If indeed the generation of dropsy is because of disease of the liver, then let your incision be to the left from the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is because of the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side: and it is not necessary that the incision be on the side above which the weak person wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin entirely with an instrument. Then insert into that incision, and raise your hand with the spiney instrument between the skin, and scrape, as if you were exfoliating it: and let the quantity which is scraped be the quantity of a nail, or around that.
Then scrape and pierce until the spiney instrument reaches the empty place: and it is the place of the water. Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument, which has this form. And it is similar to a cannula: made from silver, or copper, or gold, polished: which has in its lower part a small opening, and on its sides are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side: and its edge is cut, according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: on its upper end is a handle.
When the instrument penetrates the water, then it itself descends immediately upon the instrument, so it evacuates from the water half of its quantity.
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, then the weak person will perhaps die immediately by resolution of its animal spirit, or a syncope will befall him which approaches death.
Evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the weak person signify to you from the virtue of his pulse, and from its goodness.
Then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is, that it is retained immediately because of the skin which retains the orifice that is above the fistula: about which I have told you, so that you should perforate it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the second day, if you see the weak person tolerate it: and also evacuate a small quantity from the water.
Do that for some days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there does not remain from the water except a little.
If however you fear for the weak person, and you leave a large amount from the water: then treat it with burial in hot sand, and much sweat in a bath and sun, and wait upon thirst: and treat it with evacuating medicines, until it is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the evacuation of the water: according to what I have told you in that which precedes.
Concerning the treatment of infants who are born with their urinary places not perforated.
Chapter 45.
When any infant goes out from the womb of its mother, and the head of its bladder is not perforated, or the orifice is constricted, or is not in its proper place.
Therefore it is necessary to help with the perforation of it immediately when it is born with a very fine spatula, according to this method.
Then put in the hole a subtle key made of lead, and tie it: and hold it for three days, or four.
When the bladder is raised to emit urine, let it be removed, and micturated. Then reduce it.
And if you do not put lead, then it is possible that the urine which falls on the place will not permit it to close.
He, however, whose hole is narrow, is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is widened.
Those, however, in whom the hole is not in its proper place, are wounded. That is, because among those who are born with it, the hole is at the end of the head of the penis: wherefore he cannot urinate to the front, unless he lifts the penis with his hand to the upper parts. And there is not for him generation, because the sperm cannot pass to the womb according to nature: and it is a foul disease.
And the method of treatment for that is, that the weak one should be placed on his back. Then extend the head of his penis with your left hand by forceful extension, and cut the head of the head of the penis from the place of the priap, with a needle or a sharp spatula: just as is the cutting of a reed, or just as you scrape something, so that the middle of it comes to be like the head of the penis: and so that the hole falls in the middle according to what is proper.
And beware for yourself during the operation of a flow of blood. For it has happened many times. Apply to him therefore that which stops the blood, and cure the wound, until it is healed.
Of Albucasis, concerning what happens to the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 6
These Albather often occur on a branch, and it is an eminence of foul flesh.
And some of them are malignant, and some are not malignant.
You should therefore suspend the non-malignant one with a fine hook, and cut it off, until you cleanse it entirely. Then put on it a plaster soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it afterwards with dyafinicon ointment, until it is healed.
Which if the Albather is malignant, of foul color, then you should administer to it a cautery after the incision of it and its rasping.
If the Albather is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and part of the Albather is under the foreskin, and part of it is outside: then you should remove the Albather that is inside first, until when it has consolidated, then treat the outer one: for when you treat them both at the same time, the foreskin does not heal unless it becomes perforated.
And they also occur on the testicles, and a blackening and corruption of the foreskin. You should therefore burn away all that has already become blackened, and what you want to be corrupted, or is already corrupted.
Then apply on it afterwards a mixture made with honey that has been mixed with the flour of toasted coriander seeds and crushed herbs.
Then treat it with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
If a flow of blood occurs, then administer a cautery with lunar cautery, in this manner.
For cautery is useful for two conditions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood and for an ulcer when it becomes corrupted.
Which if the head of the branch is corroded and destroyed entirely in one hour: then you should insert into the wound of the penis a pipe made of lead, so that urine flows out through it.
In the adherence of the skin of the foreskin to the head of the virga, and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or an abscess, it is necessary to cauterize it with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the virga is freed from every part.
What is difficult to discern by feeling, then it is necessary to cauterize something from the head of the virga and from the foreskin. What is, that the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perhaps perforated on account of its subtlety quickly.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the virga with a thin linen cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
On the purification of infants, and the cure of errors that happen to them by chance.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, like other wounds: nevertheless since it is from our operation, our will, and its use is properly in children, it is necessary that we indicate in this operation the better method, and the easier way leading to health.
I say therefore, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, since they do not make use of it in their laws, and it is not except what we have acquired through experimentation.
What is, that I have found the greater part of artisans and phlebotomists to use purification by circumcision with a razor, and with forceps; and they use cauterization, and a ligature with a thread, and an incision with a nail.
And I have already tried all these methods, and I did not find a better purification than with forceps and a ligature with a thread.
Because in cleansing with a razor, it often slips from the skin. Since the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower layer remains: it is forced to a cutting to cut the other, and future pain. And with the cleansing that is done by rubbing, that is, digitally, which barbers use, the cutting of the extremity of the member of the viril does not secure: since perhaps it enters into its opening.
In cleansing with the nail, perhaps the iron slips and corrupts your operation: and the skin of a child is brief by nature, and often they are born such that they do not need cleansing: and I have already seen it.
Cleansing with forceps and ligature with thread has shown me a good experiment: since the forceps are proportional to the incision: therefore, because the sharpness that is above is as the sharpness that is below. When therefore you press your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they cut according to one operation at one time: and there is made a compression of similar figure, containing the skin of the member from every part, with which there does not occur error altogether.
And the method of the operation itself is, that you cause to extract, especially a child, if it is one of those who understands for a little while, what you do not do, except that you tie the thread on its member as much: and you leave it until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that is possible for you, from the fact that he receives his own understanding. Then make him stand between your hands prepared for the stature, and let him not be sitting: and hide the forceps in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the child does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into its branch, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards, until the head of the branch emerges. Then cleanse it from the filth that has accumulated in the squalor.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards tie below it for a short space a second ligature. Then hold with your index finger, and thumb, the place of the lower ligature with good retention, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin upwards quickly, and extract the head of the branch. Then allow the blood to flow gradually (for it is better) and put powder on top: and over the powder a cloth in which the yolk of an egg has been spread, mixed with fresh rose oil: and let it stay on until the next day: and treat it with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
The shape of the lancet for cleansing is this.
Let the two extremities be dull, and let them be cutting: so that a branch of the nail does not protrude from them: and let the length of the two edges be equal to the length of two finger joints.
The error that occurs in cleansing is this: because perhaps the whole inner skin slips away, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you stretch it out with your finger before the cicatrization of the place: and cut it according to equality.
What if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
If however three days have passed and the swelling that is under the branch remains, then let it be until the hot aposteme has settled, and remove it with ease, and cut it according to what has been prepared for you: and beware of the head of the branch. For it will not harm him.
Treatment is therefore with that which consolidates the wound from powders, which we have described in the treatise on powders: and if it cuts into the skin above the measure, and goes to the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
Treatment is therefore with that which we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the extraction of retained urine from the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage made from a stone, or coagulated blood, or pus, or ingrown flesh, and similar things to them which we have spoken of in the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine does not flow, and you see that its retention is on account of a stone, which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that he should be made to lean forward over his knees. Then let his feet be placed on his back, and let him stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and let him tightly hold his breath as much as is possible for him. It is pressed therefore with the neck of the bladder for the expulsion of the stone to the back: wherefore the urine is released.
What if it is not solved with that which we have said, and the thing is severe on the patient: then it is necessary that you administer its extraction with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose form is this: Let it be of silver, and let it be subtle, thin, hollow like the quill of a feather in subtlety of a radius, long in likeness to one and a half palms: to which let there be a thin tube at its head.
And the method of exit of urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its end a thread or a cotton, with a good ligature: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with forceps if something overflows from the thread, truly insert into the tube with vehemence, like an almond.
Then anoint the siringa with oil, or with butter, and the white of the egg: and make the weak sit on a seat, and embrocate the vesicle, and its own virga with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the siringa into the virga with ease, until it reaches to the root of the virga.
Then double it over itself at the part above the navel.
Then push the siringa into it, until it reaches to the bladder, and the weak person feels that it has already reached to the empty space: and this is not done according to this order, unless the passage, through which it goes, is where there is a curvature.
Then extend the thread with a woolen string little by little. For the catheter will follow the wool.
Then pull it out, and make the catheter run through the urine passage: and repeat the siringa, and do not cease to do that, until the bladder is emptied, and the weak person finds relief.
On the quality of cleansing the bladder with a Clyster.
Chapter 59.
When there happens to be an ulcer in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is confined in it, and one wants to distill waters and medicines into it: then let it be done with the instrument that is called a Clyster, and this is its form.
For it is closed, that is, stopped up. And in it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which pushes, should be according to the quantity that fills it without addition, until when something is pulled with it, it attracts from the humidity: and when it is pushed, it expels afar: according to what makes the clyster, with which naphtha is thrown, that is, Greek fire on the hearth of Mars.
When I insert the instrument to project humidity into the bladder, I introduce the extremity of the catheter into the humidity, and pull with it that which pushes upwards, for humidity is pulled into the concavity of the catheter.
Then I introduce its extremity into the vein, according to that which we have narrated in the syringe. Then I push humidity with that which pushes it, for humidity immediately penetrates to the bladder, so that the weak person feels it.
The shape of a thin enema instrument by which the bladder is enemad.
Let it be made from silver or gold: whose head is higher like a small spoon, and below it a notch in which the thread falls.
Then take the bladder of a goat, and put in it humidity, with which you will enema the bladder. Then tie it between two notches with a strong ligature with double thread: and warm that humidity a little over the fire.
Then introduce the extremity of the enema instrument into the vein, afterwards press your hand over the bladder with humidity with a suitable pressure, until the weak person feels that the humidity has already penetrated to the bladder.
If however the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment, and make from it a circle, and pierce it throughout all its roundness. Then introduce a strong thread into those holes, as they are turned. Then gather the circle, as the rose is gathered: after which you put in it that which you use from humectants, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it on the instrument: and do with it as you have done with the bladder from expression with your hand, until the humidity penetrates to the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of a Stone.
We have already spoken about the division of the species of Stone, and its treatment with medications, and I have said the difference between the Stone generated in the kidneys and bladder, and the signs of all that: and I have said the Stone in which the operation falls by hand and cutting: and it is a Stone generated in the bladder properly: and that one which is fixed on the staff: and I am narrating that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that the Stone generated in the bladder, happens most to children.
And of its signs is that urine goes out from the bladder similar to water in its thinness: and appears in it white sand, and the weak man rubs his staff, and labors with it, and many times it hangs. Then it rises, and goes out with it the anus in many of them.
And the healing is easy for children, as long as they are up to fourteen years old. And it is difficult in the elderly. In youths, however, it is moderate, in that which is between the two: and of whom the Stone is larger, the treatment is easier: and if small, the care is the opposite.
When therefore we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the weak one with a clyster, which will extract all the dung that is in his intestines: for it sometimes prevents the finding of the Stone during the examination.
Then let the weak one be taken by his feet and shaken, and moved downwards: so that the Stone descends to the depth of the bladder, or jumps from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be under his hips, so that the whole bladder inclines downwards.
Then examine him, and feel him from the outside.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then immediately with the proper section over it.
What if it does not fall under your touch at all, then it is necessary that you wipe the index finger of your left hand with oil, if he is a weak boy: or the middle finger if he is a grown youth: and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone until it stands under your finger: and turn it little by little to the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it to the outside against the place where you want the section: and instruct one assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct another assistant to stretch the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with his other hand to remove the skin which is under the testicles on the part away from the place in which is the section.
Then insert a spatula blade, whose shape is this. And find in what is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left buttock: and let the section be over the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the section be transverse, so that it be exteriorly ample, and interiorly strict, according to the quantity that it is possible for the egress of the stone from it not being larger.
Perhaps indeed the finger which is in the anus compresses the stone at the section, and it goes out without difficulty.
And know that because of the stone there are angles and edges, for which its exit is made difficult on account of them.
And it is smooth, similar to a acorn, and round: and its exit is made easy.
Therefore for those which have angles and edges, add an incision.
What if it does not go out thus, then it is necessary that you grope over it: or bind over it with a device decently, whose extremity is like the crescent moon, which binds over the stone and does not depart from it: or that you insert under it an instrument subtle, of curved extremity.
If you cannot see on top of it, then enlarge the opening a little. What if anything of blood comes out from it, cut it off with a ligature.
If there is more than one stone in the bladder, then first push the largest to the mouth of the bladder. Then cut on top of it. Afterwards push a small one after that, and do likewise if there are more than two.
What if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to try to cut out the large one itself. For it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or that there occurs to him a continuous dripping of urine: therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
Administer its expulsion, until it comes out: or use instruments in the fracture with forceps, until you extract it bit by bit.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with resin, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the hot aposteme may be assuaged.
Then let the weak person rest with his neck elevated, and do not loosen the bandage, until the third day. When you then loosen it, bathe the place with water, and a lot of oil.
Then treat it with the ointment called diaphenicum, and the ointment basilicum, until it is healed.
If however a hot aposteme should occur in the wound, with added corrosion, and similar things: such as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prohibited from it: and it is recognized by the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and apply all the species with that which is suitable from the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the hours of treatment of the whole, that you bind two hips, and gather, the medicinal causes which are placed on the place.
What if the stone is small, and it is in the flesh of the rod, and it is fixed in it, and the exit of urine is prohibited: then treat it with what I will narrate before you proceed to the cutting. For many times indeed you will be exempt from the cutting through this treatment, for I have already proven that.
And there is, that you take a perforator made of iron, whose form this is, triangular pointedness, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it with that rod under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron perforator into the rod with ease, until it reaches the perforator to the stone itself: and turn the perforator with your hand on the stone little by little: and complete the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine will be freed at once.
Then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the external part of the rod. For it itself breaks, and comes out with urine, and the weak man is healed.
If however this treatment does not prepare itself for you, on account of something that prohibits it from that: then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone in the same rod between the two ties. Then extract it. Afterwards loosen the ligament, and clean the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone, except that it does not return to the vein; and another tie above, except that when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and for that reason it is necessary for you, when you tie the upper thread, to elevate the skin upwards, so that it returns to your complement, and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of a stone from women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
If however it happens to any of them that a stone forms, then the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden because of many methods.
One of them is: that the woman is perhaps a virgin.
And the second is, that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to the physician, when she is chaste, or among those having husbands.
The third is, that you do not find a woman who knows well this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the remoteness of the place of the stone: wherefore it requires a deep incision, and in that there is fear.
What if necessity calls for it, then it is necessary that you take a woman physician, knowing well: and she is rarely found.
If you truly keep them private, then seek a modest physician, subtle, and present a female midwife well taught in the matter of women, or a woman who has acquired a part of the art: make her present, and especially instruct her, that she do all that you prescribe to her from the examination concerning the stone.
At first what is, to examine if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she insert a finger into her anus, and seek the stone.
If then he finds it, he constricts it under his finger, and then orders the midwife to insert her finger into the weak opening, and feels above the stone, after which she places her left hand on the bladder, and squeezes it with a good compression.
If then he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he gradually moves it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with the greatest strength of his, until he reaches it at the root of the hip.
Then he cuts above it at the opposite of the middle of the opening at the root of the hip, from whichever side is prepared for him, and he feels the stone on that side: and his finger does not move away from the stone, constricting under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then he inserts the branch above that incision.
Then he inserts the branch above that incision. If then he feels the stone, then he adds to the incision a second cut proportional in quantity to that which the stone protrudes from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. For among them is the small and the large, the smooth and the rough, the long and the round with branches.
Know therefore its species, that it may be indicated to you by this above what you are going to do.
If then the blood overcomes you, then add to the place of the injury a pound of flour, and hold it for one hour, until the blood is stanched.
Then return to your operation, until the stone comes out: and do, that you prepare with yourself the instruments which I have spoken of in the extraction of the stone from the bladder, so that you may assist by them in your operation.
For if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery which has been cut: then put powder on the place, and constrict it with a strict bandage: and do not touch it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. For a weak woman will probably die. Then treat the wound.
When therefore a gathering of blood sits after some days, and the place putrefies, then return to your operation, until the stone goes out.
Chapter 62.
Of the cutting of the watery hernia.
A watery collection is not a hernia, unless it is an aggregation of humidity in the white membrane, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg: and it is named a membrane.
And sometimes it is in its own proper membrane, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg, until it purifies: which is another egg, and is the skin of the testicle between the white membrane, which we have spoken of: and that is not made except rarely.
And the generation of this watery collection, is from a weakness which happens to the testicles: for which reason this material flows forth to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this humidity has many colors. For it is either of a yellowish color, or it is red with blood, or filthy, black, or it is watery white, and that is what is most.
And the signs by which it is known where the collection of water is, are these. For if it is in the white membrane which we have spoken of, then the tumor is round in length for a while as the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, since the humidity contains it on all sides.
And if it is humidity in its own proper membrane, then the tumor is round with part of an egg, and on account of this a man thinks that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then it falls under feeling.
When I apply my knowledge of the colour of humidity, then I examine the colour of humidity in an abscess with a square probe, whose shape precedes. Next to that which I observe as it exits the track of what has been inserted, I judge from that which is between itself.
When we proceed to a cure with iron, then it is necessary to prescribe to the weak, that they be bled if possible for them, and you see their body full.
Then he should be placed on his back on a high place slightly elevated, and many cloths should be put under him.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, who should extend his arm to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the navel.
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles in the middle along the length, until almost to the pectine: and let the incision be according to the rectitude of the equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white skin that surrounds: and clear away the same and observe, or beware lest you cut from this, as you cut the same: and your clearing should be where it is suspended with the egg more: and carefully examine with the clearing according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then puncture the full skin with water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the skin to the top, and do not touch the skin that surrounds the testicles: and cut the skin as it is possible for you to cut it, either with its entirety or in a piece, especially the thin part. For if you do not carefully examine, in the incision of it there is no security, lest water return.
If however the egg emerges outward from its skin during the time of your operation: then when you complete the incision of the womb, reduce it. Then bring together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then cure it as the remaining wounds, until it is healed.
What if you find the egg corrupted from blackness of another, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels, which are the suspensors, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspensor, and extract the egg: afterwards cure it with what we have said.
If indeed water is collected in the two parts, then know that there are two branches: cut therefore one part equally as you did in the other.
And if it is equal to you, so that it is one operation, then do it: afterwards wipe away the blood. And insert into the incisions a thread steeped in oil, or in rose oil: and put on top of it another thread which you have steeped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and the navel: and put above double cloths, and they are poultices: and tie them above with a bandage, which is having six according to this form.
Then let two cloths be taken, and they should suck, and the threads which have been steeped should fill them, according to this likeness: and let extremities be made which are pressed from a cot, or a wet thread: and let them be bound with a bandage on the loins of the arms: and one extremity should reach to the thigh up to the back, and the second should reach to the part of the chest: and two extremities over the two hips below, and two other extremities over the two groins, and all the bandage should be bound in the loins of the arms.
And when this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the place of the incision with iron: and it is, that you take a sharp knife-cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have described: until when it is detected, a white tissue containing water: then take the cautery, according to this method.
The Greek letters are assimilated.
Then perforate with it that tissue, and it is ignited, until all the moisture goes out.
Then extend the tissue with forceps, and scratch with a sharp ignited cautery, and cut it according to what is possible for you, until you eradicate the whole of it.
And beware lest the fire touch it.
And know that this operation is safer, and less prone to a flow of blood, and better than the operation with incision.
If however it shows opposition to you at the time of incision, or at the time of cautery, a hot aposteme, or a flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary that you cure what shows opposition to you from that with a cure which is suitable for it, according to what has been said before.
But if he is weak and fearful, and does not expect more than this operation, on account of his horror: then administer the perforation according to what I describe it: and it is.
When it is confirmed to you by what we have said concerning the signs, that the hernia is watery: then it is necessary that you make the weak person sit on an elevated seat.
Then puncture the aposteme in its lower part with a broad spatula: and make the puncture according to the length of the body, and let it be open wide, until all the water runs out.
Then put on the place a dressing, and bind it, and let it be so that the remainder of the water runs out: then treat it, until the wound is healed.
If however there is a contrariety to the egress of water at the time when you perforate it: and it is not except on account of this, because the white pad makes a contrariety in the orifice of the wound, and prohibits the exit of the water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water of dropsy is extracted, whose form has preceded: or add for a short while in the operation of the wound.
And you should know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time. When therefore it accumulates, then it will perforate according to the same method, and the weak days will pass.
Chapter 63.
On the treatment of a fleshy tumor.
Know that in the incision above this tumor, there is a fear of inducing a deadly peril in many dispositions. Wherefore it seems to me that its abandonment is more beneficial for the health from it.
And I recall an operation on it, and the appearance of a postulate.
I say therefore, that many gatherings occur in the bodies, from which the testicles are composed: and this is caused by many reasons, namely.
Or from an excess of sharp or sour humors, which flows to the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the gathering is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a serious gathering.
And perhaps it is a stone-like gathering, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from a knotting of the arteries, and their inflation: as has already been mentioned earlier: or from an inflammation of the veins.
That which therefore is from them by an inflation of the arteries, is recognized by the condition of the gathering, when you press on it with your fingers. And it is not suitable that you touch it directly.
That which is made from the inflammation of veins, does not disappear because of compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that a section is made on this species, and on the remaining flesh: and it is, as one cuts the skin of the testicles. Then extend the eyelid upwards, and extract it with a white sifauch: and free the suspensory membrane from the vessel, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspensory membrane after you have freed it from every part of the eyelid.
If then the eyelid is consolidated with those born flesh, then it is necessary that you attract the eyelid, and cut it.
And if there is an adherence of something from the siphac, or in that which is between the vessels: then it is necessary that you free the entire adherence, and cut it with a round incision.
If however there is a nativity of flesh in the place of adherence which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the eyelid, as we have said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool steeped in rose oil and wine: afterwards treat it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of Rams, which is with Vites.
Uitis is an unturned aposteme, a certain unturning similar to a bunch, with softening of the testicles: and it makes movement and exercise difficult on the weakened area, and walking.
And in the cure of this sickness is fear, because of the memory of that which has come before.
It is truly necessary that we speak of the operation according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore, that it is necessary for the weak one to sit on a raised seat. Then strike the suspension of the testicles to the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the instruments that are closest to the rod: and let another servant hold it, and stretch it with a vehement stretching.
Then cut with a broad sharp spatula a cross-section directly through the vessels, until they are laid bare.
Then scratch from every part, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Afterwards fix in them a needle in which is double thread, and tie it in the first of the places to which the vessels are attached: and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut it in a straight middle section according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from foul corrupt humors.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which you wish to generate a sanative, so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles fall away. For it is not an evil through that.
If however the vessel happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles with the vessels be extracted for this: so that the egg is not deprived of nourishment, on account of the incision, and wither, or dry up, and is not a help with them.
Chapter 65.
Of the treatment of Intestinal wounds.
The outcome of this wound is from a section, which happens in the sifac expanded over the belly in the groin area from the navel of the belly.
Because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the sifac or from its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy thing, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the ankle. It is what happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an equal aposteme towards the deep, therefore because the ankle compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it is from a section of the ankle, because it makes happen from the beginning a vehement pain suddenly: and it is a diverse aposteme, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior of the ankle.
And sometimes it goes out with the intestine a knob: and this is called Ramex intestinalis, and zirbia: and sometimes it happens with bloating.
And sometimes dung runs into the intestine, and is retained there: and it is with that a weakness of the flanks: for it makes happen a bad pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear: wherefore it is necessary that the case be cautioned in it.
And the method of operation is, that you instruct the weak person, to reduce the intestine with his hand to the interior of its own concavity, if it has fallen back. Then he should be lifted up over his neck between your hands: and his legs should be elevated.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and cut the skin of the testicles along its entire length. Then fix on both lips of the incision hooks, according to which you indicate to open the incision with them: and let the incision be according to the quantity that is possible, so that the egg can come out from it.
Then scratch the ankle and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white ankle is uncovered, hard on every side: then insert your index finger in what follows the testicle, in what is between the ankle and the white, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the ankle and the second, and release with it the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white membrane upwards, with your left hand: and lift the vein with the membrane to the part of the incision: and instruct the assistant, to extend the vein upwards: and you loosen the adhesion, which is behind the completed solution.
And search with your fingers, that there is not something from the intestine involved in the white hard membrane of the spleen. If however you find something of it: then push it to the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, in which is a thick thread, made a ligature from ten threads: and introduce it at the back of the last membrane, that is, of the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles which follows the incision: then cut the ends which project from the thread, until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over others with a figure that is in the shape of a cross: and tie with them the membrane, of which we spoke, which is under the skin of the testicles with a vehement ligature, until none of the vessels, which nourish them can send to them anything: so that there does not happen from it a hot apostema. And put again a second ligature outside the first ligature, being less than two fingers in length from it. And after these two ligatures release from the membrane, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely around, and take away the vein.
Then sew in the lower part of the skin of the testicles at the incision, from which runs blood and serum: as we have described in what was previously said.
Then administer a wool submerged in oil, and put it on the wound: and administer the ligature that we described. And when the white tonsil is cauterized, which we have mentioned, after its incision, fearing a flow of blood. For this often happens. And release the ligament, until it falls by itself.
If however its fall is delayed, then let it be soaked with warm water: and put on it what we have said, until it falls.
Then treat the wound with the remainder of the treatment of wounds, until it is cured.
Chapter sixty-six.
On the Lance-shaped Instrument.
In this lance I have not seen anyone who has dared to undertake its treatment with iron.
And the first ones said, that it is done as we have described in the lance which is with a vine. Which is to bind the vessels after the incision over them with ease below: then cut in the middle, and treat afterwards with that which opens it, until the vessels fall: and treat the wound, according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-seven.
On the rupture that occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the place protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is very little, and returns every hour: but if the time with this condition is prolonged, a fissure is added in the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And it happens due to the extension of the sifach, which is in the groins, as we have said. Which is because the sifach extends: then it becomes soft, and the place becomes inflamed, and protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as the description of it has preceded.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, in this manner: and it is done so that the weak person lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the place of the rupture and the prominent part, a cross-section in width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then pull the Alsifak and those that are under the skin, until when it is stretched the white Sifach, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take the rasp, and put it on the prominent place of the Sifach, and press it to the depth of the wound.
Then sew two prominent places on the extremity of the rasp from the Sifach, and join one of them with the other with a suture: then extract the extremity of the rasp.
And do not cut the Alsifak at all, nor stretch the groin, nor anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of intestinal rupture.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. When you cut the threads, clean it, and restore the wound, until it becomes consolidated.
For the Sifach is contracted, and the prominence of the Rupture is not increased.
And cauterization is better in this place: because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles often becomes softened in some men, because of which the flesh that is between them becomes softened, and their appearance becomes foul.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked to cure it, to make the weak one lie on his back, and to cut all the skin that has been softened above the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if necessary, first close the excess of softened skin with three or four sutures, and tighten the suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds, until it is healed, and the threads fall out.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law, and because of it I would be allowed not to mention it in my book, and its mention would not be necessary except for two reasons.
One of which is that it is a thing in the science of medicine when one is questioned about it, and so that he may know the cure for one to whom it happens.
And the second reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our use by it, such as donkeys, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that castration is performed in two ways. Or by extraction. Or by incision and cutting.
In that which is done by extraction, the method of operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles soften and relax and hang, then we extract them with our hand until they dissolve and do not appear to the touch.
In castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensor, and cut above all one ovary with a single cut, until when two ovaries proceed: then incise those after you have excavated both, and do not leave on them anything from silk except subtle silk, which is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by extraction: because extraction perhaps leaves something of the testicles, for which reason the animal desires intercourse.
Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of the Hermaphrodite of two kinds.
Hermaphrodite from urine is second in two modes. The defect of theirs is that which appears in the space that follows, or on the skin of the testicles, between the two testicles, a figure similar to a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs out from that which is on the skin of the testicles.
In women however there is one species, and it is a woman's vulva above the pubic area just like the testicles of a small man entirely, standing out to the exterior: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from men and one species from women, is: that it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh, until the impression of them disappears. Then treat them with the cure of remaining wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine exits, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
Concerning the cutting of the Tentiginis, and the prominent flesh in the vulvas of women.
The prepuce perhaps is added over the natural part, until it becomes deformed and its appearance is foul: and sometimes it is magnified in certain women to such a degree, that it expands like in men, and reaches to the coitus.
It is necessary therefore to hold the excess of the prepuce with the hand, or with a hook, and cut: and do not cease in the cutting, especially in the depth of the root: so that there does not occur a flow of blood.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds, until it heals.
The flesh that is born, is a flesh that grows in the opening of the womb, until it fills it: and perhaps it comes out to the exterior similar to a tail: and because of this some of the first call it a caudal affliction. It is necessary therefore that we incise it as we incise the tenthigin, and we should treat it until it is healed.
On the treatment of Alratica, which is a woman's ulcer that is not perforated.
Chapter 72.
Alratica is, that it is a woman's ulcer not perforated, or it is a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from the sickness that precedes it: and this indeed occurs either from flesh born added, or from sifach subtle, or from spissus: and it happens either in the depth of the matrix, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and prohibits coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps prohibits menstruation.
And its recognition is made by the appearance of the obstetrician, if the obstruction is apparent nearby.
If it is not apparent, then examine it with your fingers, or with a rod.
If the obstruction is from subtle sifach and it is near the two lips: then touch and disrupt it.
And it is, that you place a poultice on the two lips.
Then put your indexes of both hands together, and let the woman be on her back with her thighs spread apart. Then stretch the two lips with force, until the subtle sifach is disrupted and the obstruction is opened.
Then take a wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the place: and let the woman apply it every day, so that the place is not consolidated with vice.
If the sifach is thick and spissus, then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula like a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is from flesh born, then suspend it with hooks, and incise it: and let there be with you medicines which calm the flux of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus mixed with the whites of eggs.
Then administer a cannula made of lead, so that the wound does not heal quickly, it will hold for some days; and administer a bandage made from dry linen, then the rest will be cured by treatment, until it is healed.
And when there is a growth in the matrix of native flesh of other things, it is necessary therefore that they be cut according to this method: since there is not an apostema which is cancerous for an apostema is indeed cancerous which is in the matrix, let there not be done with iron altogether.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehel, and Bothor of rubies in the wounds of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed openings of the veins, until a lot of blood flows out from them continually.
When therefore hemorrhoids become chronic, they become hard: and I have already spoken of the division of their types, and their signs: and I will say here which of them receive treatment, and which do not.
I say therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the matrix and do not appear to the sense, then there is no treatment for them with iron.
But those of them which are in the opening of the matrix, upon which the sense falls, are those which can be treated.
It is necessary therefore that the woman be put into a cold house. Then extend the hemorrhoids with the fingers, or with coarse cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle over them at the flow of blood from one powder of incisions without sharpness: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and incense, and similar to these.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards put her into cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and a broth of pomegranates, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it over its back.
If therefore blood is drawn with it, it is good: and if not, make the ventoses and the breasts adhere to the back without scarification.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of the branches of alaulat, that is, aglanter, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the place.
When therefore the apostema rests, then treat the place with ointments, until it is healed.
The Albarth verily is a red color like the heads of alhassa, and is of rough appearance.
It is necessary therefore that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said equally in the case: and treat it, until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the perforation of the uterus which occurs in the matrix.
There occur in the matrix many kinds of apostemas, such as cancer, and apostema of stone, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot apostema.
And I have already spoken of all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of them, and their cures in division: it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of hot apostema which occurs in the matrix, when it is one of the apostemas which collect blood, and you should know how its opening is done with iron.
It is necessary therefore that you consider. Then if the pain of the apostema at its beginning is acute with its percussion, and inflammation, and fever: and you see it being red: if the sensation falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and treat it with that which helps against maturation, until when the acuteness of the accidents subsides.
Then it is suitable to make the woman sit on a seat which has two seats, and she should lean back or lie on her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of the abdomen: and her hips should be expanded, and she should put her arms under her thighs, and tie them with a convenient ligature to that.
Then the midwife should sit at the right side, and administer the instrument by which the orifice of the matrix is opened.
And it is suitable when you are about to administer this instrument, that you fix with the radius the depth of the woman's matrix: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and harms the weak.
If the instrument is more than the depth, then it is suitable that you put pads on the surface of the depth of the matrix: so that the entrance of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix is prohibited: and it is suitable that a loop which runs on the instrument be placed from the upper side: and that it hold the instrument, and that the operator turn the loop, until the depth of the matrix is opened.
When therefore the exit appears and is touched by the hand, and it is gentle and soft: then it is suitable that you cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the sanies is evacuated, then it is suitable that you put on the wound a plaster submerged in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and put the plaster, and extract the section from the depth of the matrix.
And put outside on the matrix, and on the pubes a clean wool submerged in water, in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it is healed.
And when the matrix and wound are washed, then a clyster is applied with water and honey; afterwards with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled; afterwards it returns to an ointment.
What if the wound has been hidden within the matrix, then it is necessary that you forbid the cure of it with iron, but rather cure it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 70.
The doctrine of obstetrics, how they medicate living embryos, according to a figure not natural, having come out.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the figure of a naturally born child.
From the signs of it are, that when you see a woman pressed at the lower parts, and she desires to smell the air, and is relieved by what is above her from the birth, and the exit of the embryo is hastened: then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is over its head, and the afterbirth with it: or hanging, or suspended from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary that her womb be pressed, so that the embryo may come down quickly.
For when it comes down over its head, the afterbirth comes down with it, and is cleansed from those superfluities of a good cleansing.
But that which is besides this birth, is unnatural, not to be praised.
For when the fetus comes out over its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet, and one of its hands, or one of its feet: or its head and its hands come out: or its belly comes out: and perhaps it turns back over its neck, and similar things from unnatural figures.
It is necessary therefore for the obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing the whole figure of them, and how the device is in it, and it is signified by that, and stands upon it.
When the fetus moves up above its head with its natural movement, and presses upon the woman, and parturition becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her: and fumigate her vulva with decocted fenugreek, and with humid oils.
Then the midwife should insert her fingers into the little spatule, and find the secundina with it, and cut it with her nail, until what is in it runs out from the humidity: and press the belly of the woman, until the fetus comes down.
And if it does not come down, then it is necessary that the woman be given a clyster of fenugreek mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then order her after the clyster, that she be compressed: and make her sneeze with conditis, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
What if the two hands of the fetus come out first, then it is necessary that you reduce them with ease little by little. And if it does not pass into the birth passage, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up: then strike the seat against the ground: and let the woman be held, so that she does not fall with the striking.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut them off, and extract the rest of the fetus: and tie its hand with a cloth, and pull it out gently: for it will come out.
The fetus coming out over its own feet. When the fetus comes out over its own feet, then it is necessary that you push them upwards: then turn the fetus little by little: afterwards pull it evenly.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
When they go out as far as the hips, then order him to compress it, and make him sneeze with the condiment: for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then reduce the fomentation little by little, until you put it in its natural shape. For it will then come out with an easy exit.
What if it is prohibited with all that we have described: then take from the mucus of the altea, and the oil of sisamine, and dissolved gum: and pound all in a mortar with a good pounding: then smear the vulva of the woman, and her lower belly. Then make her sit in warm water, until she obtains an enema.
When you see that her lower parts are already warmed, then make for her a suppository of myrrh: and apply it. When she has held the suppository for one hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and pinch its mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with an easy compression. For the feces will come out immediately.
The fetus comes out over the knees and hands. When it comes out according to this shape, then she will insert her hands gradually while introducing them. Then the woman will be lifted up over her neck, and her feet will hang down to the lower parts: and she herself will lie on a bed, and clasp her hands. Then press above her belly little by little. Then extract what is under her feet from the dusty things, until it is prepared in the lower part. What if the fetus does not come out, then take her feet, and move them with a vehement movement. Then press what is above the pubic area gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then he should insert his hands and gradually straighten the fetus, and command the woman to compress, until the fetus comes out.
The fetus exits hanging crosswise from the hands. It is placed in the reduction of his hand. If however he cannot reduce it, then let him lift the woman, and have her walk.
If indeed she is not able to walk, then let him make her lie on a bed, and shake her thighs with violent shaking.
Then administer the ointment that you have prepared from mucilages.
Which if it receives the birth, then make her sit on a seat. Then attend to the reduction with the hands, and straighten the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and command her to compress herself, until it comes out.
The fetus exits with its neck stretched out, hands extended, and its face towards the mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus's hand, then slowly turn it around, and straighten it with ease.
When it is straightened, then put on its neck what we have mentioned, made from oil and mucilages.
Then command her to move gradually. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and command her to lean to the right side. Then command her to compress herself: and make her sneeze with effort.
The prepared fetus exits on the side. When it descends to the opening of the womb in this manner with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail, until it comes out from the moisture.
If I suspend it over the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not retained, and dies.
Then push the fetus to the inside, until you place it according to what is fitting: and instruct the woman to press herself several times: for it will come out by itself with a light exit.
The exit of twins, or of many fetuses. Know that twins are born many times: and when three, and four are born. But truly that is extraordinary, and rarely happens.
Five is a thing beyond nature, and they do not live thoroughly: and the afterbirth contains them, however many they are multiplied, one secundine: and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing between them the ligature at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they come out just as one fetus comes out by the natural and easy way: and they come out with an unnatural exit, as we have described.
What if some of them are difficult at birth, and they reach that which we have spoken of from unnatural figures, then treat them as we have described: and let there be a subtle and skilled midwife, and she will do what she does with ease and slowness, and will guide according to every figure with what is prepared for her from guiding ingenuity for health.
The memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has been verified by me, that a woman aborting has expelled seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
This therefore is all necessary that it should be in the science of Obstetrics. For it will perhaps reach to something similar to that: he should oppose to it with what is suitable
Chapter 76, Head or Chapter Seventy-six, Head
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I have said in the division on medication, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to use an operation with the hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If the woman is of sound strength and is not with any of the accidents on account of which loss is feared for her: then it is necessary that the woman breathe again on a bed, on her back, and her head be inclined downward, and her thighs be elevated: and an assistant hold her from two sides, or she be tied to the bed, so that her body not be extruded during the extraction of the fetus.
Then the mouth of the matrix should be moistened with humid oils, with mucus of altea, and fenugreek, and seed of flax.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucus: then she should introduce it into the matrix with ease. Then she should search with it for the place where she will fix the hooks of the fetus, and the places convenient to that.
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend on its head: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its throat, or in places near the ribs, and under the false ribs.
If however it has descended on its feet, then in its chest, and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and place its curvature in that which is between the fingers of the left hand: and introduce with the hand with ease, and fix the hook in any of those places which we have said, until it reaches the empty space.
Then he should put another hook in opposition to it, or a third, if necessary, so that the contraction is equal and does not incline to one side.
Then it should be extended with an equal extension, and the extension is not just according to straightness, but rather it moves to every part, so that its exit is alleviated, as happens with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary in what is between them, that the extension is softened. What if a part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoints some fingers with oil and inserts them from the side, so that she turns it out with them, what was retained.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks are changed to another place which is higher: do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If therefore a hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth is wrapped around it. Then pull it out until when the whole thing comes out, cut it at the joint of the foot, or at the elbow: and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and with the two feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or it meets with constriction at the exit, or there is water accumulated in its head: then it is necessary that a sharp Spatumile is inserted between the fingers, and searches with it the head, and extracts the water: or it breaks it with an instrument which is called Almisdac, whose form comes with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly, do it if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then it is necessary that you cut the shoulder blade: or extract it with a misdach, as we have said. Then you pull the bones with forceps.
What if the head comes out and it is narrowed at the armpit then it will be found until the moisture that is in the chest is poured out.
If however it does not become compact and nor obstructs the exit: then cut the head bit by bit, according to that which is possible for you.
What if the lower part of the belly is an apostema, or there is dropsy in it: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until moisture runs out from it.
If indeed the fetus is above its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the matrix is light.
If however it is narrowed at the belly or chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth which you have wrapped over your hand: and find the belly or chest, until what is in them runs out.
If however the rest of the limbs are removed and the head returns: then the Midwife should insert her left hand. If therefore the mouth of the matrix is open, then she should insert her hand into the depth of the matrix, and seek with it the head, and draw it out with her fingers to the mouth of the matrix: then she should insert in it one hook, or two hooks, and draw it out with them.
What if the mouth of the matrix is narrowed, on account of the hot apostema that has happened to it: then it is not necessary that she should labor over it, but rather it is necessary then to administer an effusion of humid things, of ointments: and administer plasters: and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
What if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible that it can be straightened: then administer what we have said regarding a living fetus.
What if it is not possible, then cut it bit by bit, and extract it.
And it is suitable that you should not leave anything from the second intestine inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said regarding the hot apostemes that occur in the matrices.
What if a flow of blood occurs, then let it be stopped with astringent waters, and administer the remainder of the cure.
And I have indeed already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was, then she became pregnant on top of it with another, afterwards another fetus also died. Therefore, a postulate occurred to her after a long time on her navel, and it became inflated, until it was opened: and it began to emit pus.
I was called therefore to her cure, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound was not consolidated.
I placed therefore on it some strong attractive plasters: and the bone went out from its place. Then several days passed for her, and another bone came out. I was amazed therefore by this, since there is no bone in the womb.
I thought therefore that they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I probed the wound, and I extracted many bones, with the woman being in a better state of health: and she lived for a long time afterwards, and a little pus was discharged from the place.
And I have not confirmed this strange thing, except that there is science and assistance in it, for what the medical artisan administers with his hand from the cure.
Chapter 78.
Of the forms of necessary instruments for the extraction of a fetus.
The shape of the Vertigo by which the matrix is opened.
This figure below is the form of a stretcher, to which are equal two books, on which there are two equal joints at the ends of two wooden pieces. The treatment for this Vertigo requires that it should be finer than a strictorium: and that it is made either from ebony or from boxwood.
And the width of all the wood is about two fingers, and the thickness of each of them is about one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two additions made from the same type of wood, which have already been fixed to both, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of each is about two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matricis, so that it opens with them when you turn the two Vertigines.
Another form similar to that, finer and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of the forceps. However, on the extremity of it there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition is about a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When you use it to open the matrix, then make the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging, and what is between her thighs open. Then insert these two connected additions into the matrix: and you hold the extremity of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you need from the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of another Vertigo which the ancients called the Shape of the Impeller by which the fetus is expelled.
The shape of the Almisdac, with which the large head is pressed: and it is similar to forceps, which have teeth on the extremity, as you see.
And whenever a dressing is applied, such as forceps according to this shape, as you see, which has teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which it is cut and crushed.
The form of a staple having one spike.
The form of a staple having two spikes.
The form of a spatula having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The form of two broad spatulas.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more their kinds are multiplied, and the more they are prepared by the artisan, the swifter he is to his operation, and the higher he is among men, on account of their quantity.
Do not therefore despise any of these instruments, so that it may be prepared with you. Their necessity is indeed inescusable.
Chapter 78.
On the extraction of the placenta.
When the placenta is retained with the afterbirth, then it is necessary to advise the weak, so that it retains its own breathing. Then make it sneeze with condiments: and press your hand over its mouth, and nostrils. If therefore it comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and perforate in its cover a hole: and put in it heating herbs of the matrix, such as calamint, rue, and dill, and chamomile, and sesam, and lignea cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over fire.
Then put a bulb of reeds over the hole of the pot's cover, and another extremity into the mouth of the matrix: and hold it until the vapor penetrates to the concoction of the matrix.
Then make it sneeze, as we have said. For the second one will go out with ease.
If however it remains after this treatment, and does not come out: then instruct the Midwife to immerse her hand in oil of sesame, or mallow. Then let her insert it into the vulva, and seek with it the Second one. When therefore she has found it, then let her take it, and pull it out little by little.
If however it is attached in the depth of the womb, then let her insert her hand, according as we have described, until when she finds the Second one, and pulls it out little by little according to what is right, so that the womb does not fall with violent pulling: indeed it is necessary, that it be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then let there be added to the quantity of the pulling. For it will detach itself then, and be freed, and come away from the adherence.
Which if the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with sneezing, and from a medication of oil with herbs.
If however it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware lest you fatigue yourself over it in the repetition of the extraction.
It is necessary indeed, that what comes out from it to the mouth of the womb, you tie to the thigh of the woman. Then anoint her with the ointment Tetrapharmakon. For it will putrefy it after some days, and dissolve it, and bring it out.
Truly when it has putrefied, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and harms that weak woman. It is necessary therefore that fumigations suitable for it be administered.
Certain of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of nasturtium and fig and sycamore.
The shape of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated for retention of the secundina and menses.
Let it be made from a bowl similar to an alcama or from clay: and let the broad extremity be placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be put on the coals: let her hold it, until that fumigation is consumed: and let another be repeated.
Chapter 79.
Of the cure of an anus not perforated.
Many boys are born, and their anus is not perforated, whom the subtle sifac has already closed. It is necessary therefore, that the midwife should perforate that sifac with her finger: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatulum: and let her beware of the arm, lest it touch.
Then put on it a wool cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If however you fear that it will close, then put in the hole a small tube of lead for many days, and let it be removed when the boy wants to evacuate.
And now closure of the anus also occurs from consolidation of a wound, or an abscess. It is necessary therefore that the consolidation be cut, then treated with what we said regarding the cure and lead.
Chapter 80.
Of the cure of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
The fistulas that occur in the lower parts are a knotting and a thickening which occur near the anus or in the space of one of the parts: and it is one fistula or several.
When therefore that knotting becomes old, it opens, and a watery white humidity or subtle pus runs out from it.
And when there are some of these fistulas that penetrate. Therefore penetrating fistulas are recognized by that which exits from the evacuation and flatulence, when the weak one uses the evacuation, and perhaps exits from the worms.
And there are of them fistulas when they penetrate in space up to the bladder and up to the passage of the rod. And there are of them penetrating ones up to the joint of the hip, and up to the knot of the tail.
From that by which is known the penetrating fistula up to the anus, also from the non-penetrating one, it is, that you insert your index finger into the anus: and you insert a subtle probe made of brass or iron into the fistula: when there is no tortuosity.
Which if there is tortuosity in it, then insert into it a subtle probe made of lead, or a hair from the hairs of horses, until you feel the probe, or the hair on your finger.
Which if you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything proceed from the opening from evacuation, nor flatulence, nor worms as I said: then know that it is a non-penetrating one: proceed therefore to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or to the passage of urine: then its signification is the exit of urine from it, and prohibition of it by this, that the place be consolidated with medicines.
If it is a penetrating one up to the joint of the hip or to the socket of the hip: then its sign is that the probe penetrates up to that place, if there is no tortuosity in it up to the mouth: and finding pain in the surrounding part, and that pus always exits from it: and that medication is not effective in it, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity to him, from foolish medicines, on which it is formed.
In that which is not penetrating and not chronic, healing may be expected with a plaster: according to what I relate to you, and I have already proven: and it is, so that the weak person lies on his back between your hands: and lift his legs up above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his abdomen. Then a probe of lead or bronze is inserted, if there is a tortuousness in the fistula, until you know where it passes through.
If the weak person feels it around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel on your finger that the probe has already penetrated through by itself being detected, besides what you feel between your finger and the sifac, or flesh: then you certainly know that it is penetrating: do not therefore labor in it, since its healing is not, as we have said.
They have said, however, that flesh is healed in certain men and from the medication by which healing is hoped for, it is to apply a subtle cauterium of ignition according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and insert the ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that two or three times, until you know that all those added and filtered-out fleshy growths, which are similar to the quill of a bird's feather, have been burned.
Then treat it with cloths wrapped in butter, until the burned-out flesh comes out: then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with any other cure.
And if the probe comes out and has not reached up to your finger which is in the anus, and there is between it and the probe a thick covering of flesh or sifac: and you see the fistula in what follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you dissect with the probe that is in the fistula, until the dissection reaches where the end of the probe meets, and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean those filtered flesh parts that resemble a bird's crop or gizzard, so that nothing remains in them.
But if the blood overcomes you and separates between you and your operation so that it cuts off those flesh parts, then it is better to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
For the cauterization with fire brings together good habits, an adjustment of those added flesh parts, and a cutting off of the blood, and a drying of the moistures.
Then treat it with dressings wrapped in butter or pounded cabbage stalks, until the spot emits pus and those flesh parts that were burned protrude in the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that generate hard flesh, and there are medicines in which there are astringency and drying.
For when it is restored, then it is already healed: and do not repeat the treatment.
But if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the anus and is prolonged from the surplus of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine with it.
If therefore you feel a thin layer, and between you and it there is a covering of sifac or flesh, and it is near to penetration: then the operation is not in that, except by way of trust and hope.
Which is, that one of the three methods is administered in it: either you cauterize it, as we have said: or you cut it, until you achieve its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert dressings and cure from nearby. And do not proceed much with the cutting, so that you do not injure the membrane that contains the anus, and it happens over the weak point of the passage of excretion without control. Then treat it with what we have said.
For the wound will be healed; either you will lengthen the bandage, and clean it after you cut it up to near the anus, as we have said, or with a probe, or with another instrument of a sharp extremity. Then clean those filtered flesh parts which are in the cut, as far as you can with scrutiny.
Then consider the restoration of the whole wound with the cut, and the upper orifice where it consolidates: and a remaining fistula stays open in the interior part of the anus, and will be lighter on the weaker.
And when a fistula follows in this manner: and it is, when you insert the probe into the Fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus: then take the probe of perforated extremity, which is like a needle alekef, that is, preparing hides, in this form. And insert into it a thread wound from five threads, and tie around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the Fistula, until it reaches its concavity.
If then it is penetrating the edge of the anus inside near, then pull out the thread from that hole: so that you insert your finger into the anus, and pull out the end of the thread, and bring together the two ends: and tie both, and leave it for one day, or two days: and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tie it well, until the fleshes which are between the two ends of the thread cut and fall: then treat the wound, until it consolidates, and is healed.
If however the orifice of the Fistula does not penetrate: then make it penetrate by whatever method is prepared for you, unless it is deep within. For you should not do that on account of the liver, so as not to cut it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spoon for a patient with a fistula, whose curvature is sharp and one part is not sharp, so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
On the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from the cutting of them: and the cure of fissures.
There are two kinds of hemorrhoids. Either they are inside the anus, like vessels full of blood, or they are like a grain of a nut. And among them there are small and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
But truly those that are outside the anus, for the most part have little humidity, from which flows watery or yellowish fluid, or a small amount of blood with constant flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus, is that you should apply to the weak one so that it may sit: and it is squeezed, until the anus comes out, and the threads appear to you. Therefore hang them with hooks: or hold them with your finger. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by the hooks, because of their humidity and softening: then take them with a coarse cloth, or with a thread from two twisted wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and powder over them after the cutting certain hot powders, so that they may take the place of a cautery. Or cauterize them according to what was previously described in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with the remainder of the treatment until they are healed.
What if the anus does not obey evacuation, then give a weak enema of such a composition that there is a little mordicatio to cause it to loosen what is in the anus and to obey evacuation quickly when the weak one evacuates.
If however the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, then their treatment is easy and simple: and it is that you seize them with your finger or seize them with a hook, and cut them. Then treat them with what we have said, until they are healed.
And he who is averse to cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you administer their suture according to this method. Take an unwound thread and insert it into the needle. Then pull out the hemorrhoid upwards and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the other side: and tie the two ends of the thread on the lower part of the needle, and let them be crosswise: and constrict the hemorrhoid tightly. Then knot the thread, and pull out the needle.
Do this with all the hemorrhoids, and leave one of them untouched: nor touch itself, so that it runs from it an excess of blood.
Then put on the anus a cloth steeped in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the anus: and order the weak one to rest. Then leave it alone until it falls off.
When therefore the hemorrhoids fall off, treat them with ointments and the remainder of the treatment, until they are healed.
On the treatment of Fissures. For often it happens from the dryness of feces and the constriction of nature.
When therefore they become old and medicine does not penetrate into them: then it is necessary that you rub them with the points of the spatula or with your finger until they become humid and the outer skin which prevents them from consolidating is removed. Then treat them, until they consolidate according to what is suitable.
If they do not consolidate: then treat them again with a more vigorous rubbing than the first, until they bleed much, and then treat them, until they heal.
On the treatment of inverted and not inverted piles, and of rectal fistulas, and of hemorrhoids.
Chapter 82.
Know that a pile is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs in the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and pain happens from them during walking.
It is necessary therefore that what is around the nail be cut, and that it be held with forceps, or with a hook, and that it be eradicated from its root.
Then treat it, and if you want to cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
Of dry hemorrhoids one is a small protrusion, rough, fatty, round on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is, that you stretch the hemorrhoid, and cut it: or tie it with a thread of silk: or with a probe, until it falls off. And if you want, cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now both inverted and not inverted hemorrhoids are eradicated with an instrument that I will describe.
A boil is also a small fatty, rough, protrusion on the surface of the body, going deep into the flesh: and when it encounters cold, it feels like the biting of a ant, and it occurs in the whole body: and most often it occurs in the hands.
And the treatment of it is, that you take a small feather from a goose's pen, or a strong vulture's feather: and put that small feather on the boil, until the circle of the feather contains the parts of it. Then turn your hand with the cannula, until you reach what is in the circumference of the anal fistula; and you will put it in the depth of the flesh, and eradicate the fistula from its root.
And if you need to, do that with a cannula of bronze or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be at the edge, drawing the thread which is wound around it, so that the grasp and rotation of it may be alleviated on the finger.
And if you need to, cauterize the fistula according to what has been mentioned in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
Of the forms of instruments which are administered for clysters in diseases of the anus, and of purging of the belly, and of colic.
Sometimes the clyster is made of silver, or of gold, or of forged brass, or of hammered metal.
And sometimes they are made small and large from these instruments, according to those for which they are administered.
That therefore which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small: and those whose anuses are weak, or painful, their clysters thus also.
A large clyster.
The cannula of it, that is, the upper head in which the thread is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and it should have a distinction so that the thread can be tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be rounded, that is, not open, smooth, gentle, drawing to subtlety: and on one of its sides there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the threads, and a little thicker, and there should be a thread in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal: or from the paper of an egg, which is according to the form of small asafoetida: whose root is one palm.
And it should be perforated with many holes as it is revolving, and let there be a space which is between every hole the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made from crude thread, which is of ten threads, or around that, and tie to it a thread like astofara. When therefore the thread is placed in it, let it be tightened at the head of the clisters between two pads with strong constriction. Then inject with it.
And this is the form of the circle and the utensil depicted here, and of the holes.
The quality of injecting with it, is that you fill the thread or bladder with medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the weak person: and beware that it not be very hot or very cold.
Then the weak person should breathe again on his back, and lift his thighs up to the top, and put under him a cushion, that is, a skin on which men sit, or a cloth.
Then anoint the extremity of the clister with oil, or with the white of egg, or with the mucus of fenugreek, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the servant should take the thread with both his hands at the same time, and press it out with vehemence, until he evacuates all that is in the clister into the intestine.
Then extract the clister, and let the weak person lift his thighs to his side.
Which if the medicine brings it to the end, then let him hold as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it the whole night, it is the more ultimate in juvament.
If however you inject him with the enemas of the belly during illnesses and its exit is hastened: then repeat the clister until he is cured.
What if there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or painful apostemes, then let it be a subtle and mild suppository, from those suppositories with which children are treated.
And this is the form of a subtle suppository on which the skin is stretched tight.
Head 83.
Already I have spoken in the division of the cure of wounds what was suitable for the book, and I will say here the cure of them with the hand, and with medicines according to completion.
I say therefore, that wounds are distinguished according to that by which they are made into wounds, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are often made are like the throwing of a stone: or the cutting of a sword, or of a knife: or the striking with a lance, or with wood, or with an arrow: and similar to these from many things.
The wounds which are made according to the places of the body are, such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver: and similar from these members.
And I will describe the cures of certain wounds, so that I may set down that reasoning and rule concerning the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: since the recollection of compounders will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When there is a simple wound in the head and it is not a fracture of bone: consider then if it is from the throwing of a stone, or similar things, and has already broken the skin to such an extent: and it is a large wound, and often above the weak event of a hot aposteme: then perform promptly phlebotomy of the head at once: and do not delay it: and let out for it from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue: if there is nothing that prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood which comes out of the wound is little. And let bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the weak man beware for himself of overeating, and wine, and coarse foods.
If something prohibits diminishment, then he will diminish from food, and not approach flesh, nor wine.
And put on the wound if there happens to it a hot aposteme, a plaster underneath in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
If you are secure from a hot aposteme, then put on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and the air has not changed it, a powder which I will describe after a little while: and if the air has already changed it, then put on it certain ointments, until it be healed.
If the wound is large, or is from a cut of a sword, and similar things: and its lips do not come together by themselves with pus, then bring them together with a suture, according to what I will describe in wounds of the abdomen concerning their suture.
If the wound has already been torn from the bone, and is hanging, and there is no retention of it, except in a small sling: then cut it. Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore to it hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the weak person, that he be nourished with foods in which there is thickness, such as are heads and cooked wheat, until it be like a pulse: and similar things.
What if you find in the skin rot, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut away the whole rotten part, and cast it away: then treat that.
If however in these wounds there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not stopped by medicines, then tie above the artery. If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it. What if necessity demands it when it does not conjoin what we have said, then cauterize it, until blood is let.
If however these wounds are small, simple, then their treatment is easy, slight: so that you powder over them this powder: because it consolidates them before it changes them to air.
Method of the Powder for Incorporation. Take one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime: pound all together much, and sift: and fill the wound with it, and bind with a good bandage, until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it above with cloths, and leave it, nor loosen it while it remains, so that it does not become an aposteme. For the medicine should not be eradicated from it until it is healed.
And when it is made with lime alone, when you do not have olibanum and dragon's blood present, the latter also performs the same operation in many large wounds, when it is suitable to be placed on them and bound, and they are recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
What if the air has already altered them by some alteration, especially when it is in the summer season, then it is not in a position for the intention of this powder: therefore treat it with what we have said, so that you place on them certain digestive ointments: or place on them poultices made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then treat the remaining ones with a cure, until they are healed.
If it happens with a wound and a fracture of the bone, and it is small, then extract it with a gesture: and I will now speak of the cure of fractures of the head in what is to come.
On neck wounds.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and a head wound as regards treatment when it is simple.
If the nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no ingenuity except that treatment for it should be done with what causes violent constriction, such as ziniar and zegi and similar things. For they injure the nerves and constrict them.
And you should not apply anything cold to the wound at all, since the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is the most elevated of the organs: and let that by which it may be treated be from gentle medicines, such as lotus paste with sweet water infused several times with oil, or with rose oil and tuthia when it has also been washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture: or constrict its lips with poultices. Then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth, or a sinus occurs in its lower part in which pus has already collected, then pierce it in the most depressed place.
If an artery has been cut in the wound and a flow of its blood has followed, then separate it, or cut it off, and ligate it: or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the spongy part of the throat has been cut, or the whole of it, and the alhaudegi have been saved: then bring together the lips of the skin with a suture over a cane in the throat, and do not touch the throat, but reduce it to its natural shape. Then tie it tightly with a bandage and loosen it after a few days. Then treat it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitation, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then perforate it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them, or as many as you can: and what is not prepared, leave it, until the wound putrefies and is separated and the protrusion is alleviated.
What if the wound is fresh, then powder over it the powder that I have described. If however a bone is seen in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with that which I will mention in its own chapter.
On the wound of the shoulder blade.
If it is a thrust of a lance or a knife: and you see its depth, then consider it. If therefore a gurgling sound comes out of the wound, when the weak person breathes from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
What if the depth is not to it, and it is fresh with its blood: then do not put on it powder from the first hour, nor tie it, so that the blood is not retained in its depth, and returned to the heart, and kills the weak person: but put on it an attracting ointment, and loosen it twice a day.
If indeed the ointment is not present to you, then put in the mouth of the wound old cloth, so that it sucks up what comes out from it of humidities: and make that the weak person sleeps on the wound, so that what accumulates in it runs.
If indeed the wound has already passed three days, or more, and no spasms have happened to the weak person, nor bad heart tremors, nor constriction in breathing, and you see the rest of its dispositions good: then know that the wound is safe. Treatment is thus applied to it with bandages, and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If the healing of the ulcer is excavated and it always opens, then you should know that a fistula has already been formed. Treatment is thus applied to it from its own source.
And if the wound is from a cut of a sword or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the breast or the back: then treat it with what has preceded concerning suture, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If however it has already made an impression on the bone, and a fragment has been cut from it: then probe the wound, and hasten to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If indeed they are not separated, then leave them, until the wound becomes putrid, for the extraction of them will be alleviated.
The judgment of treatment for wounds occurring in other limbs is the same as what we have already said.
On the wounds of the abdomen, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their extrusion.
The disruption that occurs to the abdomen is great, moderate, and small.
From a great one, it happens that the intestine or many of the intestines protrude.
For which reason the insertion and suture of them is more violent and difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another way. It follows therefore, that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not hasten to insert them in their place immediately: because they become inflated, open, and enlarged: for which reason their re-entry becomes difficult.
On account of this therefore, a moderate disruption is better than the others: because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with these two types.
Know that the suture of a vein is secondary to four methods.
Two common suture methods come together in the suture of a vein, and in the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other suture methods properly communicate with the remaining wounds. However, they are more proper for the suture of a vein: and I will describe to you each one with exposition, and declaration.
I say therefore, that when a wound is small, and something exits from it from the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then it is suitable for one of the two methods. Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said: or because there is inflammation in the intestine on account of cold air.
When therefore it is thus, then it is necessary that you warm it, so that you immerse a sponge, or a moist cloth in lukewarm water alone. Or you boil in water the juice of cypress, and cumin, and spike, and chamomile, and apply it to the intestine, until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes make a wine in which there is astringency: and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
When therefore you see that the inflammation has already been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow or mallow has been boiled. For by that the entrance of it is alleviated with something little.
If however its return is excavated after this cure, then make a small incision in the disruption, with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than the incision: and there is no need to cut after necessity and lack of the instrument.
Let one part of it be twisted and sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the extremity not be with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather more blunt for a little while: and it is that which resembles a reed, as you see.
When a wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes, then it is necessary that there be a reduction of it according to its natural form in its own proper place, if possible, over that, because it is better.
When the disruption is large in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the weak one lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then put its head, and its chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then put your intention and your consideration always in this, that the part in which there is a wound be higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary that you administer it in great wounds and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, put it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make that the assistant, a pious minister, who holds the whole disruption in their hand, be present between your hands, and bring together its lips. Then let him who follows, apply to it a suture, something after something, and this is the common method of one suture.
And it is that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's depth. Then measure from the edge of the disruption a quantity of a finger's width, that is, of the doctor, and insert one needle beyond which you will insert thread in the two edges of the skin, with the two edges of the suture, which is under the skin from the interior, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have now brought together two edges of the skin, and two edges of the suture: and they become four stitches.
Then tie with doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides at once, until the two lips of the wound are brought together by a proper joining.
Then diminish the thickness of the digit also, and fix a second needle in it: afterwards tie it with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Do not cease to do that with what you insert from the needles, until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and fineness: for thin needles easily pierce the flesh: and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin: because of that it is necessary that they be medium in fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in two extremes of the skin that are close together: so that the flesh is not quickly pierced, and the wound is opened before its own consolidation, and they do not also become elongated with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the ends of the threads, so that they do not injure the weak part by their rubbing: and put little pads made from cloth on all sides, which hold the ends of the threads: and leave them, until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles is thus more suitable for small wounds. For one or two needles, or about that number, are sufficient for the suture of them.
The second common suture is to gather with the suture four ends: two ends of the skin, and two ends of the flesh in place of one, with a needle in which there is a thread wound equally in fineness and thickness.
Then when you penetrate with the needle these four ends, bring the needle back from the part where you began, so that the tied thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so that it is a suture, just like the suture of cloth which clothes are sewn with, and put between every suture the thickness of a small finger.
These men know this suture.
And with this suture I sewed up the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a disruption of the wound larger than one palm, and about two palms of intestine had come out of the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
I reduced it back after his intestine had stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was then consolidated in the space that it had been for around 15 days: and I treated it, and it healed: and he lived many years after that, living out his natural term.
And the physicians judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with an ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor any of the medicines. I placed therefore an old doublet over the wound, and I applied a frequent washing of it with honey water, until it was healed.
But I will describe two proper kinds of suture according to the narrative speech.
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture: and you insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
When the needle thus penetrates into the flesh, and into the torn apart flesh according to the length and width of the whole body: release the thread from the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from the inner part to the outer in the other side of the other flesh.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this same thing on the same flesh from the outer part to the inner: and release the thread which is in that side, and make the needle penetrate into the other side from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration, which you make it penetrate in the thread of the flesh, which is in its part, until it penetrates into the whole thing.
Then begin also from this same side, and sew up the wound with the extremity that is from the suture on the other side, and extract the needle from the skin which it has penetrated.
Then bring it back to that skin, and sew up the extremity of the suture which is on the other side, with this extremity of the thread: and extract it from the skin which is on its own side, and make one knot, and another: and make that knot after the knot, until you have completed the whole thing according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that you sew up the pelles like those who sew up skins: so that you put one knot on one side with one extremity of the skin: and so that you pass it to the other side, until you finish.
The second type of proper suture, which Galenus called.
This speech of his has been narrated as they sew them up according to a likeness, which some physicians do, so that they bring all the part to its corresponding part by nature: and apply the extremity of the thread to its other extremity, and the extremity of the needle to its other extremity. And that is done according to what I tell you.
It is necessary that you fix the needle in the extremity of the thread near to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the interior in that alone: and leave two extremities of the thread. Then turn the needle around, and make it penetrate from the outer part to the interior in the two extremities of the thread, namely on both sides.
Then turn both around, and make them penetrate from the interior to the exterior, into the two other extremities of the needle thread, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is a better suture than the common easy one, and it is a suture which recall has preceded.
This is therefore the treatise of Galen.
And they said certain things. The suture of the wound is reinforced with two needles. Which is, that you insert into them both one thread: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from that which is with you, and make it penetrate up to the other side, following the suture of those who sew the skins equally.
And you should know, that when a disruption is in the middle of the wound, then its suture is more difficult than that of the other places of the wound.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound, is the judgment of other wounds.
Which is, that when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, and sew it, and adapt it: then put on top an incarnative powder.
Which if the air has already altered the wound: then put on it certain ointments, which are present to you, until they make a pus: and the threads fall, and consolidate the flesh, and form a scar. Then treat it as is the treatment of other wounds, until it heals.
If however the medicines are not present to you, then put on it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, old grease: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not apply other treatments in many conditions, when the wounds are simple.
If however you fear that the wound communicates with the principal members in a lesion, then it is necessary that you soak a woolen thread in tempered oil of moderate warmth, or in rose oil: and put it around the places which are between the groin, and under the armpits.
Which if he feels pain, or stitches, or putrefaction in his intestines (for it often happens) then clysterize him with a warm black wine: especially if the putrefaction has already penetrated to the intestine, and an ulcer has been made which penetrates up to the perineum.
And you should know that what is from the thick intestine is of easier cure, and what is from them is from the subtle, of more difficult cure.
The intestine which is called the Jejunum does not receive a cure from any wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from the veins, and their greatness, and because of the subtlety of its body, and proximity of its nature to the nerves.
If however what proceeds from the wound is feces, and you treat it freshly: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If indeed the space has passed beyond it, and already it has become green or black: then it is necessary that you constrict it with a thread above the place which has been discolored by it, so that there does not occur a flow of blood. For in feces there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligature, and put two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so that the attraction of it may be alleviated by you, and the extraction of it in case of feces, and the emission of pus of the wound.
A reminder of the wound which occurs in the intestine.
When there occurs a disruption in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible that it be restored in certain men: because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had become chronic, and a fistula was formed, and there came out from it an evacuation and flatulence.
I have put therefore a cure, until which I was not confident in the healing of it: nor did I cease to treat it subtly, until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
After I saw the place already consolidated, I feared for the weak, that which would happen to the weak happening a disease in its stomach: and there did not happen to it from that happening a disease. And it remained in its better dispositions, eating and drinking, and blowing, and it entered a bath, and was exercised in its diets.
And now certain experimenters have said, that when a wound happens in the intestine and is small: then it is necessary that it be bound in this manner. And it is, that you receive poultices of large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and put a poultice one of them which has an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When it thus takes hold on them, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not loosened.
Then put another poultice near the first, and do not cease to do that with a poultice after a poultice according to the quantity of the whole wound.
Then reduce it, and heal its wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine, until the intestine is healed and cured, and no harm happens to the weak one inwardly.
And now it is possible that the intestine be bound with a subtle thread: which is taken from the intestine of an animal, and attached to it after it has been thrust into a needle.
And it is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and much flesh comes out. Then bind at its end a flax thread subtle and unwound. Then thrust that thread into the needle, and sew with it the intestine. Then reduce it to a closure.
And this method of sewing with poultices and intestine is not but according to the way of trust and hope.
One knows a wound that is great, ample, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no ingenuity unless subtlety, nor is its healing at all.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Know that every wound or aposteme, when it becomes old and aged, and becomes an ulcer, and is not consolidated, and always discharges pus, and does not close: then it is universally called a fistula, in whichever member it may be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula is indeed, according to truth, a hardened, white, calloused nodulation: with which there is no pain, to which the concavity of a bird's wing is similar: and because of that some people call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And it is in certain hours humid, which discharges pus. And perhaps the humidity is discharged at certain hours. And sometimes this humidity is much, and is little: and it is coarse, and it is subtle.
And I have already stated in the division, then when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed, nor flesh grows in it, is not that except on account of one of nine causes.
Of which one is, or on account of the smallness of blood in the body: or on account of its bad quality: or because between it and above its edges there is hard flesh, preventing the growth of flesh: or because there is much filth and foulness: or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material which is applied to it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is unsuitable for its cure: or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, or by the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: in which there is difficult digestion of diseases, and delayed healing of apostemes by nature: or because in it there is one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their cures with medicines in the division, and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuke, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore, that Fistula occurs in all members of the body. For some of them are Fistulas that extend to the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs: or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the composite joints of a composition: such as the hand, and foot: and some of them are which approach the proximity of the principal member, and similar things.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is according to this method, is from diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and the occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
What if it is from the Fistulas any of which the depth does not extend to these places that I spoke of: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and you use to extend to the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of bronze, or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and seek it with it.
If however there is tortuousness in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe of refined lead. For lead, with the gentleness of its body, is lifted and bent around the tortuousness.
What if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to investigate it with a probe. Probe therefore one of its openings from its own openings.
For the moisture that you probe it with, goes back to other openings, and flows out from them.
Then carefully inquire according to which method it is possible for you: to know what that is a mouth, or a nerve, and is the concavity of the Fistula far or near: or if it is one Fistula with many openings, and stand on all that, with the greatest strength of yours: with your questioning, which you question the infirm, and the invention of pain upon compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes occurring to the apostema.
When you stand over all those stations of that place, then proceed to the cure according to your confidence: and it is, as you consider then, if there is a fistula appearing nearby or in a place far from the junction, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which I mentioned to you: then cut the Fistula according to what was previously stated from my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which grows in its opening from the flesh, or the callus, and similar things: and cure it, until it is healed.
If the fistula is of deep and distant profundity, and it is according to rectitude: then it is necessary that you cut it as deeply as is possible for you. Then clean it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer unbroken bandages in sharp medicines: and insert them up to the concavity of the fistula which you comprehended with the iron: do that with it several times, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remained in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
When the cause of the fistula is an opening, and it is confirmed by you: then investigate it, and cut it according to what I have narrated to you: if nothing prohibits you from the vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
When an opening is detected by you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then shave it, until all its corruption is removed. Then cure it with that which makes flesh on it, until it is healed.
If it does not heal, and it emits pus as it was doing: then know that you did not penetrate to the total eradication of the corruption.
Remove that which is above the wound second, and make a precise incision of it, and cleansing of the same with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If then it heals, it is good: and if not, then you should know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which you have not reached. There is therefore no ingenuity for you in it, except to entrust it to nature.
What if the small mouth is corrupted, and it is possible for you, draw it back with subtle forceps that convene to it.
If however there are many bones, then make a precise attraction of all of them, and do not leave any of them behind with your strength.
If indeed anything among the humors makes a contrary to you, and there is no fear of incision or error: then incise those humors and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed there is not for you preparation to remove the bones from your hour, then put on the wound what will rot it: and leave it, until it rots what is in the vicinity of those bones from flesh and humors.
And guard the wound so that it does not consolidate. And let the section which you cut in your operation be constrained. Below put on it, if you wish, a plaster submerged in sulfur beaten with oil: or a plaster submerged in Egyptian ointment, or some of the green ointments.
For when those humors rot, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of them will be alleviated, and their attraction.
If however there is one large bone, such as the thigh bone or the hip bone, and similar to them, and what of it is corrupted is a large part: then scrape it with a final scraping, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If the bone which is in it is corrupted, and it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and to cut it entirely to the place where the corruption penetrates: then treat it, until it consolidates.
And I will tell you a fracture that happens to a man in his thigh: so that you may put it as an example and aid upon your operation.
There was a man of youthful age around thirty years, to whom pain happened in his thigh, from a cause which moved upon it within the body, that is, from the interior, until the matters reached the thigh and it became an aposteme with a large aposteme: and there was not an external cause for him.
It was extended therefore with it the time when the error of the physicians, until the aposteme was opened, and many matters converged with it. And the treatment of it was postponed, until the thigh became fistulous, and many orifices were made in it: which all emitted pus, and the humidity of the body.
A multitude of physicians therefore treated him for about two years, and there was not in it a wise hand in the art, until I was called, and I saw his thigh, and the matters which flowed from those orifices with a great flow: also the whole body of the man had already wasted away, and its color was citrine.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the places of the orifices, and the probe reached to the bone.
Then I examined all the orifices: and I found them to reach to a sinew from all parts of the thigh.
I therefore cut and divided above one of those orifices, until I uncovered a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which already was corroded, and blackened, and putrid, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I will scrape away what has been detected by me, and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I have scraped, what was not in the bone except that corruption, which I cut away and scraped. And I will now eradicate it.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines for a long time. And it is not consolidated.
Then I felt and probed over the bone secondly above the first detection, and I found a continuous corruption with the bone, and I scraped what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted the restoration of it. And it is not restored.
I probed therefore over it again, and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and to attempt its restoration: and it is not restored, until I cut around one palm from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and this iteration in the operation of it, and its section, was not necessary, except because of the disposition of debility of the infirm, and the paucity of his tolerance, and my fear over it of death: since there happened to him in all hours from an excess of evacuation of bad syncopy.
He was healed therefore by an integral healing: and hard flesh was born in the place of the bone, and a good disposition was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he was converted in his dispositions: and no harm was done to him in walking, not at all.
If however the bone is prominent in the place of the body and already fractured: then it is necessary that you scrape it, according to this method: and it is: that you take a ligament, and tie it on the extremity of the prominent bone: and order someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament made of coarse wool on top of the first ligament. Then tie it above the flesh that is under the bone and stretch out the limb so you pull the flesh to the lower parts and you will find the flesh above the place you want to cut, so the saw does not hurt the flesh.
Put a stick or a board under the lower bone decently, for when you do that, it is not prevented from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawing be above the corrupted place for a little while, so that the corruption is not in the concavity of the bone, and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and compels to the sawing of itself rather than another.
For if the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, namely the part of it continues with the part, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in its own part, then strip the flesh from all parts entirely. Then put a stick below.
Afterwards saw it from the first side, where is the corruption, until the sawing continues from the other side: and let the sawing be according to the length of the corruption for a little while, according to what we have said.
For if the corruption is in the joint, cut through the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ingenuity in it except scraping.
For if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or in the chest of the foot, then the matter in it is very difficult. It is necessary that you investigate how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever ingenuity you can make straight, when the vein or nerve does not make a contradiction for you.
And know that the incisions and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and fineness, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Wherefore it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations signify to you above the form of an instrument which you need, when with you is a long study. And the knowledge of the modes of this art is a testimony of the modes of diseases for then you will already find by yourself that which is suitable to it from instruments for every weakness.
And I will establish for you at the end of this chapter a number of instruments which you will cite as examples upon which you rely and a test by which you try other things.
The shape of another saw.
The shape of a razor for joints. Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key: and let its points be according to the shape of the points of an awl.
And it is not suitable unless the heads of joints rub against it when they are corrupted or the mouth is wide and large.
The shape of a larger razor.
The shape of a broad razor.
The shape of a razor in which there is a concavity.
The shape of another subtle razor.
The shape of another razor with a curved extremity.
The shape of a small razor, subtle and held.
This is similar to a file, and the extremities are like a saw: it is shown in many places from the rasping of bones.
The form of a rasp which suits the rasping of that which is perforated by bones.
Its extremities are triangular, and it is sharp at the extremities.
It is made from Indian steel. And similarly it is necessary that all things which we have spoken be made from rasps, and incisors, and saws.
On the cutting of extremities, and the sawing of bones.
The extremities rot, either from an external cause, or an internal one.
When therefore you have treated that corruption with medical cures, and the treatment is not effective: and you see the corruption going into the member, which nothing has struck: then it is necessary that you cut that member until where the corruption has reached, so that the patient may be saved from death, or from the evil which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign to which this happens is that the member turns black, until it rots: which fire has burned it, or it rots after turning black: until the rot is cut out to that which follows that member, and creeps into the whole body.
It is necessary therefore with the cutting of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain poisonous things: such as the marine scorpion, and viper, and weasel, and similar things.
If therefore the corruption, or the sting is in the extremity of a finger, then cut the finger, and do not give space to the corruption, so that it may not go into the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it out from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption, until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if it invades into it, then cut the arm at the elbow in its joint.
If however corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow, then in that there is death of the weak. And to administer beyond that from cure, is a quantity of strength.
And do similarly for the foot, when corruption invades into a toe, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it takes hold in the breast of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. If however it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
What if corruption has already passed beyond the knee, then there is not in it a remedy, except abandonment, and to leave the weak to death.
And the method of cutting a limb, or sawing it, is that you tie a ligature below, which you want to cut: and tie another ligature above the place. And let the assistant stretch one ligature downwards to the lower parts: and let the other assistant stretch the upper ligature upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures, with a broad flat instrument, until the whole flesh is divided. Then let it be cut, or sawn.
And it is proper, that you put a linen cloth on all the parts, and the saw does not touch the healthy place: and an additional injury happens to the weak, and a hot abscess.
If however a flow of blood happens internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put on it some powders that staunch blood. Then return to your medication, until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage suitable for it, and take care of it, until it is healed.
And I tell you what happened to a man with his foot, this same thing that I am telling you.
What is it, that which happens to its foot blackness, with a burning that is likened to the combustion of fire: and that corruption first happens to its toe, until it begins the whole foot.
It has brought out a man from itself, after it saw the corruption befalling the limb with its vehemence, which it found out from the pain, and the burning of it: and it fell upon the joint, and it was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same corruption happened to him on the index finger of his hand.
He came therefore to me, and I attempted to recover that excess with what I placed on the hand from medicines after the purification of his body: and the excess did not rebound, and it began to enter into another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
He called therefore for me to make an incision on his hand: and I was unwilling to do it, hoping from me for a rebound of that excess: and I also feared death itself in the incision of his hand. For the man's strength was upon the case.
After I had given up hope for him, he returned to his land: and he came to me concerning it, that he had hastened, and the whole hand was affected: and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration, except that it may be of help concerning that which falls from the kind of this disease: and that it may be a signification which is signified, and according to which it is acted.
Of the treatment of abscesses, and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess happens in certain fleshy limbs, and the space of the abscess is prolonged, until it makes a collection of pus: then it bursts, or is perforated, and what is in it of pus comes out, and the empty place remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is over it is like cloth that has already been worn thin: and it does not penetrate to the utmost in its corruption, nor does it impress on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be named an abscess: and it is not called a Fistula: nevertheless if its space is prolonged, until the corruption impresses on any of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or a zuken.
And the treatment of it is that you make an incision into the entire wound as it is turned out, and especially when it has been rendered subtle and made like a cloth, and you are confident because it will not adhere to the place on account of its own corruption.
And if you suspect that the skin will adhere, and there does not follow from it the last corruption of the consequence, and if there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with a clyster, and it is that you should consider regarding the anus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it is of foul odor: then clysterize it with an Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and zingar, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vessel: and decocted over fire, until the medicine reddens: and applied to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need, and dissolve it with water and honey, and clysterize the anus with it: and constrict the orifice of it, and let the medicine stay in it for the quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: do this for as many days as until the anus is cleaned and the foul smell is removed.
And when you clysterize with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is that you take the ash of grapevines or the ash of holm oak trees: and throw water upon it. Then strain it, and clysterize with it, until you are confident that the anus is now cleaned.
Which if the weak person is not able to tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor water of ashes, then clysterize it with water and honey, into which something has already been mixed from crushed ginger. Or clysterize it with honey and wine mixed together, since it is a property of honey to clean and wash, and the wine makes the anus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and astringency in the wine.
When you do that several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has already been removed: then insert a suppository with what makes flesh grow in it.
And it is, that you take from the plaster dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine, or insert a suppository with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatment of ointments.
What if the orifice of the sinus is narrow, in which the cannula of the clyster does not fit: then widen it with iron for a little while: or put in it a pledget wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in royal ointment, until it is widened.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then bring its lips together with a suture: and reduce from it the quantity in which the clyster can enter without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus runs is elevated to the upper parts: then make an incision in the lower place that is in it, so that the pus may run out from it downwards: for when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
What if it is not possible for you to make an incision in the sinus around its lower part according to what you wish: then try to prepare a membrane with a preparation so that pus may run out from it with ease according to what is prepared for you. Try, that nothing of the pus is retained in it at all: and take consolidating medicines that are put on the wound, suitable to what you wish. And spread them on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it makes contact with the entire sinus. Then cut with forceps directly at the orifice of the sinus a hole, slightly larger than the orifice of the sinus. Then extend from the unguents a gentle dressing over another cloth, according to the quantity of the wound: and put it on the same position lengthwise from the orifice of the Sinus, so that the pus may be drained from it: and you will not remove the large dressing, except after some days once.
That one, however, which is over the orifice of the Sinus, is that which you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may go out: and so that you know, whether what flows from it is much, or little: or digested, or undigested.
And with this again consider the location of the Sinus itself, whether the master of it feels pain in it, or there is no pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or there is not an abscess in it.
When therefore your treatment is thus extended, and you see the matter which goes out over the orifice of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus already adheres, or approximates to adhesion: then therefore loosen it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you loosen the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the unguent.
If however there goes out from the Sinus after a long space subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are some who act contrary to that.
If however there goes out from the Sinus after many days undigested pus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed, and its matter is prolonged: then add to the excitation of medicines, which truly make medics, so that they are medicines in their substance humid, and in their virtue dry: such as the unguent dyafinicon, when there is added to it an excess of addition from zegi.
And from the greatest last of which it is cured, it is that you take the ointment called dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil, and apply it on top of the old wine equal in its substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now it does a similar action to this, when the ointment dyafinicon is not present to you, honey, when you have decocted it, until it becomes thick, and you use it. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind all of that, and pulverize it over the honey while it is over the fire. Then smear it over a cloth, and bind it over the wound: and smear with honey that you have decocted, until it has thickened: and pulverize the spices over it, and put over it a cloth, and bind it.
And when it is administered, there are given to it Aristolochia longa, and the roots of lily of heaven, and it is lily: and flour of the herb, and centaury. Use them simple, or mixed, grind them, and sift them: and pulverize over the honey that I have described, and use it.
What if the matter of the wound is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure: then know that there is a corruption in its depth: or now it makes an impression on the bones, or on the remaining hard members, or on the ligaments: then treat it with the cure of Fistulas, according to what has been stated before.
On the treatment of a wounded or rubbed-away nail, and an incised toe, and a cut.
A panaritium is a tumor that grows under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot: and perhaps it grows on the other toes.
When it grows, the matter of it is prolonged, and its cure is neglected, and it suppurates with a hot tumor: or it becomes rotten, and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it rots entirely, and perhaps the corruption passes to the bone, until there is a foul smell: and the extremity of the toe becomes broad, and its color becomes dark.
When you raise your treatment with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not work: then it is necessary to cut with iron all the surplus that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cauterization is a strong help.
If indeed the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of vacant nail now press on the flesh inside, and begin to pierce it, and wound it: then it is necessary that you put a subtle pumice under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut that flesh with ease, and put on top of what remains of the flesh from medicines that burn and corrode, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If however the corruption has already made an impression on the bone, then it is necessary to cut out that bone, and extract it: for it will not be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains in it.
What if you see corrosion and corruption entering into the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to which its movement has been previously established. Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however there occurs nail attrition or a blow, and there is severe pain in it, then it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the weak part first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, a cross-section from above downwards.
And beware, lest the cut penetrate to the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause through it severe pain on the weak part, and it will be a cause for the birth of additional flesh in the location.
Then treat the place with what calms pains.
The digit which is added to the birth of some hands of men, is perhaps entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some nodes of the digit. That which is born at some node of the digit, does not move: and that which is born near the joint of the digit, perhaps moves.
The section of that which of them is fleshy, is easy. That you should cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The treatment of that whose birth is at the root of the joint, is difficult. Therefore refrain from cutting it.
In that which is born on the digit near the last node, then it is necessary to cut the flesh first with a round incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for that purpose. Then treat it, until it is healed.
The joining together which happens to the digits, often happens either from the birth of the man, that is, it is born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from the burning of fire, and similar things.
It is necessary therefore to cut away that consolidation, until the digits return to their natural form. Then put between them a dressing or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate between them: or put between them a subtle sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if there happens a joining together of some digits with the palm, then cut away that consolidation, according to what prepares and suits the shape of the member.
On the incision of the vein.
There are varicose veins, thick and full of melancholic superfluities which occur in many parts of the body: and they most often happen in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers.
It is necessary therefore that you administer a strong purging of the body from black bile many times with strong purging.
Then perform bloodletting on the patient in the vein of the arm.
The treatment of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they are cauterized and black blood is extracted. And the other method is that the vein is lifted up and entirely removed.
The cutting of it is according to this method. First apply warmth with hot water to the leg until the thick bloody feculence is dissolved. Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of the thigh to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three incisions as needed.
Then lift, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and it is necessary that you perform bloodletting on the weak one first. Then cut the vein until below, until a quantity of blood comes out that you see is sufficient and which the strength of the weak person can tolerate.
Afterwards bind it, and instruct him to abstain from foods that produce black bile, and also evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, for this harms the weak person.
The evacuation of it is according to this method. Shave the weak leg if there are many hairs on it. Then insert it into the bath, or immerse it in its hock with hot water, until it becomes red and the veins become swollen, or let it be exercised with strong exercise, if the bath is not at hand, until the member becomes warm.
Then cut the skin in the direction of the vein's section along its length: or at its end near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and excavate the vein from every part, until it appears to sensation: and at its appearance, that which you see is that it turns from redness to blackness downward. When therefore it emerges from the skin, you see it as a white thread.
Then insert under it the razor, until when it is elevated and comes out of the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook, gently.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then excavate the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it appears. Then elevate it with the razor as you have done, and suspend it with another hook, as you have done at first.
Then cut another section, or several sections, if you need them. Then elevate and cut it at the last section near the heel.
Then pull it out to the section which is above it.
And do that until you pull it out from the section which is superior, or higher than all the sections, until when it comes out whole: then cut it.
If it does not obey you to pull out and elevate: then insert a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and pull it out: or insert the razor under it: and turn your hand to every part, until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to heal the wound, and an injury will increase from it on account of its weakness.
When you have extracted it entirely, then put on the place of the wound a wool cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, and treat it until it is healed.
What if the vein is contracted, having a twisting where there is an involution to the parts, and it is not as we have said according to rectitude: then it is necessary that you find on it at every part of its twisting, and the place of its involution.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you elevate it entirely: and beware at your dissection above it lest you strike a vein, or wound: for it will be difficult for you to elevate, or extract it. Preserve therefore your prudence.
The shape of the incision by which the vein is healed.
The shape of a blind hook.
It does not have curvature like the rest of the hooks, nor is it of sharp extremity, so that it does not wound the vein: and it is of gentle flexibility, thick: for if it were subtle, it would strike the vein with its subtlety: indeed let it be a superfluous thickness, as we have said.
On the extraction of the saphena vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot climates, such as Alizegi, and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands of little tenderness, that is, in which no herb or tree is born.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is indeed from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just like it happens inside the bodies of snakes and worms, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
The sign of the inception of this vein is an effusion which occurs in the thigh as a severe inflammation. Then let the place be looked at. Then the vein begins to come out from the place of that inspection, as if it were a root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore the extremity of it appears, then you should wrap around it a piece of lead, whose weight is one or two drachms, and tie it, and let the suspended lead hang from the thigh.
As often as anything comes out from it to the exterior, wrap that in lead and tie it. What if it is prolonged a great deal, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it at the root until the whole thing has come out. For if you cut it, it contracts and returns into the flesh, and causes an abscess to occur, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Wherefore it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it comes out from its last part, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this vein comes out in some men what is five palms and ten in length. And now it has happened to me, that a man came out with it twenty palms.
If however it is cut during the time of your treatment, then insert the root into its hole, and perforate it with a long instrument, with a body, until everything that is in it of material comes out: and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for some days. Then treat it with the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings occur to it, and a branch comes out from each opening.
Treatment is applied to it, as we said in the division, and with what has been mentioned beforehand.
On the excision of worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouina disease.
This disease is called Bouina disease in a certain land among us: because it often happens to cattle, and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it wanders throughout the whole body, going up and down: and it shows itself to feeling during its movement from limb to limb, until it breaks out wherever it breaks out on the skin, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putridness of certain humors. As worms and snakes happen, that is, intestinal worms, and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared on account of its malice. For when it wanders in the body, and rises to the head, and reaches the location: then perhaps it opens in it, and emerges, and destroys the eye: and this happens many times.
When therefore you wish to treat it, and extract it, then it is not done unless during its movement, and the appearance of itself to feeling.
It is necessary therefore, that you bind what is above it, and what is below it with a strong constricting bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
If it has become embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it: then apply a cautery with fire to the location, until it dies.
And the greater thing that is feared, is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If however you see it having already reached the head near the eye, then bind beneath it the eyebrow with a good strong bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
And it is suitable that he should use the mild treatment of his body with medicines that dissolve putrid malignant humors.
And let him beware for himself of foods generating putrefaction.
On the incision regarding the disease of Nakir.
This disease is called in our land Nakir, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then it changes from member to member.
And I have indeed already seen it, according to which I relate to you. I was called to a weak woman in certain villages. And she stretched out her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after I remained for one hour, I saw one swelling entering with a thread, as a worm enters, ascending to her shoulder more swiftly than it can be, so that it is like living silver, when it runs from place to place.
The pain therefore receded from that place, and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran into the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it was turning in her whole body, according to what I saw.
I was amazed therefore at the swiftness of its change from member to member. And I had not seen this disease before with my own eyes in this manner. However, I saw many who find the pain changing from member to member, and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is anything but because she was one of those who are from villages with a dry body, detecting the veins, hence therefore it appears to the sense that the veininess is changed.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this method in those who are delicate and in bodies that are humid with hidden veins.
When you apply the treatment to it, and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye, as we have said, then press above it and below it quickly: and cut above it, until the constrained bloating goes out: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with a purge of the body, and with that which expels bloating, and purges them with foul-smelling pills, and pills made from serapion, and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are distinguished according to their kinds and according to the places where they fall from the body.
Their diversity is this: that among them are those which have large and small points, and are hollow and blunt. And among them are those which have three edges. And among them are those with barbs. And among them are those with little stars.
Those indeed which are according to the limbs where they fall, are according to two methods. For the limbs are either from the principal hollow limbs, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar things. When therefore it falls into any one of these limbs, and the signs of death appear to you, which I will tell you afterwards, then it is necessary that you should give up the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows in him in whom it is, in most cases. And when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For signs of the brain are when an arrow falls into it, and penetrates the bone, and exits through the siphac which is above the brain, there occur: because accidents happen from that, such as heaviness, and dizziness, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of the intellect, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood exits from the nostrils, or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed. And a moisture similar to white pus exits from the place of the wound. And there exits from it something similar to the decay of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast: and one feels it as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in a hollow thing. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the movement of a pulse: and black blood runs out from the wound. And it is followed by coldness of the extremities, and a cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore, that death descends without a doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung, is the exit of foamy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck become disordered, and the color of the sick person changes. And he breathes out a great, high spirit: and seeks an attraction of cold air.
For if the arrow falls into the membrane, which is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs: and there is made a great panting with vehement pain, with sighing: and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested will come out of the wound from the food.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and is fixed in it, something of dung will come out of the wound, or gas, or intestine which is already disrupted. There is therefore no hope in its cure, nor in the removal of the arrow.
What if an arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger above the weak place: then you should know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder, and upper arm, and spine of the back, and collarbone, and hip, and leg, and similar ones from the limbs are saved according to multiple arrangements: when the arrow does not find an artery or a nerve: and the arrow is not poisonous.
And I tell you what I have seen concerning the extraction of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding your cure.
Which is, that to a certain man an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not take out anything of it except a small end, with which it adhered to his bone: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no notches.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no bad accident happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And there was an Arabic arrow, and it is that which has a head. I cut above it between two guidings: and now it was submerged in his throat. I was careful with it, until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from the man into whom it had fallen in his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed for him, and nothing had changed in his condition, I cut above the arrow: and I applied a poultice to it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated above it. After seven years had passed, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was consolidated above it, and the arrow remained inside her: and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow had fallen into his face: and the wound was consolidated, and it remained, not causing him much pain: and many things similar to these.
And I extracted an arrow from one of the King's leaders, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and it had declined to the right side a little: and the whole arrow was hidden.
I was called therefore to his cure after the accident of the arrow for three days. I found the wound of the arrow constricted tightly.
I searched for it with a subtle probe, and I did not feel it: and he himself felt a puncture and pain under his right ear. The instrument is therefore a needle that comes from the extremity of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the spot with a plaster in which there was an attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place would apostulate and the sign of the arrow would appear to me so I could cut above it, but nothing happened at the spot indicating whether or not the arrow had hit it.
I treated it then with a plaster for many days, but no effect occurred and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and he remained weak from the extraction of it for a space of days, until he felt the arrow on a certain day inside his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I applied then to that wound a sharp corroding medicine for many days, until it was opened: and when I probed I felt the subtle extremity of the arrow which adhered to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us, and it remained with me for a space of time around four months.
Then after the wound had been enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey for exit: then I did not cease to subtly contrive and ingeniously work on it with modes of contrivance, until I began to work on it one day with well-made forceps, according to which the shape of them will be described at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And doctors indeed judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. I restored it then, and the wound was consolidated, and the weak one was healed with complete health, and nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you may put a rule and significance on it based on what I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration, nor does the book comprehend it, and the skilled artisan compares a little with much, and that which is present with that which is absent, and finds a new operation and a new instrument in the descent of extraneous things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed, except in two ways. Or by extraction from the place into which it entered. Or by the opposite part of another.
And that which comes out from where it entered, is either an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place, and is drawn out, and comes out.
For if it does not obtrude to the exit from the hour in which it falls, then it is necessary that you should leave it for some days, until the flesh which is in its vicinity putrefies, and its attraction is alleviated, and its egression.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone, and does not obtrude to you at the exit, then leave it also for some days, and move it with attraction and motion every day, until it comes out.
For if it does not obtrude to you at the exit after days, then it is necessary that you should perforate in the vicinity of the arrow in the same bone on every side with a subtle drill, until the arrows are enlarged. Then draw it out and extract it.
And if the arrow has already been hidden in a location of the body, and is concealed and hidden from sensation: then investigate it with probing. And if you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments which are suitable for its attraction.
And if you are not able to reach it, on account of the constriction of the wound, and on account of the length of the arrow in the depth: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein there: then probe above it, until the wound is enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
What if there are to them bones which hold it, then free the flesh fixed in them from every side, with every ingenuity that you can, and ingenuities, if it cannot be above the separation of the flesh in the fracture of the bones, and their dislocation, until it is extracted.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then use the dislocation of your hand, with forceps on all parts, until you make it come out: and proceed with utmost subtlety, so that the arrow is not broken, and its attraction and extraction are not made difficult for you.
What if you cannot reach it in one hour, then leave it for some days, until those things that are around it putrefy. Then return to it: for indeed the pus will have relieved the contrary condition for you, if on the other hand a flow of blood makes a complication for you, then administer what we said concerning its cure in its own chapter: and guard your skill from cutting the vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And administer the instrument in every way that is possible to you for the extraction of the arrowhead: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have narrated to you.
And it is necessary, that you do when you pull out the arrow, that it be loose according to the shape, according to which it was in the case of the arrow itself. For it is of greater advantage. If however it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The arrow which comes out from the contrary part of another, or now something already proceeds from it to the exterior: or it makes a gibbosity of the extremity of the arrow by sensation from the upper part of the adjacent skin, and you see it standing out: cut therefore over it, and let the cutting be according to the quantity that the forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull it out: for it itself becomes easy to exit.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow impresses on the bone, and enlarges itself: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for some days: then repeat it, until it comes out.
What if the wood of the arrow is in it, then drive it out with it.
If however the wood has fallen, and you want to administer a push: then introduce into it a concave instrument, so that its concavity enters into the tail of the arrow: then drive it out with it.
If however the arrow is concave, then drive it out with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow will be raised by that.
What if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary, that you hollow out the whole flesh, in which the venom is: if it is possible for you. Then treat it with what connects to that.
What if it is an arrow falling in the breast, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and is near to that which you touch with the probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of the incision of a vein, or a nerve, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see, and treat it, until it is healed.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let there be similar extremities like a bird's beak, which are made like iron: when they grasp above the arrow, they do not release it.
And they are made of them in many kinds, large and small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
The form of a concave pusher.
And the form of a convex pusher.
This is the extremity of the convex one, like a rod, so that its entrance is alleviated into the concave arrow, and it is pushed with it.
Of the cutting of veins.
The veins to be cut, whose course is known in the body, are thirty.
Of these, in the head are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called the two Herbae: and two arteries, which are visible in both temples: and two veins which are in both tear ducts of the eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead: and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose. And two guide rods, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins that are bled from in the arms, are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalica, and it is from the left side: and the common people call it the vein of the head. And the dark one. And it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica: and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilica, and it is placed on the right side: and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the cord of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow: and it is that from which blood is let, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a visible and clear appearance.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger: and there are two branches of it.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is the one that is under the bend of the thumb on the left side. And the second is the Saphena: and its place is at the heel on the right side. And the vein Ness: and its location is at the heel on the left side.
And in the other leg there are three similar veins.
Of the bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
The bloodletting of the two veins which are behind the ears is a remedy for old catarrhs, and hemicrania, and sahafat, and bad old headaches.
The quality of bloodletting is such that it is secondary to which I relate. And it is, that the head of the weak one should be scraped: and his occiput should be rubbed at the place of the two veins with a rough cloth for good friction. Then the weak one should bind his neck with a ribbon, until the two veins appear. And the places of the ears are behind the ears in two depressed places of the head. Seek them therefore with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there mark with a branding iron.
Then take the bloodletting knife, and it is that which is called the Incising one. Then insert it under the vein in the skin, until the bloodletter reaches the mouth. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin to the upper parts, and cut the vein with the skin with an incising cut. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that, and make come out from the blood as much as you want.
Then bind it with poultices, and leave it, until it is healed.
And now the incision of them has preceded in the beginning of the book, and their cauterization.
Of the two Arteries which are in the two temples, bloodletting is a remedy for old migraine: and wrong pride, and frequent eye disease: and an outpouring of overflowing humors to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting them is according to which I relate to you. Let the weak one bind his neck tightly, until the two veins appear with a clear and obvious sensation, and let their pulse be felt under your finger. Then apply the septicum with cauterization.
Next raise the skin upwards with your index finger to the upper parts and insert the lancet from underneath and raise the vein to the upper parts. And cut it, as you did with the two other veins, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then loosen the tight bandage and put your finger on the vein for one hour. Afterwards put a plaster and poultices on it, and bind it tightly from above with a strong bandage: and leave it until it heals.
And now the description of them, and their cutting, and their extraction has already been dealt with at the beginning of the book.
The justification for bloodletting from the vein of the forehead after the bloodletting of the head is for long-standing facial ailments and for half-headache and redness and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this bloodletting is according to what I will tell you. The patient should bind his neck with a ribbon until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called a Fossorium.
Put the sharp point that is at the head of the Fossorium on the vein, and strike it with a hammer or something else in its manner: and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you want. Then loosen the bandage of the patient and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet. However, it is not necessary that the bloodletter be of sharp extremity, but rather of broad extremity, unlike other bloodletting instruments. And let the bloodletting be second to the transfusion because the mouth is nearby and perhaps the bloodletter will cut it when it is subtle.
The treatment of the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, is for an eye affected with itch and redness: and to purify the eye, and the pains of the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting of them is, that it constricts the weak neck with a thread. Then let the bloodletter perform on them: and you stand over its head.
And let the bloodletting be done across to a little length, with a small bloodletter, broad for a little while, for there is no flesh in the place. If the bloodletter is subtle at the extremity, perhaps it will be cut.
Then let flow out of the blood as much as is necessary for you. And put a plaster over them, and constrict them one night, and release them.
The bloodletting of the veins of the Nose is beneficial for acute fever and vehement swelling, and pains of the face, such as half-headache and redness which occurs in the face: especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of its bloodletting is, that it constricts the weak neck. Then hold its nose with your left hand, and take a subtle bloodletter, long: and fix it in the middle of the lip, between that which distinguishes the nose according to straightness. Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you press your hand with the bloodletter for a little while: and let flow out of the blood according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it is restored quickly.
The remedy of Guidetti's bloodletting is for constriction of the breath, and catching of leprosy, and melancholy diseases, and impetigo and evil sores, and corroding, that is, herpes and itch.
And the quality of the bloodletting of the ears is that it should constrict the weak one under both with a bandage on his neck: and let the artisan stand over the head of the weak person, and the weak person should be sitting on a seat.
Then let blood from the vein to the length of the bloodletting instrument, for a short time, being ample. Then take out from the blood a quantity tempered, or according to that which you see by necessity which is for it. Then do likewise for the other vein.
Afterwards undo the bandage, and constrict the two veins with a moderate tightness: so that the weak person is not suffocated. And let it be until morning. For the wound will heal.
Of the bloodletting of the veins, according to Algeberich. The remedy of Algeberich's bloodletting of the veins is: because it benefits the ulceration in the mouth, and corruption of the gum: and evil sores: and cracks of the lips, and evil sores, also which are in the nose, and its surroundings.
And the quality of the bloodletting of the ears is, that you should make the weak person sit before you: and constrict his neck with a band. Then uncover his lip, and look at the two veins: of which one is on the right of the lip, and the second on its left: and the sign of each is through blackness of the gums. And that vein is: because around the ears there are small black veins. Cut therefore on both sides with an oblique incision.
If however there is doubt in you, and you do not know which of them it is: then attend to the incision of the greater one, and it will become more manifest.
And do similarly for the two veins which are in the upper lip: and for the most part custom runs with it: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Of bloodletting from the vein under the tongue after the bloodletting of the head. The remedy of the two veins which are under the tongue for bloodletting is: that the bloodletting of the head is for the afflictions which are in the throat, and the sickness of the uvula, and the sicknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting them is, that you should seat the weak one between your hands before the sun: and elevate his tongue, and look under the tongue from one side one vein, and from the other side another vein: and the color of both veins is inclined towards blackness.
Bloodlet therefore on both: and beware, lest your last hand be in bloodletting them. For under them are arteries, and perhaps it happens that there is a flow of blood from those arteries.
The three veins indeed which are bloodlet in the elbow, are in which the custom of bloodletting has run in all men.
And the bloodletting of them is done according to two methods. Either by pricking with a broad myrtle needle: or inclining to subtlety with an olive: or cutting with a knife-shaped needle, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its shape.
And from them are broad and subtle types according to the width of the veins and their tightness. The form of the myrtle phlebotomy is broad, as you see. And it converges to the opening of hollow veins, full, proceeding, apparent, thick and those which contain gross, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width, and more subtle extremities.
And it converges to the phlebotomy of subtle veins, which contain subtle yellow blood.
The Basilica, however, which is one of these three veins for phlebotomy, is a remedy. For it extracts blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, from that which follows the chest and stomach: and it converges to the phlebotomist with the phlebotomy instrument, so that he may cut, and is above fear of it, for beneath it is an artery. If therefore he misses, and touches the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will wound that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Wherefore it is necessary, that the phlebotomist does not puncture with the phlebotomy instrument: but rather cuts with Alnesil.
What if the Basilica does not appear with a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you displace it, and change to another, or that you seek some branch of it: or you make a phlebotomy in place of it on the arm vein. For it itself is manifest, and cut it with the phlebotomy instrument Alnesil, as we have said.
If however you use the phlebotomy of the same itself, then it is necessary before the tightness of the arm, that you touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then apply a cautery on the spot with an incision, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave section using a phlebotome of Alnebil, as we have said. And let the cautery not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, with you tighten the ligature, an inflammation in the place which you signed with a cautery, then that inflammation is the inflation of the artery: avoid it therefore.
For if you see blood at the phlebotomy jumping, like the urine of a child, and it is subtle blood, red: then know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then draw near, and put your finger on it in a long space, afterwards remove your finger. If the blood is then cut off (for it is often cut off), then tighten the arm, and release it: and let the weak one be cautious of its motion: and let it be above its fear.
And do not move it for some days, until it is healed.
If the blood does not stop, and overcomes you: and your medicine is not present at the moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For the extremities of it contract, and the blood is stopped.
Or take the bark of a fig tree, and crush it: take one half, and bind it with a decent stricture over the place of the vein, with a ligature and poultices until another day.
Then if the blood is stopped, it is good. And if not: then treat it with that which the remembrance of the place has preceded, powder to stop the flow of blood: and the stopping of its blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the smallness of the place of the wound, and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
The bloodletting of the dark vein is a remedy that draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of the royal branch and the cephalic branch, as we have said.
And it is suitable for the bloodletter to be above the fear from the bloodletting of it, because under it is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the puncture of the bloodletting and strikes a nerve, numbness occurs in it, and the healing of it becomes difficult, and perhaps it is not healed entirely.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. If however it is hidden in certain men, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then it is necessary that you place your bloodletting where you will bloodlet with a cut with the Alnesil, and divert the nerve with your strength.
For if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.
On the cephalic vein. The bloodletting of the cephalic vein is a remedy because it draws blood from the head and is useful for the ailments of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein especially, if you wish, that you bloodlet it by puncturing with an olive branch phlebotome, or with a myrtle phlebotome: because it is the saver of all veins, because there is not beneath it an artery, nor a nerve.
Truly it is suitable for you at the bloodletting, that you divert with the phlebotome the head of the lancet so much, and seek a thinner place: and it does not harm it, if it is not found with the first puncture, that the bloodletting be repeated over it several times.
A true abscess sometimes forms in certain men when not bloodletting is performed on the first percussion, but that abscess does not harm him in any way.
Of the utility of Bloodletting, and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of Bloodletting, however, and its accidents which arise from it, in whose correction you ought to consider.
First therefore it is of that which you ought to know, that bloodletting is not administered except in conservation of health and its preservation and caution against the approach of illnesses.
And that bloodletting is performed on one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic and the Fusca and the Basilic. And that bloodletting is done at the beginning of Spring on an empty stomach, and in Summer, and Autumn, and Winter after digestion, when the signs of fullness appear.
And bloodletting should be done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed from the day.
Bloodletting which is administered in illnesses does not have a determined hour, but when convenience and necessity provoke it, at night or day, and every hour, and every time.
And it is not fitting that children be bled until fourteen years are upon them. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should old men be bled who have already passed sixty years.
When therefore someone wants to be bled for any reason: it is necessary that he cleanse his intestines before bloodletting with a gentle clyster, if there is much stool retained in them: so that the veins do not attract from the intestines putrid and harmful superfluities to the principal members.
Nor should blood be let from a patient who is suffering from nausea, that is to say, disgust; nor one who is drunk or vomiting from intoxication, until that is removed from them. Nor the weak with dropsy.
And let blood be taken again after colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the belly, and excessive coition, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and anything that dissipates virtue from the bodily or animal substance.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, whether the blood is thick with foods and drinks and medicines, if it is possible for him.
Then let a bath be taken, if nothing prevents it, or let exercise be used, so that the blood may be thinned.
And let bloodletting be applied to his chest, around the third day, as we have said: and take care, that his chest may be evacuated on that day from all bad animal accidents: such as anguish, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and excessive coition, and similar things.
And let him have present the things with which usage has created a habit in men from aromaticity, and fragrance, and rubbing and similar things to the quantity of possibility.
Then let the bloodletter sit on a cushion, which is higher than the cushion of the one to be bled: afterwards let him draw out his arm, and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then let him tie the bandage with a strap, and turn it twice.
And let the tightening be moderate, because when the tightening is uneven, or excessive in tightness, then it prohibits the flow of blood: and in looseness, it also prohibits the flow of blood.
Then after the constriction, it is necessary that the hand of the bloodletter rubs his hands together, until the veins become swollen and are apparent to the sense.
Then the bloodletter shall wipe the vein with a little oil, belonging to himself or an old one.
Then he shall place his index finger of the left hand on the vein under the location where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein does not escape and the stroke is made. For there is a vein which when you come upon it during bloodletting slips away like a bowstring: and of them there is one which is full of wind: and when you place the bloodletting instrument on it, it contracts under the blade, and the bloodletter is deceived, and the vein does not show itself: and if it does show itself, it is constricted: therefore it is necessary that the bloodletter be steady, and be solicitous in all these things.
Then he shall put down the bloodletting instrument. If then the vein is exposed from one stroke, then it is good. And if not, then he shall try again another time in that location, or above it with speed, provided the place is not damaged.
What if it becomes inflamed, or becomes weak and feeble, then let it be for a day, or two days: and do not constrict the bandage. For perhaps heat will attract the inflammation. And let him not enter a bath.
Then he shall repeat the bloodletting, if it is loved.
What if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and thinly: and so that not a quantity of blood escapes which is excessive: then he shall try the bloodletting instrument in the same opening, according to what is right, and add a little to the operation.
And let him do it with speed, before the place becomes inflamed, for an inflamed place is a problem for many men during a small operation.
If then you see it already suppurating, then do not repeat on it altogether, for it does not excuse anything with you. And put something upon it from the dregs of oil: because it will alleviate the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your bloodletting, which you let blood to prohibit the flow of blood: and they call it Tyriac Alfarach, and Sagzenea, when it is put from one of them on the place.
For blood is refined and dissolved, when it is thick.
What if it happens in the place of bloodletting a large abscess, for it often happens, especially to him who is not accustomed to bloodletting except by chance, or is opening a small vein, then quickly and put on the place a sponge soaked in hot water and salt: and bind it for one hour: because it will dissolve.
And it is necessary that you do that after the blood has come out from the same vein, when its flow is complete, or from another vein.
What if something black or green remains in the place after days, it does not harm: and if you wish, put on it some aloe, or a solution of myrrh: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamint or similar to it.
And often indeed abscesses and swellings occur with bloodletting of the Basilica.
Therefore put your hand on it, then if you find softness with compression on it, then that swelling is bad. Beware therefore, that you put on it something of what we have said. For perhaps blood of the artery will flow from it.
But make for it an plaster with that in which is astringency, so that the place may be indued. Then cure itself with the remainder of the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary, that you extract from every man blood according to the quantity of his virtue. And what appears from the color overcoming the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it exit, until it becomes red: and similarly if you see it thick: then let it exit, until it becomes subtle: and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs extraction of blood twice, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified, and the phlebotomist be skilled: and in him who is weak, let it be to the contrary of this.
And it is necessary, that he extract it in the veins, and that the opening be narrow: and better that which is administered in the phlebotomy of the vein is, that it be a cross-section, not a puncture.
And this mode of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of the nerve: and it is more to be praised, and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And to whom it is customary to faint at phlebotomy of the syncopis, it is necessary that he eat before phlebotomy moderate bread infused in water of granate or of musk, if it is warmed: and extract for him from the blood in three veins, or four.
And if it is a cold complexion, then let him receive before phlebotomy bread infused in syrup of myrrha, or in syrup of honey aromatized with spices, or in syrup aromatized with perfume.
What if it happens a faint at phlebotomy, and is the cause of its exit of much blood: then it is necessary, that he take in drink water of flesh, and subtle perfume syrup: and that he use aromaticity with galbanum, and that his breast be lined with it: and that he use the remaining things which we said in the division in the chapter of faint from evacuation.
Whoever wishes to purify his arm and release his blood secondly: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is due to abundant evacuation, and the virtue of it is weak, that he should release blood little by little according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
Who indeed wishes to purify his arm and release his blood secondly, and his body is strong: then let him do that after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to attract blood from his body to the opposite part to which it inclines: it is necessary that he should be purified on the second day, or on the third.
In whom there is indeed much blood already heated and sharpened, and it causes fever to occur: it is necessary that blood should go out from it in a single vein, and a large quantity be extracted from it: and the opening be widened until syncope occurs: after which you have observed all conditions of phlebotomy: and that you place your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncope. For it often happens, when the phlebotomist is ignorant, and negligence occurs.
And it is not necessary when the vein has been closed, and the second release of blood is to be made, with the orifice of the vein already closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, that it should be pressed upon with violence, and the curved needle extended quickly. For that is a grievous evil, leave it alone, until a second phlebotomy is made.
Or remove with acuteness of phlebotomy that which has coagulated from the blood at the orifice of the vein, and put on it something of salt dissolved in water. And put on it something of tyriac alfarch or sageena, and apply it with gentle compression, until the blood goes out.
If the vein has already become varicose, then leave it, and do not touch it, until the aposteme has settled.
What if necessity provokes to let blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either perform phlebotomy on it above that place, or on another arm in another vein.
The veins of the arms are bled at the places of the Funis, and Basilica, when they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed from them.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is, that an weak hand should be put into warm water, until it becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
Then let it be constricted above itself with a bandage of moderate tightening. Then let the phlebotomy be done across gradually, not across the width, nor along the length: and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be where you will phlebotomize above the joint of the hand for a short time.
What if the flow of blood is stopped, then put the hand again in warm water, and let the blood flow in the water, until you obtain your necessity.
If however it is in the days of summer, then you should be spared from putting the hand again in warm water. And for the most part, the flow of blood is put into warm water in winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is salvation to all veins, because there is neither a pulse beneath it, nor a nerve.
The phlebotomy of the right Salvation vein is conferring with the liver's illnesses.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is, that you constrict the hand with a bandage, or your hand, after you have put it into warm water, until the vein becomes inflated, and shows itself to the sense. Then let the bloodletting be done by crossing over. And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm it in any way.
And be careful, lest you wound your hand with the lancet. For under it are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then put the hand into warm water, and let the blood flow out into it. For if you do not put it in warm water, the blood coagulates in the opening of the vein, and is prevented from flowing.
When you have extracted the amount of blood necessary, then put oil and salt on the vein, so that it does not close quickly.
And similarly it is necessary to do with every constricted branch.
The justification of its bloodletting from the left hand is that it contributes to diseases of the spleen: and do similarly in its bloodletting as you did in the second equally.
The justification of bloodletting from the saphena vein is for diseases which are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the matrix, and retention of menses, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and thighs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its bloodletting is that the weak foot should be immersed in warm water: and friction should be made on it until the veins are swollen: and bind above the joint of the foot with a bandage. And the place of the vein is near the heel, appearing towards the thumb: and many branches ramify from it on the sole of the foot.
Therefore perform bloodletting on its larger branch, or near the heel at its collection: because it is better and more healthful.
For if you perform bloodletting on the sole of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are under it on the surface of the foot.
And place your venesection where you want to make an incision across it, as if you wish to cut it, and let the cutter be a NESIL.
If on the other hand the flow of blood is impeded, then soak its foot in warm water, and let the blood run into it until it evacuates.
What if the bloodletter misses the vein at the first time, then let him repeat with venesection towards the upper parts for a little while, for the location is safe, and you will not take harm from it when you cut a nerve, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel on the wooded side.
And the indication for venesection of it is, for pain of the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of its venesection is, that an weak person should enter the bath and be bound: and let the leg be constricted from the side of the hip up to above the heel four fingers, with a subtle long thread: for it does not appear unless because of that.
When therefore it appears, then venesect it according to whatever ingenuity is possible for you, or according to the crossing: and it is better, or that you cut it with an incision, or that you section it. For its location is salvageable, and it itself is hidden very much in many men.
For its location is salvageable, and it itself is hidden very much in many men. What if you do not find it, and it does not appear to the sense at all: then venesect some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, and turned towards the ear: and beware of the nerve, and make the blood flow in quantity as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and put a bandage over the place of venesection, and constrict the place. It will heal quickly.
Of letting blood, and the quality of its use.
Cauteries are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And bloodletting is done in two ways. With scarification and the extraction of blood: and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
And this bloodletting which is without scarification, is according to two methods. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the bloodlettings that are administered with scarification and the extraction of blood, are fourteen places in the body. Of which one is the bloodletting of Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the bloodlettings of Alhagdahim, and they are two sides of the neck from both parts together: and the bloodlettings of the jaw, and it is under the jawbone in the lower mouth: and the bloodlettings of the two spaulders: and the bloodlettings of Alachosos above the end of the tail: and the bloodlettings of the two elbows, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and the bloodlettings of the two thighs: and the bloodlettings of the two hams.
And bloodletting indeed does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that, no virtue falls from them, as is the case with phlebotomy. Nor is it necessary to administer bloodletting, either with fire or without fire, in any of the diseases that occur from overfullness, until the whole body is evacuated.
Which if necessity calls for bloodletting because of disease or because of habit, let us administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
What is it, that which is from humans who when blood is multiplied in them to the point that it needs extraction through venesection, finds in its head a heaviness and swooning.
And there is one of them who finds fullness and redness in his face, head, and neck. And there is one of them who finds itching in his face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And there is one of them who scratches the place of his venesection. And there is one of them whose sneezing is multiplied. And there is one of them who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or it gathers on his tongue, and he spits out blood. And there is one of them whose sleep is multiplied. And there is one of them who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and killings, and wounds, and things that are similar to those.
When we see any of these things, and it is specifically in the third quarter of a month, we prescribe that venesection be done, after two or three hours have passed.
The indication for venesection of the neck is: since it brings about heaviness in the head, and what flows to the eyes. But it is necessary that it be after purging of the whole body.
And this venesection is in place of bloodletting of the head.
And it is not permitted that it be used by one who is of a cold complexion, or in whom there is a flux. For it brings to him great harm.
And because of that, it is not fitting that the elderly use it, and those in whose head there are cold ailments.
He who does it frequently over it, brings about for himself forgetfulness.
And on account of that it is necessary to warn the person performing the procedure, that he should place his hand with the veins for a short time in a lower position, fearing the generation of oblivion.
The application of the cup or Alkehel is in place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the royal vein, and on account of that it brings together the spasm and constriction of breathing, and the fissure of the instrument of breathing, and coughing, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the cup of Alkehel be applied for a short time, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
The application of the cup, indeed, brings together pains that occur in the head, and diseases of the eyes, and half headaches, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is in place of royal phlebotomy.
And it is necessary to warn the one performing the cupping, that he should not press his hand with the scarification, so that he does not cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
The application of the cup under the chin brings together ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar things from ailments which are in the mouth: and it is in place of the phlebotomy of the two lips.
The application of the cup to the shoulders brings together the disease of alchafacham, which occurs from congestion and heat.
The application of the cup to the inner parts of the two armpits brings together the substitution of phlebotomy of the three veins, the royal, the dark and the cephalic: because it itself attracts blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh: and those small veins attract from other thicker veins, until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary to warn the one performing the cupping, that he should not proceed far with the scarification: because the place is bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
A poultice is applied to what is swollen above the anus, and it relieves hemorrhoids and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary to instruct the applier of the poultice that it should be large and made of air, because the location requires strong suction, and subtle poultices are easily torn, and a large scarification should be scarified.
Poultices of the legs diminish with manifest diminution: because they draw blood from the whole body, and relieve old pains in the kidneys, and uterus, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and relieve a flux, and amenorrhea: and they take the place of phlebotomy of the two saphena veins, and aloxocheni.
However, they greatly weaken the body, and cause syncope to occur in many men.
And the benefit of poultices of the vein behind the knee is similar to the benefit of poultices of the two legs.
The quality of the position of poultices is that you should put a poultice in a vacuum, and draw with tempered suction: and you should not prolong the positioning of poultices, but rather put them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the place equally: and do not cease to repeat and continue this, until you see the place already red and inflamed, and the appearance of blood appears: then scarify, and repeat the suction little by little. Then consider the disposition of bodies.
For one who is of tender flesh and rare pores among men, it is necessary to scarify the place once, no more: so that the location is not ulcerated.
And instruct the applier of poultices to amplify the scarification and make it a little deeper: and to temper the suction with facility, speed, and its own motion.
What if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify the place twice. In this case, what is first investigated is the subtlety of blood and its thinness: and in the second, what is investigated is the scrutiny of extracted coarse blood.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then let there be made a third scarification: so that it may follow the last.
And in the end, when we wish to extract blood little by little, or for a short while, one scarification is sufficient for us. What if we wish the extraction of much blood, we make many scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is coarse: then it is necessary that there be made a deep scarification: and the limit of equality in the scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is that thing which ought to be administered from oils at the placing of the bandages, and what the bandage covers.
In that case in which the skin is coarse, hard, dark, and its pores are constricted, it is necessary that the places of the bandage be anointed with oils which are opening, loosening, resolving: if it is in the summer season, such as is the oil of cloves, or the oil of violet, or the oil of sweet almonds, or the oil of the seed of gourd.
And if it is in the winter season, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lily, or the oil of chamomile, or sabbatical: and similar things.
If indeed the excess is coarse, cold: then let the oil be bitter, or the oil of balsam, or the oil of abeny, or the oil of dill: and their similars.
If indeed the bandage is of large pores, of tender flesh: then it is necessary that it be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that these places of the bandage be washed after the bandaging with rose water, or with cold water, or with solatri water, or with gourd water, or with purslane water: and their similars.
He whose blood is of much humidity, should wash the ventoses with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumach: and similar things.
Whose superfluities are gross, should wash his ventoses with old wine, or with water of samsuc, or decoction of anet, or camomile: and similar things.
And it is fitting that the ventosation should be received in a bath, or in a dressing room of a bath, and it is fitting that it should be administered after the exit from the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not fitting that anyone should sleep after ventosation.
What is it that one ought to be governed by, the Ventosed or the one who will be bled before ventosation.
And after that it is fitting that you consider first: then if the Ventosed or the one who will be bled is choleric, and there are conquering on his blood acuteness and inflammation: then it is fitting that he should receive cooling things, such as granulated mucilage: and also an enema with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin, and iuleb: and similar things.
And let his food be soft porridge, and meat of boiled eggs, and seasoned foods with verjuice: and similar things.
And whose complexion is cold, it is fitting that he take in a drink syrup of honey, or of almiua, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and let him take fragrant wine, which is between old and new: and let him be prescribed to use a small amount of food. And let his food be soft porridge, and cane sugar: and peas, that is, small birds: and the soft porridge of doves.
And it is fitting that the drink on the day of ventosation and phlebotomy should be more than the food: and it is fitting that there should be given in a drink to certain men at the third hour alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is, muscad, or alesselithe before ventosation: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal members may be comforted, and the blood may be thinned. And it should not be taken in a hot drink.
On inflammation without incision. Inflammations which are without incision, are those that are applied on the liver, and spleen, and gout, and on the navel, and the umbilicus, and the kidneys, and the groin: because these members do not tolerate incision on themselves.
And it is not sought for through them, unless there is an attraction of blood from one member to another member: as we apply a plaster on the breasts in case of a flow of blood from the nose. And we use them to dissolve a cold inflammation from a member into another member: as we apply a plaster on the abdomen and navel. For it rarefies the member, and warms it, and removes the pain for that reason, because it resolves that inflammation.
And it is also applied on the kidneys, when there occurs in them a stoppage or a stone. For by the virtue of its attraction it perhaps opens up the blockage, or extracts the stone from its place.
And it does similarly when it is applied on the liver and spleen for a tertian fever in both of them.
And these plasters should be given to those who are with incision, only so much. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with warm water full in cases of pleurisy: and that is, so that the plaster is filled, and is large, with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs that are suitable have been decocted.
The form of a plaster administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two fingers, according to which we form it: and its quantity in depth be half a palm: and let there be on its side in the place which is around the middle of it, a small hole, according to the quantity that the needle enters: let it be made from copper or brass, of thick edges, smooth, equal, polished: so that it does not harm the member at its position on it: and let there be in its middle a transverse rod of copper or iron, where the candle with fire is placed.
And now this large suture is made, greater than we have described, and a little less, according to the ailments and age of the one who uses it.
For there are different sutures for children and for the thin, than for men and those with large bodies.
The quality of applying this suture with fire on the member, is that you set alight a small piece of linen with fire from a lamp or a small candle made of tallow: and place it above the middle of the transverse rod which is in the middle of the suture: so that the fire burns around the lower part of the suture, so that the body of the weak person does not get burned.
Then it is placed on the member: and the finger is above the hole that I mentioned, until when we hold the suture: while we press, we remove the finger, and vapor will come out over that hole, and the suture will be loosened immediately.
Then apply a small piece of linen to the fire according to its size, and remove it, if you press on it.
In the suture that is administered for the ailment of dropsy with water, there is no transverse rod, nor hole: and it is not administered, unless it is filled with water, and placed on the member only.
And this is its form.
And this suture, the larger it is, so that it can hold much water, is better.
Of the suspension of bloodletting.
Bloodletting is not administered to many, unless it is in those members where the application of sutures is not possible, due to their smallness, such as the lip, and gums, and similar things. Or in a member stripped of flesh, such as the finger, and nose, and similar things.
And the quality of using them is: that you should use bloodletting from the veins that are in clear and clean waters, free from corruption.
Then they should be soaked day and night in fresh water until they are softened and nothing remains in their stomach. Then the body should be treated at first with bloodletting and with applications to the belly. Then the weak member should be cleansed until it becomes red. Afterwards they will be placed upon it.
When they are filled and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with an application, then it is almost the end of the treatment: and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and rubbed, and squeezed out.
What if the flow of blood is prolonged after a fall of the blood vessels, and it is that which flows back: then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on top, until the flowing back is cut off.
What if the blood increases, then powder on it aseh powder, or alum, and similar things from astringents: until the blood is cut off.
Or they will be placed on the place half-cooked broad beans: and left until the beans stick to the place, for the blood is cut off.
And it is necessary if a repetition of bloodletting is needed, when it is possible, to change them.
If however the blood vessels are forbidden from suspensions, then the place should be cleansed with fresh blood. Or apply a sharp point to the places, until something comes out of the blood. Then they should be applied, for as soon as they feel something from the blood, they stick at once.
When therefore you use them so that they fall, powder on them something from powdered aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall at once.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know, O sons, that the foolish medical men and the common people mock this chapter, and who have never inspected any ancient book, nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason it happens that this method is deprived of the sciences in our land. And I did not find anything good in it at all, and I would not have attained what I attained if not for the length of reading ancient books, and study beyond understanding them, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experimentation and study for the duration of my life.
And now I have described to you from it in this Chapter all that my knowledge contains: and on which my experimentation has passed, after I had shortened it for you, and freed it from the occupation of prolongation, and shortened it at the end of shortening, and showed it at the end of declination: and formed in it many forms of instruments that are administered in it, when it is with the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is fitting that we say in the prologue of this Chapter, the sum of the discourse and chapters, for the understanding of which the artisan is compelled at first to stand on their truth: namely so that you, and those who are prompt, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall happens to someone, then it is necessary first to bleed him and/or to treat him, both at the same time if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of strength, or if he is one of those persons who has a fever, or an old decrepit man, or if it is a time of violent heat or of violent cold.
Then let him be content with his food of cooling herbs, and flesh of birds, and of fish: and prohibit wine, and fat meats, and fill him with foods and every food that fills the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from the hot aposteme, and you do not fear the effusion of material to the member: then let the weak man return to his first regime with which his habit was accustomed.
When, therefore, the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the weak man be fed with nutritious foods of much nourishment, thick, heavy, in which there is viscidity: such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and cabbage, and feet and hocks of geese, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. For with this regime a consolidation of the fracture happens more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in early old age and decrepit, it is not possible that they knit and consolidate according to their nature always, because of the dryness of their membranes: and they consolidate and knit which of them are at the end of softness, such as the bones of little boys.
Truly, however, nature joins to the broken bone from every part something like glue, in which there is thickness, with which it adheres and binds itself, until they knit together and bind together, until they come to the end of strength and firmness, as they were at first, until nothing prevents them from their operations: and for this reason it is necessary that you put nourishing food for the weak man, in which there are thickness, and viscidity, and grossness, as we said.
And you should know that there are different types of fractures, according to the diversity of organs, because a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone, and similarly all the other organs are different from one another, and I came with remembrance of each species of fracture exposed in its distinct Chapter, separate from another. And the species of bone fractures also differentiate among themselves.
For it becomes a fracture that is curved, besides which stars occur in it. And when a fracture occurs according to the length of the bone, and its fractures are jagged, that is, stars, and additions proceed, as they are in a reed, when it is adapted to a knife for writing. And not proceeding, and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And each species has its own ingenuity, or proper instrument for its restoration, according to which comes the remembrance of it, distinct in its places.
And from that which the fracture of the bone is recognized, is its twistedness and its own prominence: and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore the twistedness is not apparent in its place, nor sound upon your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does the weak one find great pain: then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there be a twist or small fissure: therefore it is not necessary to move it with hand and compression at all, but rather put on top of it from medicines, which remembrance came after the moment that it is suitable for the place: then let the strict bandage be tightened.
And you should know that the place when it is curved and splits into two, besides which stars occur in it, nevertheless every part is moved away from its comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to rectify it, equalizing it before hot apostema occurs to it.
If a hot abscess happens to it, then leave it for some days until the abscess quiets. Then treat it equally according to whatever method is possible from gentleness and ingenuity.
And you should know that the restoration of it and its equalization is easier than of a bone, in which occur fractures.
Then bind it, according to what the memory of it will indicate to you.
If there are fractures in the bone, then extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, if it is the hand or foot: or with your hand, if it is a small member: or with two cords, or with a cord and a hand.
And let your position be where you place the member on an equal place, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, that you make those additions return with all ingenuity, and according to whatever method you can in their places: and beware according to your strength, that pain or injury does not happen to the weak one through your operation: and try according to your strength, that you apply one of the two bones with its companion, according to better forms.
And it is necessary at that time, that you touch and feel it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the quantity of your ability.
And beware of violent extension and strong compression, as many stupid ones do. For they often cause a hot abscess to happen through their operation, or a contraction in the member: as we have already seen that from their operations many times.
Then connect after equalization, and decent operation, and straitness of that member, and quiet, and tranquility: and warn the weak one above it. And let it heal so that it does not move during the time of its watchfulness and its sleep with regard to its revolution and its agitation and with regard to its ejection and all its movements with its final strength. And let it heal so that the position of the limb is not a position in which pain follows. Which is, that when it feels pain or injury in the disposition of the limb's position, then it is necessary to change it to a different disposition from that in which it does not feel pain.
And let it heal with that, so that its position is equal and straight, so that crookedness does not occur in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the fracture of the broken limb is according to which I will describe.
Know that fractured limbs differ in their smallness and size and shape.
Therefore, those of them which are small, such as the arm and finger and elbow and similar things, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft cloth, fine. Those of them which are large, such as the hip and thigh, it is necessary that there be a wrapping on them of broad, hard cloth.
For a broad bandage connects the large limb and binds it on every side with equal constriction, so that it does not press upon it unevenly.
Then begin after your adjustment to put a plaster suitable for it on the soft cloth over the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap a bandage over the place of the fracture itself with three or four wraps, according to what the limb deserves, and bind your hand firmly with the bandage for a short time.
Then go up with it to the upper part from the place of the fracture and bind less tightly than was your constriction, with which you bound the fractured place. Then stretch yourself with an involution from the place of the fracture for a little while, and gradually soften the stiffness, until you take from the healthy place a large thing.
Then take another cloth, and involution it again over the place of the fracture with involutions. Afterwards lead with an involution to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be on the tightening of the involution and its softening, according to what we said in the first involution above.
Then put between the involutions a piece of flax or cloth, with which the crookedness of the fracture is equalized, if there is crookedness in it: and if not, you do not put anything in it.
Then involution another cloth over it. Afterwards equal the stars made from the plaster directly over these involutions, if there is not an inflammation in the place, nor a hot abscess.
If however there is an inflammation or an abscess in it: then put on it what will calm that abscess and take away the inflammation: and leave it for some days. Then bind over it the plasters at that time.
And let the plasters be from the middle parts of latten cane, scraped, formed wisely: or let them be from wood from which are made cribs, which are made from pine or gerahid, that is, branches of palm, or calingi: and let the width of each plaster be according to this form, and this same figure.
Truly it is necessary, that the plaster which is put on the same fracture, be a little thicker and wider than the other plasters: and the length of the plaster be according to what is suitable for the member from its size and smallness.
Then bind over the plasters with another cloth, according to the first tightening, the same. Then bind from above with threads in the middle, according to what we said about the dressing: and it is, that your dressing should be above the place of the fracture more: and the more it is elongated from the fracture, the dressing is less.
And it is fitting, that the threads should be moderate in thickness and fineness, and should be of soft flax.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of foolish surgeons who put their threads of flax twisted into strings, it is a great mistake: for the dressing falls with them beyond the quality.
And very fine threads are not suitable either: for you will not achieve through the dressing with them that which you wish.
And it is not fitting, that it should be between stitch and stitch less than a finger.
What if a weak person is injured by the ends of the stitches after the dressing on healthy places: then put under them from soft lint or wool, anointed with salve, until nothing is injured from that.
When, however, there is a fracture with a wound, and a disruption occurs in the skin, I will come to it with discussion of it in the second chapter according to its uniqueness.
And know that not every broken member needs to be bound with stitches from the first day. What is, that when the member is large, it is not fitting to put stitches upon it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters, with which the ancients restored, which are put on a fracture and dislocation.
The method of a common plaster abbreviated, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially for women and children: for it is from that upon which neither heat nor cold prevails.
And it is, that you take from the powder of the millstone, and it is the marrow of the flour which hangs in the walls of the mill near the motion of the mill: and you knead it as it is, except that you mix it with the white of the egg: and you put its confection not thick, nor subtle. Then use it.
Another method of plaster for restoring a fracture, and a dislocation, and a twisting. Take mastic and laudanum and acacia and elecampane and mugwort: and juice, of each a similar amount, myrrh and aloe of each a similar amount, and of electam a third of that, let all be pounded, and sifted, and mixed with water of electam: or with the white of an egg, if the plaster is applied to a weak complication. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, it restores broken bones quickly, and confirms many men.
Another method of plaster, which also confirms fractures and twists. Take mugwort and mastic and white plant, of each a similar amount, myrrh and aloe of each a similar amount, acacia a sixth part, Armenian bolus a twentieth part, let all be pounded with much grinding, and sifted, and kneaded with water, or the white of an egg: and administer.
Another method of plaster for joints, and bones separated from their places: and it calms the accidental pain to them, and the cracking of bone, and the fracture. Let lanolin be applied, and submerged in vinegar, and oil cooked: and put upon the place.
And in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, but it is good for calming a hot abscess: and it properly expels pains.
Another method of plaster, which restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig and the leaves of the poppy, and pound all, and make a plaster from both.
The method of abbreviated plaster, administered for the restoration of the fracture of a bone: and when you wish to resolve a remaining postulate. Take the root of the altea, and chamomile, and the flowers of violets, and the powder of the herb, all in one portion: pound all, and mix with wine, if the member is not heated.
If the member is hot, then mix it with water of moist coriander, or with water, and apply it thereto.
Another method of a stronger plaster for resolution, than the first one, when there occurs a hard postulate during the restoration of a member. Take the root of the altea, and seed of flax, and balsam, and melilot, and samsuch, and flowers of violets, and chamomile, all in one portion, pound all, and mix with water of willow, or with sweet water, or with wine. All that according to the heat of the member, and the tranquility of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be put on a fractured member for its restoration, except a cerate made from wax and oil: none other: and he described it as being a mean between thickness and subtlety.
But Galen used to put on a fractured member for its restoration things, in which there is an exciting of heat, such as myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense, and similar to them from those which we have described.
A method of plaster that is useful for a wound and pain. Take mugwort, and cichory, and cut human hair, or dove's wings, and altea, and salt in equal parts: pound, and sift, and mix: and make from it a plaster.
The quantity however according to which it is necessary that the ligature remains and then is dissolved, is, that you consider then, if not severe pain occurs, nor itching, nor the fractured bone moves from its place: then you do not resolve it for many days. If there happens to it in the place intense itching, or troublesome pain, or swelling: then hasten and dissolve it within the hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a marine sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the place with it, until the itching is stilled, and the pain is assuaged.
If there happens to it in the place intense itching, or troublesome pain, or swelling: then hasten and dissolve it within the hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a marine sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the place with it, until the itching is stilled, and the pain is assuaged. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then put on it a wool cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind over it for one night, until you are secure from the hot abscess, and the inflammation of the limb is stilled, and its pain is removed.
Then repeat it to a subtle binding and small plaster: and do not bind it with your first constriction, but subtly, until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess and redness and pain and swelling and all accidents are entirely removed, and you apply plaster and binding, then repeat it as you did at first equally.
If none of the things we have spoken of happen to the limb, then do not dissolve it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is left for twenty days, all of that which appears to you from the solution of the limb, as we have said, until when the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh approaches over it: add then also in the binding more than your whole first binding: and add also in the thickening of the weak body, according to what its remembrance has preceded.
If you see the place of the fracture is already becoming dry and withered more than it should be then you should know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Apply a warm poultice to it at every place where you reduce the fracture and let it be thus for three days, and alleviate the tight bandage for a little while.
Through this operation nourishment runs to the limb and it heals quickly.
What foolish restorers do when a limb is fractured and not restored at first as it ought to be, but instead is restored according to its deformity, is an error in their operation and a great danger: and if it were correct, the ancients would have said so in their books and would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of them at all, and it is better that it is not done.
On the fracture of a wound on the head.
The species of fractures are various and its shapes are many: and the causes of it are distinct.
For there is a fracture that occurs from a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the bone as far as it reaches to the siphac, which is under the bone, just like an axe does in wood: and because of this it is named this species of fracture Axial.
Or the sword strikes a part of the bone and strikes its surface, and the cut does not penetrate to the end of it: and this species of fracture is named Kalan, that is, Absolute Separation.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture that is a crushing or bruising: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which now approaches the periosteum, which is under the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and there is a wound of these two fractures also, either small or large.
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone in the fineness of a hair: and it is a small fissure, and because of that this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And there is a fracture which occurs from a fall, or a blow with a stone, and similar things, which cause the lamina of the bone to penetrate to the interior, and it becomes concave in that place: just as happens to the caldarii of copper, when a blow occurs to them, and a part of them penetrates to the interior.
And it happens most often in the heads of moist bones, such as are the heads of children.
And there are for all these types of fractures treatments separated, and I will come with a reminder of the whole thing in its own place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures by detection upon them, and an inquiry into them with probes, and the removal of corrupted flesh which is upon them.
The species of Capillary fracture is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone, and wiped away, and anointed upon it with a plaster: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the weak person: then if you see from the accidents something that signifies a manifest sign of fear, such as vomiting of bile, and stretching, and loss of intellect, and interruption of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar things to these from accidents in many conditions, without doubt it is not cured: and if you see accidents not terrifying you, and you hope for health: then begin the treatment of it.
Which is, if the wounded person comes to you immediately after being wounded: and it is in winter days, then it is necessary that you should strive for the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every condition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from the bandage becomes rotten, and those accidents which we have described happen.
What if the fracture of the bone has already reached the bandage touching the brain, and is with damage, and pulling: then it is necessary that you cut the damaged and pulled part, according to what I will tell you.
And it is that you shave the head of the wounded, and uncover the bone as much as is possible for you, and according to the shape of the wound, and what is least above the weak part.
What if there occurs to you during the uncovering of the bone a flow of blood, or a hot abscess: then apply to it what is necessary. And it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the abscess settles, and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin with the cure of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method indeed is, that you cut the bone with a strict razor-shaped incisor: and this is its form.
Then administer another incisor wider than the first one, but only for a short time: and this is its form.
Then administer also another incisor even wider also than the second one.
And the second method is, that you have a number of different incisors: some of which are wider than others, and some of them shorter than others: and let them be sharpened at the ends, and let them be made from hardened iron or steel: and use facility in striking on the incisor, so that it does not strike the head, and harm it.
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you perforate around it before you apply the incision instrument, with non-penetrating awls which are called non-penetrating awls; and they are not called thus, except that they themselves do not penetrate beyond the limit of the bony tissue to what is behind it: because the awl has a round extremity above what is under its pointed head, similar to a margin, and a small circle prevents submersion and penetration of the thickness of the bone.
And it is suitable for you to take a large number of these awls, each one of which suits the thickness of the bone, until there is an awl available to you for every skull: whose pointed extremity's quantity in length and width is, according to the quantity of the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of awls, or trephines.
The quality of perforating around a fractured bone is: that you place the awl on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated. Then exchange the awl to another place, and put what is between every hole a quantity of thickness of the radius, or around it.
Then cut with incision instruments what is between every hole in the bone: and make it thinner than you can above that from the fineness of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, either with your hand, or with some other one of the instruments which you have prepared for it: such as pincers and subtle borers.
And it is necessary that you proceed with all caution, lest the awl or incision instrument touch anything of the brain.
When you have perforated around the bone and it has been separated from the brain, if it was continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary that you scrape and smooth out the extremity of what remains in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision instrument. The needle should be thin and finer than those of other surgeons.
What remains from the small bones and sawdust, then take it with ease, along with what you have among your instruments. Then treat the wound afterwards with bandages and ointments which we mentioned.
And another method of the operation is easy, far from fear, which Galen said and praised it with great praise, and this is his statement. It is necessary for you first to begin to remove the piece of bone from the place where the fracture is most violent and most apparent, until when you have removed that piece and placed under it the extremity of this grooved incisor, of which this is the shape.
And the grooved part does not cut gently, and its pointed part on both sides of it proceeds along the length, as you see, so that the grooved part is attached to the saw, with its pointed face cutting into the bone.
Then strike the incisor on one side with a small hammer, until you cut the whole bone with ease, as it turns out, and you will be safe from the accident that you fear, namely.
And if the doctor were not more stupid than men and more ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the bandage in certain places, he would cut it away from it with the extremity of the grooved incisor itself, and free it from it with ease. For it is freed from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the bandage, and what is cut away from the bone is its surface, and remaining in it are roughness and subtle sawdust, then it is necessary that you scrape away that roughness and remove those sawdust with fine rasps which you have prepared in a number of different quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply them in every place more conveniently and more correctly, according to what the operation leads you to, and the bone itself, and its shape. And it is necessary that you manage with a rasp, which in the first place has a wider tooth than those of other rasps. Then use afterwards something more subtle than it.
And it is necessary that you manage with a rasp, which in the first place has a wider tooth than those of other rasps. Then use afterwards something more subtle than it. And do not cease to make that a second time in succession until you reach making something thinner and more subtle than all of them.
In each and every one of the remaining small fissures or tiny little fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a thing which is not hidden from everyone, that in this art there is something to be studied, and it stands upon what we have written, and we show in great fractures.
If indeed a piece of cloth is detected and retained when you extract the bone: then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth: and do that as easily as you can over it, so that it does not press on the spleen.
Then administer over it a wide bandage: and do not bind it, except in the amount that will hold the wound so much: and leave it with this care for one day, or two days, until you are secure from a hot abscess. Then undo it, and administer after that medicines with which there is a dry excess, such as the roots of lily, and flour of herbs, and powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and it is that you make from these medicines a powder, which will be powdered over the wounds as they are dry.
And universally administer on it every medicine of a property which is that it cleanses and does not bite. And beware according to your virtue, that the wound is in your cure clear: nor is there in it filth of ointment, nor foulness.
And beware according to your virtue, that the wound is in your cure clear: nor is there in it filth of ointment, nor foulness. And do not allow the pus to gather in it at all: for when pus gathers on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it, and putrefies it, and a great evil happens to the weak after that; and now it happens in the cerebral membranes, when the mouth is cleansed from it, especially when the care of it is neglected, blackness on its surface.
Consider then, that if there happen to the weak the accidents which we have said, you should know, that it is pernicious without a doubt.
And if the blackness does not happen, except from the medicine which is put on it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine, that it makes that blackness: then you should take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and anoint the cloth with them. Then put it on the cerebral membrane: afterwards cure it with the species of cure which are suitable, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Know that the nose is not fractured except when its two upper parts break at the same time, or one of them: because it itself has two bones: for the lower part of it is cartilaginous, does not fracture, and nothing happens to it except bruising, and twisting, and deviation.
If one of its two parts is fractured, then you should insert a small finger into the nostril, and straighten that fracture with your index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural figure: and this should be done with skill. And beware, that pain does not happen to the weak because of your operation.
What if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach to that finger then it is necessary that it be adjusted by a small thickness of the radius.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to that and restore it immediately on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day with rest of a warm apostume.
Then insert into the extremity of the nose a linen pledget from a linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two pledgets if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be in the pledget a thickness of such quantity that it fills the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers have said that the pledgets should be soaked in butter and changed every day. That however does not seem to me, but rather it is necessary that the pledget be soaked in the white of an egg mixed with powder of meal. Then leave the pledget until the bone becomes firm and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes a feather of a goose is inserted into the nose in place of a pledget, after which a soft cloth is wrapped over it: and it is done so that it holds the fracture of the nose more vigorously, and so that it does not prevent the weak from inhaling.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you want, do that: and if you want, do pledgets.
What if it happens to the nose again while you are operating with a warm apostume, plaster the nose with a cerate, or with a paste mixed with rose oil, or with a little of dyaculum.
If however the warm apostume does not happen, then it is necessary that you plaster it with flour of sesame and powder of frankincense mixed with the white of an egg. Then put on top of it a linen cloth, and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are slightly fractured or broken, then it is necessary to split over them, and extract them with instruments that suit them. Then sew up the wound, and cure it with what promotes flesh, and consolidates it with suitable plasters or ointments.
What if there happens to be a wound between the nostrils, then it is necessary to cure it with threads: and administer a tube of lead, until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw, when it is broken apart.
When the lower jaw is broken apart and its fracture is not with a wound, then consider if the fracture of it is only a slight defect and does not break into two, and is curved inwardly: then the treatment of it is easy.
It is necessary, therefore, if the fracture is in the right part, to insert the index finger of the left hand into the lower mouth: similarly if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and push with it the curvature of the fracture from within with ease to the outside with your other hand from the inner side of the bone, and straighten it with that.
What if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary to administer extension from both parts, according to straightness: until its equalization is possible.
If however there has already occurred a shaking or disruption of the teeth, then tie them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then put on top of the fractured jaw a cerate. Then put on top of it a double-folded cloth, and put on top of the cloth a large splint made to fit: or a piece of leather sole equal in length to the jaw.
Then bind it from above, according to the preparation you make for its bandage, and let its application be suitable until it is not destroyed: and order the weak person to have tranquility and quiet: and put his food in soothing sips.
But if you think that something of its shape has already changed in some way: then hasten, and release it on the third day. Then correct what has been changed in it, and plaster it with dust of rose powder, or with the flour of barley, after you have removed the hair: and put a soft wool over the plaster.
So long as that plaster remains attached to it, and the bone's arrangement is not changed, leave it, do not remove it, until it is healed: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound for three weeks.
If meanwhile a hot abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in its treatment, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider. For now a fragment is already separated from the bone, or from the edge: then be subtle in this, so that you remove those fragments of the edge with what suits you in the removal of them by means of instruments.
If indeed the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it with a lancet according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then when you have removed those fragments, and none of them remain, or then the opening of the wound, if it is wide: and if not, put on it some plasters that suit it, and let it heal, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the Jaw, when it is broken.
The Jaw is indeed broken most often from the front part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it either breaks and separates into two, besides which accidents happen to that fissure: and it is easier for the restoration of it.
Or those things that happen to the bone of the fissure: and it is more difficult for the restoration.
Or it is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation in it when there is a fracture without a wound, is that you should have two attendants present, so that one of them may hold the help that follows the fractured Clavicle, and the other stretch the neck towards the part.
Then equal the fracture with your fingers, until its form is made, according to what is necessary: and it should not be in eminence, nor concave.
What if you indicate extension more, then it is necessary that you put under the weak little cloth a sphere of cloth or wool: and its size should be according to the quantity of your necessity: and extend and elevate the Clavicle, and bind the sphere with your hand, until it equals the fracture, according to what is necessary.
What if you cannot draw the extremity of the Clavicle to the outside: because it penetrates to the depth: then it is necessary that the weak one should lean on his neck: and you put under his shoulder a middle-sized pillow, and an attendant presses his shoulder downwards, until the bone of the Clavicle which is in the depth rises upwards: and then rectify the fracture, and equal it with your fingers.
If you feel a false movement from the Clavicle, and it moves: then it is necessary that you bind over it, and extract that false movement with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then make an incision of it with one of the Incisors which you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed under the Clavicle an instrument that preserves the siphach: and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It becomes like a spoon for one who has no spoon.
And let its width be according to that which you need it from the size of the bone, and its smallness. Its length also according to what is possible for you for the operation.
And let it have two ends, as you see: and one end be wide, and the other narrow.
If the disruption of the wound which you cut when you extracted the sequestration of the bone is wide, and you are far from the hot aposteme: then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you are near the hot aposteme: then fill the wound with rags, and poultices according to the quantity of the division of the wound.
If a hot aposteme happens, then soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The stricture of the bone when it is without a wound, and without a cut, is, that you put on the bone a plaster made from flour of millstone with the white of an egg. And put a soft dressing over it. Then put a ball under its nipple, if you need it. Then take a bow, that is, the wheel which the Saracens hold, which should be very long: and let its width be one palm, or about that. Then put a double poultice over the dressing and plaster. Then take a rod from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the rod in the place of the bow that falls on the fracture and place. Then put the splint over the fracture as it is turned, and wrap it around his neck, and under his sound shoulder, and under his weak shoulder: and bind it over every part, and however you see that the bandage holds the fracture, the bandage is sufficient: and it is that which is not hidden from you, and all, so that the star is not removed from above the broken bone. And for this reason, it is necessary that you examine the weak part every day. How often therefore the bandage is loosened, and you see the star already being removed: then correct it, and tighten the bandage.
Then put a pad on the weak part over his back, and put under his shoulder near the weak part a small pillow at night, so that with it his helper is elevated from his side. The fracture of the arm is therefore elevated by elevation of the shoulder.
Or tie his arm to his neck: and do not untie the bandage, unless an accident occurs on account of itching or from a gathering, until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see that it is suitable for it. And add to the bandage, and diminish it, until it is restored and united.
And the fracture of the arm is bound and strengthened mostly within twenty days: and sometimes it happens in certain men in less than that.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
The shoulder blade is rarely broken, and in its broad place: and they are not broken except for their edges.
When therefore it is broken from that place, and it breaks in the middle of it, and it is not recognized except by touch: then according to what is the figure of the fracture, prepare its treatment. And I reduce it to a natural figure in every way possible for you.
Then put on the place a dust of grinding with the white of an egg, and a linen cloth, and put above it a small pillow from a double cloth. Then put on it a broad star made from a subtle board according to the quantity of the entire spatula or a little more.
If indeed under the star there is a concavity in some place of the spatula, then equal that concavity with a linen cloth, until the star descends according to equality.
Then bind above with a long alum paste, a decent constriction, and firmness of the star, until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the ligament in every day. As often as the ligament is softened, bind it, and equal the star if it is moved from its place: and let the weak one lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then solve the ligament: and you will be in security. For it is one of the bones whose joining is not feared, nor their separation.
If a fragment proceeds from the bone and pricks under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said in the fracture of the jaw from the application of a warm poultice, if anything happens from it.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the breast.
The chest is rarely broken in the middle of itself, and it hardly ever happens to it. Its extremities are most often broken and joined from its accidents.
When its middle is broken, which declines to the lower parts, and a violent pain happens to it, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps it vomits blood, and is declared in the fractured bone, and is not hidden from sensation. The restoration of it is, that the weak one should rest on his back: and put between the spatulas of it a pillow.
Then press his shoulders, and gather the ribs from the two parts or sides with the hands, and reduce them in their equality, according to every manner that is possible for them and is suitable, until the shape of the bone returns, according to what is proper.
Then put on it a plaster and a dressing, and put over it a splint made from a thin board of willow or hazel, or similar things, lightly, after you have wrapped it in a cloth. Then bind it subtly over the fractured bone, so that it is not removed: and see to it with a bandage according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten it with a suitable constriction.
Then consider the bandage every hour, and as often as it becomes loose, tighten it: and if necessity demands its removal on account of itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or abscess: then hasten, and remove it, and eradicate the plaster, and correct what has happened with the method of its cure.
Then put back the plaster, if you see it is suitable for that face: and attach to it a dressing, until it is healed.
Of the restoration of the ribs, when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur, except in thick places which follow the back, and from the extremities of them on the front side. And damage does not happen to them, except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling on examination with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way, that you press the fracture with the fingers according to the possible method, until it takes on the shape, according to what is proper. Then apply a plaster, and bind the fractured bone with a splint, if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined to the interior, then intense pain occurs to the weakened person, and puncture, just like the puncture that occurs to one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and also difficulty in breathing occurs to them, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And now the ancients have devised many devices for it: and among them there are those who say that you should apply foods to the weakened person which generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflamed, and distended, and the fracture pushed outward.
We indeed disapprove, that a cause for making a hot abscess does not happen quickly, if it does not occur. But if it has already occurred, then he adds to it.
And some of them said: let a poultice be placed on the swollen place, then sucked with force, and it is similar to reasoning. Truly, it is feared that the poultice will attract the excesses of the swelling to the location, because of the disposition of weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the location be covered with wool which has already been soaked in hot oil: and small pillows are placed between the ribs, until it is full: so that the bandage is equal when you wrap it around according to its roundness.
Then the weakened person should be treated with a cure for pleurisy, from food and medicine.
Since the intense thing constricts the weakened person, which it does not tolerate, and the bone pierces the membrane with a wounding puncture, and we fear for the weakened person: then it is necessary that we cut above the location, and remove the fractured rib. Then let us place on it an instrument that preserves the health, whose memory has gone before: and let us cut the bone with ease, and let us cut it.
Then we shall bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and we shall treat it with plasters, until it heals.
What if a hot aposteme happens in the meantime, then apply it, and pour into rose oil poultices, and put over the place: and let the weak one be treated with that which is suitable for the aposteme.
Meanwhile also let him breathe on the side above that which he sleeps, until it heals.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
When a fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and rarely does it happen to them with an injury: and similarly to the vertebrae of the back also. When therefore that happens to anyone, and you wish to know, whether it will heal or not, then consider. For if you see his hands already softened and numbed and deadened: and he cannot move them nor extend them nor clench them: and when you clench them with your fingers and prick them with a needle he does not feel it and does not feel pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and in most cases it is mortal.
For if he moves them and feels in them a constriction with the fingers and a pricking: then know that the marrow of the bone is safe, and that the weak person will be healed with treatment.
For if it happens to the vertebrae of the back similarly to that, and you wish to know whether it will heal also or not: then consider his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and it happens in them what happened in the hands: afterwards when he lies on his back, flatus and vomiting come out without his will: and when he is turned on his belly, vomiting comes out without his will: and when he is turned on his back and wishes to urinate and cannot: then know that it is mortal. I do not therefore undertake his cure.
If on the other hand nothing happens to him from it, the thing is lighter.
And the treatment of what happens from it is that you apply a dressing of hot aposteme: thus, that you put on the affected spongy part rose oil alone: or with roasted egg whites.
Apply on it that several times a day, until when the hot aposteme is applied: then apply over the place one of the comforting, drying, and constricting plasters, and bind over it with a bandage: and instruct the patient to use quiet and rest. And let him not sleep on the side on which he feels pain, until he is healed.
What if it happens at the place of fracture of a bone, or something that is already separated from it: then it is necessary to cut over the skin, and to remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then treat it with some kind of ointment, from the oils, until it is healed.
If on the other hand the end of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary that you insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus, and straighten the fractured bone with your other hand, according to what is possible, and a second adjustment.
Then put on it, and bind it: and treat the wound with the treatment that preceded, until it is healed.
Of the restoration of the nail.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the donkey are rarely fractured. What if they are fractured, then the fracture of them is not, except a comminution at their extremities: and they split along the length, and bend inwardly: and there happens to the patient pain in the place, and puncturing: and the leg which is fractured becomes numb.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the fracture in whatever manner its figure is.
If the fracture is only in its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from equalization, until it is assimilated to its natural figure.
If the fracture is in the length, or it declines to the inside: then make the weak one lie on its belly, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have equalized it, put a plaster on it: then put above it a splint of wood or of leather: and bind a bandage over it which you do not fear to change the fracture, nor remove the splint.
And equalize the concavity of them with what fills it, until the bandage takes it according to equality: and instruct the weak one, to sleep on its back, or on its healthy side.
If a hot abscess happens to it: then cease from its extension and its restoration, until the hot abscess has subsided: and put on it what subsides it, according to what has preceded, then return to its restoration: and bind it as is necessary.
If indeed a crack occurs in the bone, or it becomes comminuted, extract.
On the restoration of the fracture of the assistant.
The assistant is that which is from the elbow to the head of the spatula.
If it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to the shape that follows.
And two bandages are bound on the two extremities.
Then let it be suspended from a raised place: and let the weak person sit on a seat. Then he should throw his broken arm over a stick, until it reaches his armpit, in the middle of which let the curved piece of wood be attached.
Then let something heavy be suspended from above it, so that the assistant extends it to the lower parts. Then the physician adjusts the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns, according to what is necessary.
And another method is, that the weak person rests on his neck: and his hand is suspended from his neck with a bandage. Then instruct two assistants, that one of them should hold what is above the fracture with their hands: and that the other should hold the lower part of it, and each of them should pull to their own side.
And if you want it to be a stronger extension, then tie under the fracture with a bandage, and above it with another bandage: and let each of the two assistants pull to their two sides.
If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, then it is necessary that one bandage be placed under the armpit, and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary that a bandage be placed above that place, and above the elbow itself.
Then adjust the fracture with ease without effort, until when the fracture is adjusted according to what is necessary, and a good application is applied: then tie it, if not a warm abscess occurs.
If a warm abscess does occur, then loosen the bandage until the seventh day. And place on it a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until when the abscess subsides: then tie it: and the method of tying it is, that you put a plaster on the fracture.
Then put a dressing made from new cloth over the plaster. Then he should place his arm on the help itself and put his open hand on his shoulder.
And put a cloth and tie it over the help for the arm, so that the arm stays in place: if nothing prevents you from it, nor is anything altered by you from the fractured bone.
If you fear that something will be altered by you from the fractured bone, then use a splint: and it is, that you put on the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And put between every splint the width of a finger: and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on each side.
Then tie over the splints a bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage should be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the more the fracture stretches, the less tight the bandage should be.
If you see the splints and bandage as we have said at the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do it: and if you fear a warm abscess, then remove the bandage and splints until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the bandage for all three days, so that there does not occur in the place itching, or inflammation, or is prevented by foods reaching the limb, because of the condition from the excess of the tightness. Therefore straighten the whole thing, according to what we have said.
If you are confident that nothing will happen from it, then do not loosen the bandage unless after three days or more.
And let the weak person sleep on their back and their hands on their stomach: and put under the arm a full cushion of wool equally.
And consider at every hour of night or day, that the shape of a fractured limb is not dissolved, nor the bandage loosened. Set it right therefore with all your skill.
And give food to the invalid according to the order which we previously mentioned, so that it should be a subtle diet at first, until the mouth begins to close: then it is necessary that you increase his food.
For it is the custom of the hip and the thigh, that it should be constricted for forty days: then therefore it is necessary that it be loosened, and a bath be administered, and medicine be applied with ointments which restore it.
If the fracture is foul and contused, then you should not loosen the bandage from it, but keep it until fifty days, and until two months.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two little foemen.
Of which one is small: and it is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is the one that is placed under the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore the larger forearm bone alone breaks, or the smaller one: and perhaps they break together.
When therefore the upper small forearm bone breaks, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower forearm bone breaks, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones break together.
If therefore the bone that breaks is the upper small forearm bone, then it is suitable for the doctor at its restoration to apply a slight extension with ease, until it becomes equal.
If indeed the large forearm bone is the one that is broken: then it is necessary that a strong bandage be applied.
And it is suitable that he should put a figure of a hand near its restoration and its own extension extended on the pillow. And the thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers above: and the joint should be lower than all the fingers or the rest: and let the weak one sit squared upon itself, and let the pillow be before it, or in a straight line with it, in height, so that the weak one does not incur labor.
Then the assistant should extend the arm from its lower part, or his hand, or with a bandage. And another assistant should extend it similarly from above.
Then the physician adjusts the bone until he reduces it to the best shape that he can.
What if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then take care to reduce every fragment in its place with your strength.
If indeed a separated splinter appears in it, and it pierces the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then sew over it, and remove it according to the method that we have spoken of concerning those things which were mentioned before.
If the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter about that, so take the treatment of it from there.
What if at the beginning of your restoration a hot abscess occurs, then spread a linen cloth made with rose oil and white wax, and let it be a medium between thickness and subtlety: and bind the cloth over it with a subtle bandage, until when the abscess has settled: then remove the wax, and put an prepared plaster made from powdered flour with egg whites. Then put splints, and let the splint that is put on the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most arrangements: whether the fracture is in one forearm or in two forearms at the same time.
Then put your bandage over the place of the fracture, stronger and tighter, and somewhat more with the bandage towards the upper part of the fracture, or to the lower part of it: or put a softer bandage instead of it for a short while, according to what was stated in the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be gentle cloths, moist: and not rough, harsh. And let the thread with which it is tied be a linen one, medium between subtle and coarse, as we have described.
And consider the limb and the bandage after some days. What if something happens which needs correction, such as an itch that happens to the limb: then it is necessary, that you bathe the limb with warm water, until that itch calms down, and you release the limb not constricted, until it calms down, then repeat the bandage.
What if the bandage has already been softened, and the wound has already closed, and similar things to these: then correct that entirely with your skill, and examine again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, on account of the excess of the bandage, then it is necessary that you soften it for a while, and release it for some days, until nourishment runs to it, then tie it.
If however nothing happens to the weak person among those things which we have said, then it is not necessary that it be undone, unless after twenty days, or around that.
Then let the hand of the weak person be suspended at his neck. And let his neck be straight, and let it be protected by its strength from agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. The whole of it is secondary to the dispositions of the complexions, and the dispositions of the virtues.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that a fracture of the bones of the hand and the joints of the fingers rarely occurs. And it does not happen to them unless from repeated trauma.
When therefore a fracture of the sole or a trauma occurs, then it is necessary that the weak one sits on a seat: and before him is a seat according to equality. Then place his hand on it extended.
Then the servant extends the fractured bones, and the physician adjusts them, until they join with a good union.
Then it is necessary that he put on a plaster and a dressing, if not a hot abscess occurs. Then place a splint over it according to the quantity of the place: and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is near the lower part of the heel of the foot, then make a sphere-like shape out of cloth: and order the weak person to press it with his foot that has the fracture: then it is tied with a long cloth.
And let the splint be of leather, in which there is softness, so that the leather may be applied to the body of the foot: and tie it, according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary that you put a splint over it, and another splint under it on the foot: and let the hand be open and straight. Then put a bandage, as the hand turns: and extend between the fingers with a binding.
Which if a fracture occurs to any of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, adjust according to what is necessary. Then tie with the foot: and if you love him, put on a straight small splint, so that the fracture may be elevated, and not moved.
If the fracture is of the remaining fingers, such as the middle, and index, or ring, and little finger, then it should be straightened, and bandaged with the healthy finger that follows it: or all should be bandaged according to continuity: and it is better. Or put a small star on top of it, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the appliance of a warm poultice: and apply with it what is necessary, when anything happens from it, according to which its treatment is repeated.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the hip.
The neck of the hip is frequently fractured, and it is revealed by sensation: since it is converted to the inner and back part.
And its restoration is done in this way, that a bandage is tied above the fracture, and another bandage below the fracture. And a plaster is applied over its surface.
Then every bandage is extended to its own part according to equality: and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let the bandage be to the part of the chest, so that the extension falls upwards: and another bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee, so that the extension is to the lower parts.
Then the physician adjusts the bone with both his hands, until he reduces it according to the likeness of its natural shape: and the bone is joined with a good joining.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, if an abscess does not occur on the limb. If an abscess occurs in it: then leave it for some days, until the warm abscess subsides, then return to your cure.
The narrowing of it should be thus. It is necessary that you bind a hard bandage over the fracture, that is, a binding: and fold it twice or thrice: and let some of it remain as an excess. Then bind the leg, until the heel reaches near the root of the buttocks.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee downwards, and let the ends of the thread appear from the upper part of the two parts. Then wrap over the leg and hip what remains in excess of the bandage.
Then put over the hip, in the place of its fracture, a splint, and put one of them as a splint over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and hip with soft rags, so that it equals the narrowing.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle over the place of the fracture, with three or four windings. And the more you extend it with a bandage from the place of the fracture, let your narrowing be less and softer, and looser.
Then tie the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and the leg. Bind therefore with three splints which are above, to both. Then bring the two ends of the thread downwards, until you reach the heel of the foot. And tie with them also the ends of the splints on the other side, so that the bandage is not moved from its place.
Then leave the bandage on for as long as it stays, so that there is no corrosion of the member, nor an abscess, nor inflammation, and similar things. If anything of that should happen. Apply therefore its remedy, and correct the whole thing that happened from it, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a fragment of bone in the wound which pierces from the bone: then it is necessary that you reduce it equally, if it is possible for you. And if not, find above that and remove that, and treat with that which the aforementioned treatment has preceded, until it heals.
And when this fracture of the hip is tightened, besides that pieces of bone are added to it, as we said regarding the help and arm.
Truly however in the restoration of one fractured thus, does not occur in the weak a lameness. And if it is restored alone, besides that another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the one whose it is, is always lame.
And know that the hip is tightened in fifty days, or a little is added to it, or a little is reduced from it: all that is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the knee.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap rarely occurs, but an injury to it happens many times.
If indeed a fracture occurs to it, then it is not unless either a split or a hole in its parts. And it is with a wound, and without a wound. And let it be that the whole is treated with sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what has been disrupted from its parts with the fingers, until it aggregates and is joined according to what is possible from equality and ease and fabrication.
Then put a plaster made from flour of sesamus, or of milled wheat, with the white of egg: and put above it a round piece of bone, if you desire it: and tighten over it a bandage suited to that.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have narrated concerning other fractures: such as a hot application, and similar to that: so that you oppose every accident with what is suitable for it, until it heals.
On the restoration of a broken skull.
You should know that the skull is made up of two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name skull, and the other is subtle and is called foecile.
And it happens to both types of skull fractures what happens to the two bones of the arm, and because of that, its restoration is made, just like the restoration of the arm, equally, and the operation is one.
What if the two bones are broken together, the skull will be converted to all parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the skull converts to the front part.
And if the thick bone is broken, you find it below, and it is one of those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and alignment, and binding of the stars according to that equally.
Truly it is necessary, if the fracture of the skull is a foul fracture, having many sores: that there should be a lesser extension, and a gentler alleviation of yours.
And in the skull there is something from the operation above the arm: and it is, when you equal the stars, and complete your entire operation, then take two splints of pine wood, which are used in the making of wooden sandals, that are placed under the tables: and they are made from palm spatulas: and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and not from the tiny ones: and let their length be according to the length of the skull from the knee down to below.
Then wrap over each one a cloth with two wraps according to its length. And put one part of the skull on one side, and the other on the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the bottom of the foot.
Then tie two splints in three places with two extremities and the middle. For when the tightening is prohibited, the leg declines to the right and left, and it stands in a good position.
And now let a little bed be administered from wood according to the length of the leg, and let the leg be placed in it, so that it conserves itself from motion.
And it is very necessary, that you should do that in the fracture when there is a wound with it of its own.
Then consider the leg every day, and study it with utmost care for signs of an abscess, or inflammation, or other remaining things. If therefore anything happens from those, then apply to it what is necessary, until it is healed, if God wills.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
The heel indeed does not have a fracture within.
A fracture happens to the bones of the foot and to the toes also a little, and it does not happen to them except by bruising in many dispositions.
What if a fracture happens to the bones of the foot, and you see those bones raised above each other, then let the weak foot be placed on the ground prepared, as when walking.
Then stand and place your foot on what is elevated from those bones: afterwards press, or tread upon it: and make it equal, until it returns to its places.
Then put a plaster, and pack above: and place under the sole of the foot a small board, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it with the foot a suitable tightness, after you have wrapped it with cloths, and other things which it needs.
When therefore three days, or four, have passed for it, then loosen the binding. For you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured, or dislocated. The operation therefore is in them, as you have seen.
If however some fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them equal according to what I have told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then put a splint on your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider than it: then place under the foot this board which I have described to you, and bind it with a suitable binding.
If indeed what is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then put on top of each finger a splint of its own size, wrapped in linen cloth: and bind the board to the underside of the foot: and let it stand on one end of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you, that you do not forget, but consider all things which I have told you regarding the remainder of the fractures from accidents which we have spoken of: and oppose each accident with what is necessary.
Of the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the os pubis, and the virga of a man.
When the vulva of a woman is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then lean her backwards a little to that side, and let it be held back.
Then the midwife should fill the vulva of hers with a cake, until it fills it: and let it become in the vulva from that like a sphere.
Then let the woman be shaken, and her back be lifted up little by little. For that cake will come out, until it forms before the opening of the vulva like a sphere, and the fractured bone returns.
Then put a pillow on her back. When she then wants to urinate, remove the cake with ease, then let her urinate: and reduce it itself according to the manner in which you first introduced it: then let her return to her first pillow.
Let it be done for seven days, or thereabout, for the mouth itself is restored.
And if you need, take a small reed tube and tie over the opening of it a thread of papyrus, and insert the whole tube into the vulva. Then blow into the tube with force, until the tube is inflated inside the vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then let it be filled with a gauze, and let it stand for some days, according as we have said, until it is healed.
And when the mouth of the pubic bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and its adjustment that which we have described for the bone of the ankle.
And let not the rectum be hidden in these nearby fractures, which little touch, especially to him who has something of a stud or a peg.
And understand my book this much, that the fracture itself shows you in many treatments the right way for its restoration and its adjustment: understand therefore.
When the rod of a man is broken, take the neck of a goose, and insert the rod into it. Then put over it a dressing made of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days, or thereabout, and it will heal, if God wills.
On the restoration of bone fractures, when there is a wound.
It is fitting for him to whom a fracture with a wound happens, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or the like of it, that he should be bled at once: if the conditions of bleeding, as we have said before, testify to you.
For if the wound flows with blood, then it is necessary, that you should proceed to its cutting, so that you powder over it the powdered zeolite: if you have not present another thing.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day: and do not postpone it, unless an abscess forms.
If a hot abscess forms, then abandon the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause bad accidents to happen to it.
If the fractured bone is protruding above the skin, then it is necessary that you should gently reduce it and adjust it with your hands with ease and slight extension.
If the extension of it and its adjustment with your hands is not prepared, then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight finger widths, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And because of that it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the quantity he needs for the cure in every type of fracture.
And let it be round, and let there be a small thickness in it, so that it does not double at the time of compression during the operation: and let it have a sharp end, which has a edge on its ends. And let its upper part be thicker from the middle of it to the lower parts.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the pointed curved end of it be placed over the end of the protruding bone: and push it with it once, until the bone returns and is adjusted by some adjustment.
Therefore adjust the ends of the fracture to each other.
If the fractured end is delicate and does not receive the instrument with a good grip, then it is necessary to cut the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce the bone with what we have narrated altogether, then cut it with what is suitable for it from the incisions that we have mentioned: or saw it with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
Then rub away what remains in the bone from roughness and small fragments.
When therefore the bone is reduced, and the weak person finds after its reduction a vehement painful wound, then know that the bone did not return to its natural place.
Do it therefore. For you confer on the weak person a great benefit, when your restoration which you do for the bone is completed.
Then dip a cloth in black astringent wine. And especially if it is in summer. And do not put on the wound a plaster, nor anything in which is oil, so that it does not cause to happen in it putrefaction and corruption.
Then administer the stars at the hour of completion of your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound uncovered: so that you cut with a fork a hole in the bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware with all caution, lest you constrict the wound with a fracture. For many foolish physicians have done this: and have caused to happen to their weak patients either death, or corruption, or ichor, that is, sanies. And let your dressing be soft, gentle, different from the dressings of fractures and other things.
For if the wound is bad, or is a great wound, and you find on it certain evil accidents which we have narrated, and you find pain in the place suspended: then it is not suitable that you put on it a plaster. And make for them bandages from hard cloths in the place of plasters, and constrict it with them.
When it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove from above the dressing that you had placed on it with wine. Then apply bandages and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds, such as the ointment tetrapharmacon and similar ones.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the dressing. And examine the wound every day morning and evening, until it becomes consolidated and healed.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way, that the pus runs out from it downwards with ease.
If many days pass for the wound and it does not consolidate, nor is the pus separated from it: then know that there are small splinters of bone there. Wherefore it is necessary to probe the wound with a probe. Whatever of those small splinters are separated, remove them, and extract them. And those of them that are not separated, and prick the member, and cause pain, try to cut around them, and remove them in every way possible for you.
If there happens to the wound zuchen or ekileten, that is, estiomenus, or another species of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary that you oppose each one of them with what is suitable for it from the cure, whose description preceded in its own chapter.
And in that which it is necessary for my speech to stand, and to which you should direct your attention when a bone fractures, and protrudes above the member, such as the hip bone, and the shoulder, and similar ones of the large members, it is that you should not attempt to pull it back, for many times death occurs from this, instead leave it alone until it becomes putrid.
For it will surely fall out by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then take care of the wound, if it seems to you, and if not, leave it alone.
On the cure of swelling in the case of a fractured limb.
This swelling often occurs in the healing of a fracture of the limb. Especially one that is near the joints, and is disfigured from the shape of the member. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Consider then, if the swelling is recent, administer to it medicines which have a contracting property, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and gum, and acacia, and similar things.
Thus, that you take some of these or all of them, and mix them with a drying wine, or with the whites of eggs, or with vinegar: and apply them to the swelling in a poultice, and bind them tightly over it.
And leave the binding on, nor loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another, until the swelling is removed.
Or bind over it a sheet of lead from Decenter. For lead has the property of removing all that is inflamed from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone, and is constricted, and necessity urgently demands its removal: then cut on its upper part, and incise the prominent excess: or scrape it with certain scrapers, until it is removed: and take care of it, until it is healed.
On the cure when it is restored, and the limb remains after that subtle, not according to its own nature.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains after that subtle and weak, then this does not happen except for many reasons. One of them is the multitude of the solution of a bandage and its ligation not according to what is opportune: either because of the superfluity of the strictness of the bandages, until the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member: or because of the multitude of superfluous embrocation at not its hour: or because of the paucity of blood in the body of the infirm, and its debility.
And the cure of it is to feed the infirm, and to make tender its body, until the blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And bring joy and gladness upon him.
Then put pitch on the member, so that it may attract much nourishment to itself. And repeatedly moisten its bandage with warm water, until the nourishment runs and it returns to its natural figure.
Of the cure of fractured bones when they are restored to their twisted state.
When a member already restored after its healing becomes twisted and a bone that is fractured or knotted is prominent, and the form of the member is disfigured by it, nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its natural operation: then it is not necessary to heed the advice of him who thinks that the member should be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish doctors and restorers, who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed highly culpable, leading to death, or great fear, so that it would be mortal.
But if the lameness and knot are recent: then it is necessary that a bandage be applied with warm water, in which there have been decocted softening herbs, such as leaves of marshmallow, and its root, and melilot, and their like. And let there be made for him a plaster with a softening plaster, such as diachylon prepared from the decoction.
Let a plaster of the root of marshmallow be applied, and let it be rubbed with hen's fat or with sesame oil: and let it be applied as a poultice.
Let the fat figs be pounded, and let them be ground with dove's dung, and let these and similar things which are named from medicines that lessen the consolidation.
And when a knot is loosened with continuous, gentle, and mild friction, which is done with moist hands. And let the movement of the limb be administered to every part at all hours.
If however the deformity has already preceded, and has become strong, and is turned into a callus, and necessity has been provoked for its treatment with iron: then it is necessary that the part above it be cut, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and that which exceeds in knot or bone be cut out with fine incisions: and let facilitation be administered to it with solicitude and study.
On speech in the case of Dislocation.
Dislocation is the exiting of a joint from its place. For which it is prohibited from its motion, and the figure of the limb is deformed. And it causes pains to happen on the weak part, and vehement injuries.
When therefore a dislocation happens to someone, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration: and let it not be delayed at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes calloused, and perhaps with that the reduction of the dislocation is hindered.
On account of this therefore it is not necessary that it be moved, nor extended at the time of its callous formation. For it often causes spasms to happen, and painful pains.
But when that happens, then it is necessary that you proceed to the bleeding of the weak part. Then let it be applied, until the aposteme quiets.
Then let the limb be anointed with warm water and oil. Then let it be reduced with ease.
And the whole limb should be treated with that which is recalled to its proper place.
I have already discussed the chapters on dislocation and also according to what preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower.
Of the cure of dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both jaws are rarely dislocated except slightly.
And the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods. Or they are moved from their places with slight movement, and made soft for a while. Or they are dislocated with complete dislocation, until they become soft to the part of the chest, until the saliva of the weak one runs, and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is involved with speech.
When however the dislocation of it is slight, then it returns in many cases by itself with swiftness.
If indeed the dislocation is complete, entire: then it is necessary that the reduction of it be administered quickly, and not delayed at all: and it is, that the assistant holds the head of the weak one: and the physician inserts the thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocated jaw between his mouth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he inserts both his thumbs together, if the dislocation is from both sides. And the rest of the fingers of his hands are outside, with which he pulls.
And command the weak one, that he cleans his jaws, and frees them for chewing on every side. And the physician pulls the jaw, and thrusts the jaw, until it returns to its place.
What if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are affected at the same time: then administer vapor with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy: nor should you delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said.
When the jaws return and are equal, and the weak mouth is closed, and not softened: then put over them cotton pads, with cerate made from wax: and rose oil.
Then it should be bound with ease with soft ligaments.
And the weak person should sleep on their back: and their head should be steady between two pillows, so that they do not move it to the right or left: nor should they be forced, or compelled to chew anything: instead soft food should be put in their mouth, until when the pains have subsided, and the jaw is knotted: then they should eat what they want, and it should be administered with ease.
He should not exert himself over the operation of his mouth during eating and drinking, and speaking, until the jaw is knotted and healed.
What if the reduction of the two jaws is difficult, when they become dislocated at some time, and do not return to their own place: then often fevers and constant thirst occur from it: and perhaps the belly of the weak person is loosened, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
When you see that, then know that it is a loss, and often he dies to whom it happens in ten days.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the elbow, and the extremity of the shoulder.
The elbow indeed is not dislocated from the inner side, because of its continuity with the chest. And it is dislocated whenever to the outer sides: and that is shown by sensation.
And its restoration is, for the weak person to lie on their back, and to extend their arms. Then grasp the constricted place with your palm, for the constriction itself will relax.
Then put a plaster on it, and poultices, and bind it tightly.
The limbs which follow the elbow and are connected with it are not dislocated except rarely. What is dislocated on that day should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said, and what has been prepared for you.
Then put a plaster on it, and poultices, and a bandage. And instruct the weak person to adhere to stillness and quiet until he is healed.
And with this same treatment the arm is reduced when it is separated from its place.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways.
Of which one is, that it is dislocated towards the lower part of the armpit. The second is, that it is dislocated towards the breast. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the shoulder, and that happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back, on account of the blade. And it is not dislocated to the front, on account of the nerve.
And most often it is dislocated and protrudes downwards towards the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is sparse. For it protrudes quickly in them and goes in quickly.
In those, however, whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, namely that it protrudes with difficulty and goes in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men a blow or a fall, and the shoulder becomes swollen with a hot swelling, and it is thought because of that, that it is already dislocated.
It is necessary, therefore, that you should test that thing, until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And a dislocation is recognized when it turns to the lower parts of the shoulder joint, and you distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you find between them a clear difference, and you find in the head of the shoulder a concavity, and below the joint upon touching the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg: and the weak one cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if the shoulder is dislocated downwards or upwards, then you find a palpable feeling, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this kind of dislocation is easy, when it is recent, or the weak person is a child.
And its reduction is, that the assistant lifts his hand to the upper parts. Then put your thumbs under the joint and lift the joint with force upwards to its place: and the assistant lifts his hand and extends it upwards. Then he puts it downwards, for it returns quickly to its place.
If however it does not return by what we have said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary that the weak person should bathe in warm water, and an embrocation which softens and soothes should be administered, such as if the roots of marshmallow and fenugreek and melilot are decocted in water, and administered.
Then the weak person should rest on his back: and a sphere and wool which is equal between softness and tightness should be put under the joint.
Then the physician should place his heel on the sphere, and lift the head of the shoulder with strength, and pull the weak person's hand downwards.
And if you do, draw him back according to this method: and it is, that you make the strong man be present who is longer than the weak one, and stand at the side, and insert his shoulder under the armpit of the weak one: and lift up his armpit to the upper parts, until the weak one is suspended in the air. And another servant should pull the hand of the weak one to the lower parts of his belly. If the weak one is lightweight: then it is necessary, that something else be suspended with him, so that it weighs him down: for dislocation returns immediately.
And it is drawn back also according to another method: and it is, that a long wooden pole be fixed in the ground, whose head is of a round figure: such as a mason's mallet: which is neither thick nor subtle. Then let it be placed under the weak one after they have put soft cloths on top of the head of the wood: and let the weak one stand according to the length of the wood.
Then let his hand be stretched out to the lower part from the other side, and let his body be stretched out from the other side with force: for the joint returns to its place with speed.
What if the reduction of it is difficult through all that we have said, then use this cure: and it is, that you take a wooden pole whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entrance is alleviated into the depth of the armpit, according to this form.
Then soft cloths should be tied over the round head, so that the wood does not harm the weak one.
Then let it be placed under the armpit of the weak one, so that the hand or arm is stretched out over the wood up to the lower parts: and let the wood be tied over the aid, and arm, and extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on the step of the ladder in width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the rest of the body is let down suspended from the other side. For the joint will enter immediately.
When therefore the entrance is completed according to whatever mode is possible: then it is necessary, that you place under the eyelid a sphere of equal quantity made from wool. Then put the prepared plaster made from the powder of millet with benzoin and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it turns out above.
Then tie under the eyelid a proper bandage: and turn the ligature over the plaster above: and attach his hand to his neck, and let it be, nor move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that food of little nourishment be given, until the member is strengthened: since it is quicker for its healing.
Then a larger one is put on after seven days, or five, and it is exercised with movement. If therefore it becomes firm and is not softened, then it is already healed.
If indeed the joint is dislocated many times, on account of the humidity which happened to it, or on account of another cause: then it is necessary that a cautery with three openings be administered to it, according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter about cautery.
What if all this is done, and the ligature is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not confirmed, and the plaster and bandage are put on it many times, and it does not become firm, and falls, and cannot be lifted up to the upper parts: then know that the nerves which are at the head of the shoulder have already been cut, or stretched, or softened: and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
And dislocation which occurs towards the chest and breast, or a reduction to the back, is done with an impulse and extension with the hands: until it returns, and the rest of the bandage and care are administered to it, until it is healed.
What if after healing a heaviness occurs in the limb and slowness in its movement then let the weak one use a bath many times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its first nature.
On the cure of dislocation of the elbow.
You should know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty also: and it dislocates to all parts, and especially to the front or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: since it falls under sight and under touch, according to whichever shape it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it is shown to you clearly. For the joint is shortened, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch with it its own shoulder.
And it is necessary that you hurry, and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot aposteme occurs to it.
For if a hot aposteme occurs to it, its reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it is not healed at all, especially when it is to the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocation, and a more vehement pain occurs to them: and many times death descends with it.
And its restoration when it is from those which are possible to reduce, is that the hand of it is extended with two hands: and its arm is stretched out, and the hands of the doctor are above the elbow and below it, and he himself pushes the joint with his thumbs or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or indeed the dislocation is to the front: then it returns thus, that he bends his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the root of his palm the dislocated elbow.
What if not preceded dislocation to reduction, then administer violent extension, and it is that two assistants stretch the arm, and two assistants hold it also, so that it is not moved during extension.
Then the arm is turned to every part after which a double layer of cloth or a broad bandage is applied over the hand.
And when the physician touches with his hand the joint, he should anoint it with oil: so that it is one of those things which help with the slipperiness of the joint with ease. Then he pushes the joint with a vigorous push until it slips back.
And after its reduction, it is necessary that a plaster be placed on it, in which there is astringency and excitation with the whites of eggs: and it should be bound with a decent bandage. And the arm should be suspended from the neck of the invalid, and left for some days.
Then it should be loosened. If then the joint is stabilized in its place, then undo the bandage from it, and leave it.
And if you see the joint not being well bound, then apply another plaster, and bandage, and leave it for some days, until it is bound. Then undo it.
If however heaviness occurs to it after the reduction of the joint, and the arrangement is in motion: then administer a moistening in a bath, and subtle rubbing, and compression, until it is soothed, or put on the joint a plaster made of fat of the spleen. Then bind it, and leave it on for a day and a night. Then remove it, and introduce it into a bath. When it sweats, then rub the joint with moderate rubbing. Then repeat over it a mixture of vinegar one, and second, and third time with the bath, until it is soothed.
And if you use it, put on top of it a poultice of dung, warm and heated with butter.
Do that several times. It is soothed by itself, and returns to its own condition.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow of the hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. Unlike the rest of the joints. However, it is necessary that there be speed in the reduction of its dislocation at the hour in which it becomes dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed: or a hot abscess occurs in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation in it is, that you put the elbow of the hand on a table, and an assistant extends the hand of it: and the physician puts his palm on the prominence of the joint, and presses it, until it returns.
However, it is necessary that it be considered, if the palm has already receded to the front of the hand: then let the back of the hand be put on a table at the extension and reduction: and if the dislocation proceeds to the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand be turned inward on a table, that is, the inner part of the hand be put on a table, so that the hand of the physician falls on the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a poultice sitting on the abscess: and leave it, nor repeat it.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you above the reduction of it, after the days have passed, however the joint remains according to its twistedness: and nothing harms the patient, except that the hand becomes soft, and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut or injured.
There is not therefore ingenuity in it, except that it is tightened with a cautery near its edge. And perhaps it does not press upon anything.
When therefore Almahassem does not return, then put on top of it the plaster which we have described. Then let it be tightened and left for five days: afterwards let it be loosed and left, and the hand is exercised.
If however the motion of it is hindered, and some heaviness occurs in it: then let it be soothed with warm water, and rubbed several times, until it is soothed.
On the cure of dislocations of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction, or a finger to the back of the hand, or its joint: then extend the finger, and push back the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend it towards the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang it, and extend it, until it becomes straight on its own on that day.
When therefore it has been so, bind it according to the same method: and do not cease to loosen it during the day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Do this for several days, until it becomes tight.
And do similarly with it, if it is dislocated towards the joint of the hand: and bind it to the same part, and perform your first operation on it, until it is healed.
And do likewise with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
On the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
When there occurs to someone a complete dislocation of the vertebrae of the back, or of the neck, or many vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death quickly follows the infirm.
And the sign of it is that the weak bowel comes out without control, and it cannot hold it, and often some of its members become softened because of it, or two of its legs, or two of its arms, or one of them: or one vertebra is removed from its place.
For often a removal is made, because often a removal is made to the four parts.
That which is removed towards the back is called Gibbositas.
The treatment of it is that you should consider then, if the Gibbosity occurs from childhood: then there is no treatment for it, nor is there any healing from it.
In that which occurs from a fall, or a blow, or similar things to those, the ancients have already spoken of the methods of treatment in prolix discourse. To whom it does not return with profit.
I have already abbreviated from it, whose fault excuses little because of its abundance in my proximity to the intention: and my exposition which I expounded it, and formed an instrument for it in a different way than that which they showed it, and exposed it.
I say therefore, that in the humpbackedness which occurs from the front part, there is no ingenious remedy, nor healing from it.
And likewise in that which happens to both sides also.
And it is not treated from them, except that which happens on the back properly, with what I relate: and it is, so that the weak one is extended on his face on a level platform near the wall: and under it a humid cloth is spread, so that his chest is not harmed.
Then a straight stick is fixed in a hole in the ground, at the end of the platform, near his head: and another stick near his feet at the other end of the platform: and an assistant holds the stick, and it is not fixed in the hole. One servant should hold the other.
Then tie above the head of the weak person, and under his armpits a soft ligature, firm, and extend the end of the ligature to the wood which is near his head, and tie it on that.
Then bind another ligature above his ankles, and above his knees, and near his calves. Then gather all the ligatures together, and tie them on another wood which is near his feet.
Then each servant should pull the ligature to the part of the wood, and the two woods should not be moved from their places where they are fixed: nevertheless they should not be tightened, as we have said.
And the physician should put his palms on the vertebrae with force, until it returns, or he should put a board on it. Then he should attach his feet to the board, until it returns.
But if it does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three cubits. And bore in the wall which we mentioned that is near the weak person, a place into which the end of the board will enter. Then put the middle of the board on the vertebrae. And the physician should put his feet on the other end. And he should pull strongly, until the vertebra is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a lathe that is turned by your hand: and it is, as if you fix in the ground near the head of the weak person at the end of the bed two woods, whose length is one cubit: and near his head at the end of the bed two woods.
And let the length which is between each wood be one palm: and now a hole has been made in every place where the lathe runs: and each wood should be fixed firmly in the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And a round stick is inserted: and it is turned in which the ligature revolves in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hole, in which the stick is fixed, whose length is a palm with what revolves: and in two other sticks there is similarly one of them.
Then tighten the ligatures that you have tightened on the chest with the turnstile that is at its head: and the ligatures that you have tightened on its shins with the turnstile that is at its feet.
Then let a servant stand at each turnstile, who twists his hand with the cloth, with which the turnstile revolves: and the physician adjusts the Spondile, according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turnstile, which follows.
Then after the Spondile has returned, and the place is adjusted, then it is necessary that you put on an exciting plaster with white of egg. Then a poultice. Afterwards put on top of the plaster a bar of wood, whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length such a quantity as to cover the place of the gibbosity, and over the sound part of the Spondile.
Then let it be tied with the ligature that we have said. And let the weak person use subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
Which if something of the swelling remains in the place at the end of the healing: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, with the administration of the bar that we have described for a long time. And now let it be applied on that plate of lead.
And when a swelling occurs on the posterior Spondile of the back: and it is thought that it is due to a dislocation, and it is that bone which now protrudes. It is not suitable that a presumption be made for him with this medicine: perhaps it will cause death.
On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that the joints of the ankle and shoulder do not suffer anything except dislocation, nor does what happens to other joints due to slight movement and concavity happen to them.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways. That is, because it dislocates to the front and to the back.
And most often it dislocates inward, and little dislocation occurs to the front and to the back.
And the treatment of its dislocation inward is: that when you join the weak leg to the healthy one, it is longer: and its knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the weak one cannot fold its foot at the groin: and the place which follows the groin is affected with a warm poultice, because the head of the hip has already reached there.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation to the outside occurs is that its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation to the front occurs is that it stretches out the healthy leg in extension: however it does not bend it without pain which is in the knee: and if it tries to walk, it cannot step forward: and its urine is retained, and its groin is affected, and upon walking it steps on its heel.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation to the back occurs is that it does not stretch the knee, nor can it bend before the groin is bent: and its leg is also shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this dislocation of species is that you should consider then if the dislocation is old, which has already become established with the one who has it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is not in it a cure at all. Not therefore ought a complete presumption be made for it.
In that case in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocations: then proper for this, that you bind the joint, and extend it to the interior and to the exterior, and move it right and left: perhaps indeed it returns, and does not need another cure.
If however it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister, and let him extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands, or with a ligature, which will be tied above his leg above the knee: and another minister extends his hand from above, so that he inserts his hands under his armpits. Then let him tie with a gentle ligature over the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other ligature.
And let its extension be either from the front part of the groin to the region of the armpit, or from the back to the region of the back.
And let the extension be of all of them in place of one, until the weak one is lifted with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this indeed is a common species of extension among the four species.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for every species that which I will say about its own cure.
In the reduction of it, indeed, when the dislocation is to the interior, it is necessary that the weak one lies on his healthy side. Then let a ligature be placed over the root of the hip, in that which is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then extend the ligature upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the region of the armpit.
Then the assistant should take his strong arms and cut the thick place of the weak hip, and stretch it to the outer stretching of the vein. For it returns to its own place.
And this type is easier than the other types of treatment, by which this member is reduced.
If it does not obey you for entry with this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary that the two weak feet be bound together with a strong and gentle binding over the two heels and over the two knees: and let the length of each be from its fellow the quantity of four fingers: and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the weak one should be hung over the head of the wooden beam, which is in the house: and its length from the ground should be the quantity of two arms.
Then command a strong youth to support the head of the hip: and let another youth be hung with the weak one: and let another youth push, supporting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
In the reduction of it itself, however, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one should lie on a platform, according to what we have described for one having a hump. And let a bandage be tied over its weak leg itself, and over its chest.
Then two wooden beams should be placed, one at its feet and the other at its head. Then an additional wooden beam should be placed in the middle of the platform, fixed well: on which let wet cloths be wrapped, so that it does not harm the weak one: and let the beam be between its hips, so that it is not drawn to the lower parts at the extension.
Then every assistant should stretch to his own part, and the physician should accomplish the reduction with his hand.
If it is cut to restore it, it will be good.
And if not, put on it a plate, and press on it, as we have said for hunchbackedness, equally. It is fitting that the weak one should lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is fitting that the weak leg should be extended quickly: and this is a second narration on the couch: and the physician puts the palm of his right hand on the weak groin. Then he tightens it with his other hand, and with that tightening he puts it extended downwards towards the knee joint.
And if the dislocation is to the back, then it is not fitting that the weak one should be extended downwards, and it should be elevated above the ground: but rather it is fitting that it should be placed on a hard surface, as it is also fitting if his hip dislocates outwardly, according to what we said about its lying on two hips: and it is on its face, and the ligaments are extended: according to what we said just now.
And it is fitting that compression should be administered with a plate also on the place from which the joint protrudes, when the reduction is completed according to what is fitting.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is that you should extend the two weak legs: and when you see them equal, and the weak one draws in his leg, and expands it without effort: then you should know that the limb has already returned according to what is fitting: then join the two hips, and put on a plaster, and bind with a bandage, that is, a wheel: so that the hip may not move to any part: and let the weak one adhere to quiet for three days, or four.
Then undo the bandage and plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in condition, then you should know that the dislocation has already been fixed: therefore release the weak one to walk.
And if you see something of softening: then reduce it, and apply a plaster to it, and bind it according to your first binding: and leave it for three days.
Then undo it and make it stay behind in walking on both for some days, until it is well comforted.
Of the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outward, inward, and downward, namely to the back.
And it is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will find the weak one applying his leg to his hip. If however it does not adhere to the hip: then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is that you make the weak one sit upright, so that now he extends his leg if he can over it, and you adhere your back to his face: and put his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee adhere with your palms, and straighten them out between your fingers over his knee. Then apply with your palm the two sides of his knee with strength. And another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg adheres to the hip gently, not laboriously.
Then apply a plaster to it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days, or four. Then undo it.
And the weak one does not use walking for some days, until he is healed.
If however the reduction of it fails you, then administer a strong extension with bandages, whose description preceded in the cure of the ankle, until it returns.
On the treatment of dislocation of the heel bone.
The heel bone is sometimes moved with a slight movement and sometimes it is dislocated according to its complement. And its dislocation occurs, either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel bone swollen, protruding to the side towards which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its displacement is an easy reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease by the hands, and straightened until it returns to place.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to its complement, it is necessary that you make the weak person sit upright and a strong assistant should hold him firmly from behind on the middle of his back.
Then you should hold with your right hand his foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the place of the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand. Then with the left hand with two fingers.
Then stretch it with the left hand, and push the foot's heel upwards with the right hand towards the leg without strain.
Do that twice, as we have described.
Then push the heel of the foot towards the leg for the third time, and you pull the ankle.
If then it returns to its place at the first or second attempt according to this method, and you see the foot is straight, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on it, since it will return.
If however the reduction of it is prohibited to you with what we have described: then make the weak person lie on his back on the ground, and fix a strong stick in the earth firmly, so that it falls between his thighs: and you have already wrapped something around it, so that it does not harm the weak person.
Then the servant should take his thigh: afterwards the servant should stretch the other foot, either with his hands or with a bandage that binds above the ankle. Then the servant should stretch everything in the opposite direction of his comparison: and a small stick should stand between the two hips of the weak person holding it, so that his body is not pulled downwards at the lower part during stretching.
Then the physician adjusts the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg below. For the dislocation returns with swiftness.
When then the dislocation returns, and the health of its return is declared to you: then put a plaster and a dressing, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you beware or avoid the nerves that are above the posterior heel, so that the bandage is not oppressive over them and harms them.
Then leave it for two days, or three. If the bandage becomes loose, bind it: then undo it on the third or fourth day: and forbid the weak person from walking for forty days. If indeed he tries to walk before that time, there will not be security unless the dislocation is dissolved over it, and becomes putrid, and it does not receive a cure after that.
What if a hot abscess occurs to him: then it is necessary that you administer to its treatment what we previously mentioned in another place concerning the cure, and an application of warm poultices, until it is removed.
Of the dislocation of the toes of the foot, and its cure.
It is necessary that what is dislocated among them should be adjusted with a little extension without labor: and this indeed is not difficult, rather it is easy.
If the dislocation is in certain nodes of the foot's back: then it is necessary that the weak make his foot sit on an equal place to the ground, or on a board: and he stands as one walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then tread on it with your foot with strength, until it returns, and you see it already equal, and it does not appear in the place of prominence.
Then put under the sole of his foot a board that can hold the whole foot, which has two ends. Then bind it with a binding for three days sufficiently. Then unbind it, and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is bound and secured from the reduction.
Of the species of dislocation with wound or fracture.
When something happens to it, and you consider its cure and restoration, many times death occurs: and because of that, it is not necessary that one presumes on the cure of such a thing, unless one who is prudent in the art from long usage, merciful, pious, slow, not daring, nor presumptuous: and so that he uses medicines which calm hot apostems only: and entrusts the weak to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for health from destruction with gentleness of sickness, and in which appears something to be hoped. Therefore, consider the reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the thing, before a hot apostem happens.
If the member returns according to what you wanted, then administer a regime that calms an apostem: and cure the wound with what is suitable for it from dried plasters.
Which if the dislocation is with a fracture, and they happen in a separated bone, then consider their removal, and do on it what we said in simple sicknesses from that which preceded in their places.
And beware according to your ability, and guard yourself from the entrance on the way of fear: according to that which my preceding preaching has instructed you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more healthy for your body among them in your time.
