O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh children, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the result of the gathering of knowledge in the field of medicine, and I have made the end with my explanations and by my declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is twisted and strange in our region and is unknown everywhere, so that science has perished and been forgotten, and there remains only a few small descriptions in books of the ancients who have moved their hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this, errors and foolishness have arisen, and the intentions are closed, and the science is abandoned.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will live and thrive by following the order of this treatise according to the path of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and then I will assemble the forms of cauterization tools, and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of these, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been stretched.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting that he who enters into this subject should master anatomy, as Galen says, so far as he knows the measurement of bones, and their forms and connections and separations, and be acquainted with the bones and nerves and marrow and the number of veins, and the direction of their flow.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this Ypocras says that nails are very foul, and flesh is less so, and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	So that anyone who is not familiar with the things said in this book, will avoid falling into error and offending people; thus I have often seen many of those who intervene in this science abandon their knowledge and understanding.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I saw a madman who cut open an abscess from scrofulous swellings or the neck of a woman, and cut into her arteries in the neck; for this reason so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another madman who tried to break a large stone from an old man's skull; so he carried off a piece of the bladder with it, and was killed inside his own head within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have seen that it is called for the treatment, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the wound, and I knew well whether they would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where a certain mire took the treatment of Duke from our land who had broken his leg, and with the breakage he got an infection; and the mires ignorant in handling the break bound the break above the wound with strong ligature, and did not release it from the wound at all, and thus I ended it; and he commanded that he should not be released again; and remained so until his leg was completely infected and his feet and died of perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to release the leg; and when I heard it loose itself, it was peaceful and he did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all corruption is already confirmed in the limb, and cannot be cured; and does not cease to corrupt until the member has lost all.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another operation that causes the abscess to burst and infect, and then inflame because of the evil spirit of its rule.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, cannot be cured unless you touch it with iron, if there is not enough time to remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And dearly children, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, whether there is danger in more than one situation; and I will show you in each of these books where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because you must protect yourself, if the physicians do not speak well of you. If you take your arms in comfort, and carefully and firmly take your sick ones, and use the best way so that by God's grace you come to health and are praised; and let fear of illness disappear from sickness; and put away your weapons from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The Gauls wrote in some of their admonitions: "Do not take up care for a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cautery and cauterization of aqueous medicine, and they are arranged from head to toe; and the forms of ointments, and metal instruments for cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cauterizing wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the forms of ulcers.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and the ordering of the bones just like pieces, and the forms of ulcers.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Also as we recall the work, it is necessary to tell the quality of aid and the evil of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and evil are the longest words and subtle science, and the secrets of response; and the more wise men speak about them, and agree with one another; and they reprimand me for my long words, because I am too verbose.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally to all kinds of flesh where there is matter; and it helps two kinds of complexions: namely the hot kind with matter, and the dry kind with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry combined flesh with matter, some say that cutting is great help; and others say the opposite: that cutting does not do much good for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat or cold, and this one who says the opposite that cutting makes great help to hot and dry disease that comes into the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you purchase the body of a man and its moisture is in the hot flesh, you find that the flesh is frozen.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this phrase.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have not found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And no path should be pursued unless by one who has tried it, and who knows from long experience the cautery of burns, and the variety of human conditions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies and space for treatment; for us of other kinds we have little hope or fear of maladies cold and moist.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians concur and agree on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cautery is made from fire so it has the properties of a cure, and is more beneficial than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	The fire is simple, and it comes from no other place than the member that is burned, and it does not happen to any other member if its name is mentioned.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The medicines that burn come from member to member by separating, and they bring disease to the afflicted member of healing; and by chance, the fire does not occur in the healthy member because of its high heat and the subtlety of its substance, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through long service and study, which has been revealed to me on the surface of things; and therefore I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to reveal the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, as how it cures diseases of the body, just as the philosopher said in demonstrating; now receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, how they will agree on when to perform the cauteries, and whom they will choose as assistants.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cutting is beneficial in all times, because the evil consequences are removed by the aid of cutting; and even if the cuts cause painful necessary wounds and hurts, which cannot wait until greater illnesses come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think that a child, for his foolishness; because the disease that is cured by cutting has no return; and they say so; but it's not as they claim, for cutting is not just medicine to heal, but one that changes the complexion, dries out the humors that cause pain, and brings relief sooner than other medicines, through its virtue and power, and by the excellence of its work.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	In cases where disease comes upon him at times according to the complexion of the patient and their nature and virtues; and certain excesses are assembled in him through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless they administer cauterization on them when they have a small amount of excess and moisture, as cauterization for teeth causes pain, and similar things, then this does not come back again; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the art of medicine, and it's just observation; but they do not believe that cauterization is useful after medicine, their understanding is false, and cauterization is called the art of medicine because when we administer certain types of cures in any disease and they are useless, then we administer the cauterization, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And then apply carefully the cautery to the behind of medicine, not according to the foolish opinion of blind men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery made with an instrument of gold is more effective than one made of iron, and they did not say so because of the fire itself but because of the quality of gold and its density; and they said that the cauterized ones do not rot, but I have seen otherwise in some men; and things made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, just as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And it is not known at all when you heat an instrument of gold, whether it will be corrupted by the color of gold and cooling down; and if one heats it too much, they make it in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have tried on our own work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	or you have ordered this chapter to be written on the head with great pieces, because the vein is lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	do cautery olive oil
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is worth moisture and cold on the head, because there's one that we do by the cause of a sickness called "soda", and due to many humors that come down from the head onto the eyes, and ears, and for many pains of the teeth, and pain of the throat, and in itself all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine dissolving the warts, or on the head three times a day, or four times a day, according to what the virtues and the age and the habituation of the patient can tolerate; and then make the wound of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on some cloth; after placing the root of your palm above the root of his nails between his two eyes; and when my hand comes to meet it, if he bleeds from it, take out the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the new signet ink on the wound, and make a small incision and draw out your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand gently, and dress the wound if you see the bone exposed little; if not, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after take some wool, put it in powder and soft cotton inside, and put on the wound, and let it be for three days; after put a moist linen cloth in lard; and let it so that the dressing is exposed; afterwards cure the wound of the ligament which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And when they said the old ones, that as long as it stays on a wound, more blood is spilled; and therefore they take care.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said any of these that one must take such care with the cautery so that part of the bone is burnt, and then reattach what has been burnt by the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say other that you must take such care with the cautery so that it is burnt as far up as possible, and strike it as hard as when you lower a piece of bone to an equal size as one wears for their girdle; because thus the humors come out moved outside; after, you must cure and suture.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two kinds of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, fire whether in some people it gives a view of fear; and I think I must leave them because the bones are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have shown in other members; and even when the joints of the sick person are weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salubrious and soothing for me, then I follow that remedy accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When it is chronic pain in the head that lasts a long time, and the patient uses herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives of the head, and oils, and ointments; and if one does the cautery which we have previously said, and it is not helpful.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be aware that if the head of the sick person is of strong constitution and not too cold; then cut under that cautery as we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cutting the cautery under each corner of the head until the bone, as we have said before, and perform the cautery as they are called "vasselz"; for this is where one puts vasoconstrictors; and adjust your hand so that you do not see anything until under the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary to make the corne cauteries more subtle than those which are made for the luteinity of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Cut the head with fire
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and the disease is spread to the oil, and the sinews are purged by medicines, and other remedies have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them help: then do cautery according to two manners, namely with sharp medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with sharp medicine is this: you take an ounce of alum, and remove the scab and skin around it as well as the two sinews, and then make a small temple to apply the alum in such a way that you can cover the spot again under the skin; and when you have covered it so, bind it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then release it and treat with fire again the spot of alum, and let the wound be like two days or three; then put on cotton soaked in butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you see, do what I have written about burning medicine or decoctions that I have prescribed to treat burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery to what shape it should be:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the chief is made in the shape of a clover or has little horn, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and put on the painful place, hold your hand tight and turn the heat a little gently, until the edge that hurts is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which lies hidden, and bleed abundantly of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Instruct the patient to put cotton wool on the wound for three days; then put a moist cloth over it; after that apply ointment to the wound until it is healed. And if you want to cauterize this emigration with the "cultellare" tool, which has a point at its tip, and take care not to cover the artery in this emigration which is not old.
de emigraine	of an abscess or boil
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	Since you are treating an abscess as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not benefit from cutting, and observing that what was said about cauterization does not please, then it is fitting to heat the "cultellare" tool until it is white; and so apply a hot oil line on the wound, one half a finger's breadth, and take hold of your hand once; do not strain too tightly, lest you cover the artery, or make it worse as it turns towards the bone; and beware that pain in the jaw occurs when eating, and that there is no numbness but spasms, and let worry for the bleeding of the artery when it is cut be great, just as it was for those who were not skilled and knowledgeable; and leave the wound to heal on its own. But I will tell you how to keep the wound closed when the artery is cut, and show you in this book where it usually occurs.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If the fire cautery does not alleviate the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize the wound as we have said, and cure the pain until it is healed; and if you see, administer the fire cautery that we have said in the chapter of extraction of the artery, with the fire cautery that has two stitches; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of pain in the ears from cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and there has been no relief from solutives medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not cease, then use this fire cautery which is called "pins", because it takes this form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the diseased ear, or on both sides where pain holds, and you are a little apart from the root of the ear after staining it with encaustic; and mark X points around each ear; after the cure, let the ear be so that it is sane.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that must be cured by cautery is not that which burns of fire, but only the one that moves from the swellings, as we have said in divisions of disease; and do not make cautery on similar symptoms that come from the drying and phlegm of the nose.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this similitude of torture that swells from the humors, and from head-sweat, and pharyngitis, and gargarensie, and it is so that you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little away from the temple, and the third in the meeting of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part where the skin is healthy, and make the point directly to the crown of the ear above a little below the horn of the ear, and another on the temple just as long as an inch; and leave the cautery there until the moisture of the cure is dried.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the sawing that we have shown before, but it is slightly more subtle and it is necessary for the cuts to be slightly larger; after treatment let him be as I said, until he is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it in the way we have said, but it does not benefit and the sick person has no fever, then do four cauteries: two on each of the two horns of the head, one on the forehead, and one at the "vasselz" (as we have previously said), and a cautery on the lower part of the abdomen, and be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of leprosy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease it is necessary to give the patient large and bitter pills for the brain; after dressing, dress the head of the sick person completely, and put a poultice made with sinapis (on the occipital region) on the emplastrure (the application), which is written in the treatment of ointments; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy in that way, it's good; and if not, three fire cauteries are made on the swollen head as you go down to the navel, with space between each cautery two of large size; and the cure does as the others do, and if you see a boil, and the patient suffers, make one cautery in the middle; and when skilled is, two other ones above the two horns, and the cure until he's healthy; and let the cauteries be which are called "olivare", as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is fitting that the head be purified with years and what we have said before. After putting on the patient's head, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and two below the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries above the spine of the back; and let him lie as long as his pain is reduced, and raise your hand; after the cure, until he is healthy, and let be the cauteries which are called "olivare" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should use fire cautery only on those who are fleshy, and it is advisable to first soften the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from many kinds of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's an infant who cannot suffer, make him gargle and chew bones to soften the brain often with meat; after raising his head a mile high, and then perform fire cautery as we have said before, and do fire cautery on the neck, and each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make it undergo such cauterization as I told one who had paralysis and softening of body, on the spine of the back and neck; and do olive cautery according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, he must do fire cautery subtlety according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are superfluences or corrupted moistures and large pus, then cut with fire cautery as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluences decline to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him to drink something by which his brains are purified, according to what is in front in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After he brings the head of the sick person back to its proper place; after cut off a piece of linen well made, like a circle, which you put inside the head; and tie the patient crosswise, and keep him tightly from all parts; after wrap the linen, and pour melted butter of old sheep on it; and let the head heat temperately, so that he can bear to be poured on him; after pour the circle into the head through, and let it cool down; and do this for each sick person once a week with another good government, until they are cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see someone being cauterized while doing multiple pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain more; and then wraps cotton soaked in butter and pig fat around it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and therefore give to the patient something that is purifying the head, and cleansing all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times at dawn.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to reapply the poultice, and make cauterize on the inside of the head, and make II cauterize on both temples if there is II weakness in both eyes together, or if one eye has weakness; and strike at all the cautery veins and arteries that are under the wound, and be careful to cauterize long as the temple is wide; and beware of complications of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the cautery with a great care as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising the art of how to extract them; and at no time have been done cautery or hatereil under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the bowels
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the lumps of the eyelids are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or on the arteries that appear in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it's excesses cold and phlegmatic, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the treatment downwards under the eyelids: 1 cautery on the forehead, and 2 cauteries above the two temples, and 2 cauteries under the two bones; and if it needs more, cut with a careful cauterization above the eyebrow.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Body of the eyelid inside the eye
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not bring any relief, then give the patient three bitter drugs; after the king has washed his head, and performs fire cautery on the middle of the cautery olive oil; and perform two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two shoulders, one below the cheeks; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of olive oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cauterization called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	It is because of this
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that cut two cauterics on the same sores just as long as the sores are; and do not let go of your hand unless until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	one hair which pierces the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is never the case that the hairs of the ointment are converted to paraffin, and pierce the ointment, and then it is done cauterization according to two manners: this means by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and grow even, then put the patient in a healthy place; after that, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure such as the shape of the navel of myrtle, and the beginnings of the sign of the hairs; then put cotton soaked in oil with musk and pepper from persil upon the cut.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have drawn little by little a few times, until the wounds are closed to the end; and the signs of good health of the work are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised towards the point of oil; then release your hand, and leave it so for III days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the scab falls off; after apply ointment until he is fully recovered.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow after this; and the paper is softened then again apply cautery to that same place as you did first; if the hairs are fallen off, cauterize it until the paper rises back to its natural place, even and not pricked by the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment in the shape of mint leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, one of each .2, and grind them together well; and do it hastily if it does not cool down, then place on the eye as if you had made a shape like mint leaf, and put on the paper of eyelids; and if the patient is cured in oil alone, they must be treated with both; and put below the oil a cotton wool soaked in wine; and press the joints of the patient so that your two fingers show above the medicine, and apply .2 to it every time the patient feels biting of the medicine, as he feels it as if of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine is at your debt.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the wound has healed, if you lift the limb so that it is lifted just as it was lifted by constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not so, put again the medicine on the limb or if the medicine has not worked yet, until your wounds are equal and your eyes are fixed; then put on cotton soaked in butter until the pustules dry up, after applying the ointment called "dyafenis" and other things, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you must guard yourself well on your wound by great care so that the wound does not catch again of the medicine at the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the papers become damp after, and the hair pricks in the oil, then resume the medicine on that person who has been dampened by the paper properly, as you have done before; until the cure is complete; and this is the form of a poultice made with mint.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to those be your constrictions; and do not return to the straight path for him who has the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit it, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in a safe place; and bind the menisters' fingers around his head in such a way that it does not move, nor does his head; after binding cotton wet with wine or persillous juice on oil; after cauterizing which is done thus: and if they are bound so as to resemble the shape of a bird's beak, like this it should be done; for if you see, it has been appointed from one side of the head to another; and if you see, it is just like a tent; but all that matters, this which is bound is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula so that it is open, and taking out the pus, and drying it; if it is closed, then apply, and take fire to the bowels; after putting on the cauterizing hot in shape, and holding your hand to the cauterizing at the place not touched by the oil, lest your hands become mad; and put the cauterizing into the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just after the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, if you repeat the cautery once more, and if it's needed again, and you leave it for three days; after that, put on cotton soaked in fat, and apply a drying ointment to heal the wound, until it is healed, provided that forty days pass and it is healed. Then, put on medicine containing corrosive acid so that the bone may be exposed; and treat according to what he came into his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients have mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To treat a fistula, and to cut it open; after that, put in the wound a thin thread so that this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of one .Z. of pus; and hold your hand firmly on the spot, and do not let the patient move at all, until the pus is drawn out and does not run back into the wound; and it is advisable that you put a cloth soaked in wine or oil on the patient's wound: the poultice will serve as a cure for fistula, and will bring about marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have told about, then it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, it is advisable to administer pus to the wound, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what is most pleasing in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are fissures on lips called "poil", and even on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures of that which we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit the patient, then apply a small cauterization with a spoon-like knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put him immediately in those fissures until they come into their proper form; after treatment, he shall eat cherries so that he may recover.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or on the uvula or in the mouth or on the roots of the teeth, after it is opened and drained and dried out and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary to apply cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening of the fistula, and keeping your hand until the iron hook comes into view again, and on the root of the tooth; and do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until he is cured; and if it is treated so, that's good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the root and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Any movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and this does not work, then put the patient's head on a warm stone; after put the cautery in the shape that comes next in that manner that you put a cloth over the tooth; and put hot caustic inside the cautery firmly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with vinegar and let them spit it one hour and a half over fire.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the teeth that were moving are fixed, and the gums are restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of the teeth comes from coldness, or if there is coldness in the vein, and medical remedies are not effective, then it must be necessary to cut according to two manners: and cutting with butter and cutting with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cutting with butter if is such that you apply butter from a raven's wing, and the end into a iron spoon or arrow; after putting cotton and wrapping it on the point of a tent, and the pus in butter boils, put on the painful tooth suddenly and hold until it cools down; and so do frequently until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that molten lard and cotton in butter burn, and put on the tooth itching, and put on iron hot until the fire reaches the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Instruct the patient to hold a candle made of iron or linen, and let it be so large that the fire does not come close to the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, see how the form will appear afterwards, and place it on the tooth and keep your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be removed on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of applying this cautery, and then wipes away the residue; and it is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on the head that you wish, and according to your power; and this is the shape of the candle:
des scrophules	There are ulcers.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When ulcers are filled with pus and moist coldness, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then apply the cautery to the head so that what follows comes next, and have two apertures for the fumes to come out from the cautery of the other side; and place the cautery on the abscess once, or whenever it seems proper, until the pus of the abscess comes forth. If the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its quantity, and leave it that way for three days; and put moistened cotton wool in butter on top until the ulcer is healed. After care with bandages and poultices until it is safe.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the rope.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures conquer on the channels of the body, and also when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first with soluble medicines; after the cautery at the root of the neck, and beware so you do not come near to the throat again, and do not burn with heat but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the other cautery at the shoulder joint, and the one called "clavicle" because of its shape, we have the form in front of it; and cure the patient as we have said until he is healed.
de la toust	of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the illnesses of the womb are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor sweating, and it is an old illness, then they do two cauteries on the forceps in both hands; and another cautery between the two breasts; and the one called "clavicle" as stated by its shape.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, do cautery by pricking at the whole cauterized area which is called "poins" of why it takes this form before in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be for just thirty or so.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment according to what has been said before, and let the cauterized areas be cut into three parts according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because of that, the cauterized areas are lighter, because you make three cuts in one.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After is laid the patient on his back and on his chest; after he raises the pimple which is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then he heats the cautery that has two nerves in its form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the pimple so that it pierces just on the chest, and comes out with the fugure of the cautery assembled four cauteres; and because of this four cauteres are made together for the figure of cauterization, and they have three nerves according to the subtlety of a net and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it sticks to one of these eight nerves.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the cautery on a perlon (bronze) needle with thread; after he makes the patient rest, and does not keep the limbs in that position for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	If it is dislocated above, that sort of thing happens rarely, so then do fire cautery on the thick part of the shoulder with a needle, or many needles.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	But when the joint is closed again and the moisture has been removed and the patient's wounds are healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When frostbites come to the stomach and there is much moisture that must be extracted from it, and many purgings are given to him, and all manner of accustomed treatments do not benefit him, then it is necessary that the sick person lie on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And after that he does III fire cauterizations I under the spoon of meat on the weight of a dole, to the entire cautery needle, and II fire cauterizations behind the two sides so that the figure of the cauterization is at III angles, and has the space between one and another such that they are not joined together when they start to purulent; and the cauterize them so that they prick both parts of the vein, and the figure of the cauterization according to this form until they become adherent.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	If you prick at the base of the fire cautery in the stomach according to this form; and if he has fear of this cautery, prick at it and touch upon the stomach at that point as much as you see there of enche; then pricking the whole cautery which is called "poins
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the ailment we have had before, until he is cured.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver causes pain from heat and moisture and large ventosity, until it is reduced to its natural complexion through purging; and those who are cured of this by what we have said in divisions, do not benefit from it if they are not purged; and it is necessary that they be purged upon their bile; sign and enche III cauteres according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, without considering the hypochondriacs, where or where the pain comes from; and there should be space between each cautery the growth of a doe; and the cauteries should be long along the body, and not press too much pressure with all the cautery; and they should only burn the moist parts of the liver, and let the patient stand upright and straighten their legs and arms; and if he cannot, then it is gout, and extend his limbs and lift his biceps; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish to have your hairs cut, then cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and take care that you do not burn all of the flesh, for you would dry out all the body; and should it come into contact with hot blood, because the flesh is very subtle at that point, and your knowledge to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you see if it is inside the skin of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the skin, the patient feels a dull pain not very strong; but if it is in the membrane, he feels sharp and excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment requires poultices, it is advisable that the patient be placed on his back; and then it must be pressed on the spot where the abscess is located; and then the cauter should be applied to the area which resembles the vein.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Instruct the fire cautery to burn as hot as the key can bear, and it will come out just like a syphac, until the wound is completely burned; after the cure following the healing of the wounds so that he be sane; and it is not advisable to use any fires from this cautery except those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have been cured at some time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore it is allowed to handle carefully and always seem that the value of leaving.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleurisy.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy you must perform the following cauterization: take a root of aristolachia as long as you can find, and dry it, and make it just as big and just as long as your two fingers; then cover it with olive oil, and press it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the lung and the neck, and 2 or 3 times in descending on the part below the beard; and cauterize between the fifth cost and sixth, at an angle after a little; and one cauterization near the breast, and another above the stomach, and between two shoulders, and between two ribs, and do not press with your hand, but rather make it as open as in an odorant.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said an old man that no one uses cautery of fire similar to the razor, and the sawing and placing them between the ribs until it comes to that place; and fire takes away the pain, just as we have said in the apostle of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patients die now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of mice as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit him, then there are three ways of cautery that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There are two methods of cautery. First, where you perform three or four cauterizations, linking according to the length of the mouse, as we have shown in the treatment of the liver; and do not press hard on any cauterization, and let the patients rest on their backs; and another method is that you shave the cauterization which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the wound where the mouse is, or if the patient's wound comes towards the left side, and lift the wounds according to the wound, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to burn the II parts until the keys are felt from the other part, and then apply fire to the cautery, and so on in this. If you see, cut off all the cautery at III parts.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been done for a long time, and this is what the other treatments before said.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Fire does not value the dropsical, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the manners we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make IV cauteries around the boil, and one on the stomach, one above the liver, one above the mice, and II behind the back over the spine, and I next to the foot; and let the cauteries be well near the spot where the pain is felt.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cautery burn for a long time, and not lingering more on the patient's wound after the cautery, and that healing would hasten, and both evils would come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is a nail that we have shown to be effective; and it for the back is olive oil, according to what has been placed there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swollen feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in the person who is watery, and filled with a green pus, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and hold your hand tight with the cautery so that you turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply in the center, lest the green pus flow, and apply the cautery as follows:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the second limbs, two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutlery; and so the cauteries are on the short one in front of the knee and the other behind it in the leg; and let the cauteries be left long to cure, until they come out; after curing the others as we have said.
de la menoison	from the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When stomach problems come from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive virtues are weakened and stagnant in the stomach and intestines, they cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering very much and with great weakness, so do a large cautery on the stomach according to what he has previously spoken about, or cauterize the stomach. Four cauteries on either side of the abdomen subtle, and four cauteries on the hams.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abound and the patient suffering, let them cut fire on the nail, and let fire be applied to each nail, and twice ask for cauterization on the stomach because the cure is helpful when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or one or more of them and are old and are large humors cold, moist, and corrupted, and they have been treated as we have said in divisions, and it has not benefited him, then do cauterization: III apply fire under the spine of the back, that is far from the arm pit, little by little in a triangular manner, and II apply fire under the buttocks; and if you think that its stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and swelling is seen in the face, then apply cauterization to the stomach, as was said before, and II apply to the liver, and II apply to the intestine all over with cauterizing claws, and let the cauterization stay for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelel
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the flesh (thelel), if it seems like a scythe, and then put it completely on fire above the cut flesh, and leave it so long that the cautery comes to the origin of the vein, because it is quick; do this once or twice, and if there's a lot of flesh, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of the instruments, profit from them until they are healthy, and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the cartilage, it will give more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of badly healed wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear pain or opening, which we will tell about in his own words, if a similar illness comes upon him that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When an abscess comes upon, and is hardened and filled with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, if the doctor probes it gently and notices how far down it goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After a cautery burn that resembles a razor, and pour the balm into the abscess according to how much it has entered, and resume the cautery until the rotten and corrupted flesh are burned away once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount of pus; and beware of burning the nerve which is in question, and great pains.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	For the fistula that is in the body of the testicle and in the intestine, if you take care of this one, do not make it worse by touching it only with your finger, but rather think it is not serious; after the cure, let it be so long as it becomes sane, and if the intestines are inflamed, and the materials are dried for a long time, then know that the intestines are completely healed; and if the materials are not dried, know that the intestines are corrupted, and the bones rot away; and thus as one of these we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from the fruit comes to the kidneys, and of great windiness, and does not come on quickly in a woman, then it is necessary that you do cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the clavicle cautery which we have previously mentioned; and if we are cautering at the midpoint, so three cauteries will be done in line, and if they bring more relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and enfeebled due to fruit and moisture, if the patient holds back urine, then you cut the fire in that part behind the bladder, where the hairs are at the navel, and on both right and left sides, and either one cuts as long as we said with a finger; and you cut backwards over the back, wherever there is need; and whichever one cuts according to the shape previously stated.
de la marris	of the intestines
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the intestines are cold and moist, and do not conceive because of this, and their roots are corrupted and delayed; and when they come out, if it causes great pain: then it is necessary to cut fire into them inside the belly, just as we said for cutting the bladder, and two cuts on the back; and whichever one cuts according to what we said.
de la hainche	Of the cheek
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the moistened viscous substance flows onto the cheekbone and because of this movement is hindered from its place, and signs indicate that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring together; and it's found that there are painful movements in the departure of the joint, so it is fitting to cauterize the patient on the cheekbone with a cautery similar to the one used for the stomach; and hold the leaden point inside the circle as it turns, so that the cheekbone is within the circle; and so cauterizes as those who have cauterized the liver.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of olives with large pits, and so cauterize as all the keys; and the doctor until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the groin, and it's from cold and moisture, and patients are cured of what we've said about cutting off division, and a cure does not work, and the disease is old; then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors of fetid pills or other hard-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After applying cautery; and the manner of cautery is in two ways: to know, it's about assembling hot medicines, and cautery of fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is in many ways: and one of these is that you cauterize under the groin, three times; to cut off the groin triangle according to this form, and make a deep, strong wound, and space each cautery by the thickness of two fingers, so that the cauteries are olive-sized; sometimes done once on the midpoint above the head of the groin, because it is four in this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the fire cautery is applied to the cautery on a circle as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder joint; but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the joint and all the spears are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way one does it in sciatika, when the pain is in the shoulder joint, and cannot be overcome to reach the thigh or the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and knee, he makes two fire cauteries on either side of where the patient says that the pain is; four cauteries above the ankle, one on the left side, a little; whether they are cutting cauteries or burning the thick spears. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to both feet or very close to them, he makes fire cautery on the spot where he feels the pain three times or four at the cautery called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the skill is lost, do more; and if he knows that the pain is located below the knee to the thigh, then do fire cautery on the cauterization cutlery or circular, and take good care in all your cauteries not to do so much cautery as you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not make the patient more annoying and contracting.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who did fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they burnt them so much that the leg became completely twisted, and the feet as well, and it was perceived and corrupted all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an emetic treatment in which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in both upper and lower parts together, do fire cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	Instruct the learned men of the fire cautery, that this is the manner, to make such a hook and have it as big at the head as one of our sailors with finger breadth, or slightly less, and so inserted between one piece and the other, spacewise according to the length of a penny; and they should be the crosspieces two in number, and also as thick as nails, and there should be one well-made iron hand; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And so heat it until it is entirely red and let it emit the smell of gunpowder, and then place it upon the hook of the sick man's hainche, and turn its surface towards his healthy side; and let it be cauterized once with a cautery, and let him stay three days; after which apply balm to the wound, and let it remain uncovered for a long time; afterwards treat with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sting, and if you see very few who use it; all know that these are the best cauteries, which one can suffer, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burns if you make a wedge between the two sides, where it falls from the edge of the wound, and be made of iron or linen to a long appearance, and in the high part there should be twice as much, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of two fingers; and over and under, so that they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the beech leaf on the patient lying on his cost side, and pressing your hand much above the beech leaf; after gifting between the two circles of the hot water which is heated a little in the fire, let him stay one hour, taking away the heat and the burning from him.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the molar extraction, instruct as you do for fire cautery; and when molar extraction fails, take hold with the instrument and lift the cheek with a soft hand, and let it be so for three days, and put butter until the decay in the extraction site is gone; and let it be three days that purtification takes place; and that would be the rear aid after the cure of wounds, until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread just to the thigh or just to the leg, make an instrument like the one you have made in the cheek more so; and that is the way of applying warmth, and I wrote it in treating of medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and gypsum, equal amounts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If the small opening does not prevent the point of a razor from entering; and place another pot well filled with fat, and put above chili and chalk and powder soft as much as you have two above the powders when you will have taken it to your hand; and leave thus until it comes out hot and bloody or full of fat, then take all that and put on chalk and on chili so.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very hot and becomes moist due to the moisture of various medicinal works and cauteries of other members, for it makes all these works like fire, and other medicines that we cauterize well, so as to cut the vein just so with thread and honey acacia and chalk with soap, all these sweet things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Galen tells us of a cure for one man who was cured of vein pain and sciatica, and how great he praised it, saying that no other cure was necessary, and that he became whole after one time when this cure was done, and he had bathed as he teaches here afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	Instruct the patient to hold a green and fresh liver in his left hand, and crush it with a little fat, and place it on the haunch, on the thigh or where the pain is felt, and bind him; and let him stay for three hours, by the quantity that the patient feels no more irritation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then put him into the water or bath until his body is a little flushed out, and put him back into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that none of these medications should be used on the body after evacuation.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatica vein is cauterized with sheep's intestines, if it helps much; and he must be made to do this in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and anoint it with old oil, and put it on the hollow that is between the little toe and the other which is called the flesse.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dried cheese, and putting it on fire until it is like charcoal, put it on linen, and let it stay until it becomes soot-like; repeat this again, and do not stop doing this until you think by touch that it has reached the point where the pain will cease; for this kind of cautery is called "cautery of cheese".
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes on, whether by falling or from impact or due to excessive blood evacuation, or when it seems that there is an expansion of cold material, none of these symptoms value cautery, except for those who come from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be free of fetid pills or other similar things on his back, where the pain lies, three lines marked out in length, and for each line V cauterys are performed or more according to the virtue and quantity the patient can bear; and it should be done the cautery as is called "poins"; and if you see this, do III cauteries or IV at the cautery of the clavicle half-mooned according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes upon small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow ribs when they straighten up, and fear; and you will find in the back spine on their back and at this appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you view him being cured, if you cauterize at the cautery of a cell according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery stains each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that cutting into the spine causes two or three lines of marks, and the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment, let him remain as long as he is sane according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply fire cautery in a groin area where there is inflammation of nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by swelling in each limb of the body, and when the pain comes from the foot, they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, then it should be cured with fire cautery in this manner: make a hole with fire cauteries around the joint of the foot, and apply olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it has need to prick at the face of the foot, then let them perform cautery on all the cautery as they claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then let them perform cautery on each knee three cauterizations or four on each part, on all the olive oil cautery; and if you have need of more, do more, but don’t hold your hand too far over the fire until it is blackened.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knees and on the back, then let them administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then let them insert pins into the flesh two lines; and if there is no pain remaining, you must let it heal on its own, but if it does not go away, let's do pinches on each joint and on the skin of the hand; and if pains come to the elbows or shoulders, let's cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and use medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	If you do good governance and purge the humors, then you will be healthy again by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the cut of the sinew.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a cut comes to the flesh and the bowels descend to the joints and it is new, then it is advisable that when you cure the wounds, do not make the same thing the next day; and use things that cleanse the belly, so that the fumes descend from its belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to twist his ankle until the flesh is healed, and tie it with your hands, and mark the sign of a half-circle above the bone of the finger, and in such a way that it be like a circle above the body; then take off the cautery which has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	So long as he is white and has sentels.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then tie up the bowels to their place; and let the ministers keep his hand away from returning there; and work well on the patient, and put a cloth and a servant over the thighs, and another under the leg which keeps his hands; then put the cautery on the sign at the tip of your finger, and your right hand and your thumb until you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, so that it comes out again another time until you grow old enough to touch it; and watch carefully that the bowels do not sail when you make the cautery; do not burn them; and thus let the patients not die, or from some other evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you will know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Instruct the cauterization of children to be subtle according to their measure, and of great men also in proportion to theirs; after three days cure them with butter cautery until the scab is shed; after treatment for other ointments until they are healed, and care for the patient for forty days on his back so that the wound is well covered; and it is necessary that their nourishment be prolonged long enough, so that the boil does not burst when he goes to bed in chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage, and pour on him forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive consumption of wine and eating, and excessive breathing. And when you follow this teaching, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after cutting on his shoulder blade.
de la routure dou ventre	of the surgery of the abdomen.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When such wounds come to other abdomens and become known, and you see that they do not grow again, cut the wound according to its size, and burn off one third of the fever; after the treatment, as we have said; and none of the ancients said that it should be cauterized at three angles like this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark first the left of the incision and make a line for the width of the wound, and another further away, and take out all the cauterization nails.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and more bitter.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, or from a fall or from an injury, and the pain persists for a long time, and no cure of medicine is effective, then it is fitting to cauterize with the cautery called "poins", and to do the cauterizations according to the length, thickness, and weakness and virtue and location of twisting and of pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If there is strength in the first cautery, it is well; if not, repeat the other cautery on that one, because it is customary to make the member move as it is nearest, so that you may do cauterizations until the patient becomes whole.
de meselerie	Of skillfulness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The problem is not cured with cauterization alone by great means, and the disease itself that comes from rotting flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You cannot see the cauterizer being effective, be on guard if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, do not pierce or let it remain, for you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the whole patient, then perform cauterization on the head: I cover the head with wool, and the other towards the front of the eyebrows; two above the ears, and one behind the ear; and keep your hand away until the cauterizing comes to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the big humors can escape; and cauterize on the mice according to what is in front of it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the mesentery is everywhere sparse; and it manifests itself, so it is fitting that you cauterize with these cauteries which we have said about in the head, and one cauterizes on the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and one on the cupola, and another under the scapula, and two under each shoulder, and two on the buttocks, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the cavities of the hands; and beware not to burn those that are under the skin calcified, lest you do so; and at no time cauterize on the bone of the finger, or on the bone of the stomach, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that as you do more cauterizing, the more it will help, and the more it will benefit; and know that patients feel no pain at cauterization if they are healed, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that cauterization should be done both large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in various types of instruments.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the treatment let him eat white flour mixed with honey and other remedies until he is cured.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When an edema comes upon any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you must perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and put one cautery in through the flesh of the wound; then treat the limb with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes a cautery is made by hand and foot and back at the end of the nerve that mutes the member, and thus if it causes swelling; and whoever tries to intervene without knowing the members and their movement of the body will be wrong.
de albaras	of bars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called “bars” is old and the art of medicine has no value, then cut it with a cautery a little in depth, according to the quantity of the flesh that is cut, until the wound is stopped and its color; then feed the patient flour made with whey and lentils with olive oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from chickens and goose blood, each one a part; and mix all together, and tie it in a bandage, and apply to him as long as he is well.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Treatment of the chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the chancre comes at the beginning, and you stop seeing it, cut it with a cautery that seems like a circle all around its circumference.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Instruct all wise men that cautery should also be performed at the center of an ulcer; and I do not think this is good, for I fear it will cause ulcers and corruption, and I have never seen such a thing happen; and there is no surer way than to cauterize around, with the "circle" cautery, as we have said in many other cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of an edema that cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it does not die or because of the fluidity it makes or because of the age of the sick person when they are old and have little blood or time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries, after that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	She will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced with the fire cautery, so that it takes shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the fire cautery pierces the liver, so that the cautery takes on the appearance:
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is completely cured.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease which is called "corrodens", and is nothing other than an ulcer on a limb, because it infects the limbs just as the fire eats away at dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this sickness in someone who can suffer fire cautery together, then take the fire cauteries small and great, according to what is needed for the patient or where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you have removed all the corruption, and there remains nothing of it, that everything which is corrupted should be destroyed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let him lie three days, and place the patient on fire cautery to suffer burns with oil until the scalded skin is destroyed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of flesh born from wounds.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that no healthy flesh is born, it's good; and if not, repeatedly cauterize those who have remained corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this remedy is sometimes treated with medicated water instead of fire cautery; but every time fire cautery is used it is a greater help, and I have said before the remedy for medicated water in the division: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of pears that come to the joints
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, at the joints due to wear and tear, a disease comes into being which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big thing that causes pain.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the fire cauteries for this disease are according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	Which is to say cauter with fire and cauter with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautering with fire is that you should heat the cauter like a heated needle as well as a pen of vulcanite, and it should be made from good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the nail in all parts, and have subtle margins. After that put the whole hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail so long as it comes out with a burnt spot; then leave it like this for three days until it starts to rot; then make an emplastrum of fresh mulberries crushed with resin, and let the emplastrum on the entire night, and the nail will come loose and be descaled from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to treat the joint with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if it is converted by foul odour of the body, and has often happened in hands and feet, so that you must apply fire cautery to warm water; and thus: take a cane of iron or linen, or a quill of vinegar, and put on the nail and the nail bed, as one presses warts; and put the cane on it so that it pricks all around, then put some warm water in and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and you can find the warm water deep down to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the warm water for an hour; and then let it be, and all will come out at their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So that you may do after another, until you have examined all those who are in the body, then treat the joints which obstruct movement.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver from cold or fever, or a quarter-fever, or any other, it is fitting that you make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one on the skin, and one on the stomach at the olive cauterization; then let them stop shivering, and hasten their recovery from the cold sickness.
des pustules puans	of pustules that are putrid.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never appear by accident on the body bathes, or putrid pustules, which come from great corrupted masses.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary when they first appear that we do a cautery on each of the head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of a fustel made from myrtle wood, so that the point may be gripped by the fire, or with an aristolochia root long, or with the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time should the cautery be done at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it will not cause them to grow in size ahead, but breaks off the superfluous flesh that comes from there, and cures; but it is necessary to do so after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the arteries are cut open.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great bleeding from the artery that is cut on the wound, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and such similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Instruct the patient to hasten whenever this happens to anyone, so you apply your index finger on the wound of the vein and strain it very much until the pain is appeased below your index; then put the olive oil cautery in small and large quantities as they are all red; then grasp, either great or little according to the wound and how the artery is routed, and place the cautery above the vein where you hold your index, and keep it there until the pain does not remain.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the fire jumps up when you lift your index finger above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hold of another cautery that is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until they are all extinguished; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is near, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when there is no discharge of the artery, it cannot be well restored by itself because the artery is large, unless it happens by one of the four ways we have mentioned: or through cautery, or through extraction since it has not been treated, or with strong binding of thread, or with medicines applied which have power to stop the bleeding; and let it happen as a consequence.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will stretch back the joints tightly wrapped in cloth or place hot things upon them, or other similar things, if it does not profit him at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has not taken any medicine or remedy, then he must place his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well so that it remains stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not stir him, but let him feel cold water frequently until he is frozen stiff, so cold that when he has stopped bleeding, he becomes swollen and solid and remains stretched.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have said in the first chapter, when it is necessary to cut with fire or hot medicine, and what can be treated with cautery, and the causes and symptoms and forms of treatment; and I wrote that chapter on the head just as if it had been written by pie. And I will go through this same path because that's how one finds the quickest solution for what is sought.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there are more danger and fear than with the first cauterization, and for this reason it is necessary to be more careful.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to venture into madness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come in for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who were so afflicted by their illness that they die easily because of the severity of their disease and the great power of their evil; and for these reasons one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these ones who come to me with their condition, and says: "wait, I am cured"; and the sickness is pitiless.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you should only be willing to treat those who come to you with this condition, but put more great consideration in your honor than in your own wealth; and do not be feeble-mindedly but rather wisely of those things from which you are certain, and for which you have taken possession; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick patients so that a cure is converted to salvation; and this will help you to attain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear children, Our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter for you in the order of chapters, according to what is before or after a cautery chapter, which I have devised for you from the head down to the feet, because you will find it more easily that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Fill your head with water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is known that this illness comes often in children at birth, and when the child holds his head too tightly; and sometimes it occurs from a reason returned which one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness in adults, and all those that I have seen have had a severe death; and therefore it seems to me that one should exercise caution with these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	In this affliction the child has swollen flesh, and the head swells every day until it cannot be sustained; and so strong is the moisture that he is believed to have died, and this moisture so forms beneath the bone above the spleen, between the heart and the bone; and such wounds are caused by the moisture being between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you must cut open with a broad fissure in the head, as long as two of us, until the swelling ceases; and observe this form of spatulate
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more deeply seated, and the abscesses are larger, cut two incisions in the shape of a cross.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the commissures of the head are swollen on each side, and the fluid bursts forth when you press with your hand into it, but does not return: then it is necessary to cut three incisions in the head according to this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After tightening the torn sheets and powders, and putting in wine and oil, and leaving it so for a fifth day; then remove it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head drain completely, and give the patient dried meat of a little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look at or open the size of the abscess, and the assembled water; for sometimes it is before, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right side, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure then at or when the abscess is opened, and the filling of the water, and cut according to what you have the skill; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and apply a sufficient amount of blood, so that the patient dies from the consequence of bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of the loin
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to anyone who is called a "catering" or the worst, and the disease is ancient, and medical remedies do not help, then the last resort is to apply cauterization with what we cut off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary that you cover the eyes when they are done reappearing on his head; after he rubs it with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull out the disease from his neck all with one strip of cloth; then examine if there is blood on either side, and near the ears, and not long to recover; then mark the sides of the veins afterwards, then cut one and the other with a good spatula, two parts thick, until it reaches just to the bone, so that they be as wide as the forehead.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	If you see, pour out the spatumile below the artery and cut on top, as you should when going through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And if the vein is cut, so it bleeds continually without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the arteries do not open to feel, it is best that you measure the quantity of space three times (dozens), then sign and make it as tight as possible; and put a poultice of fire on it six or seven times, in case there are one more or less than that, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if there is still an exposed point on the bone, do not open the incision further because it may cause bleeding again, then extract the wound and bind, and provide treatment with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	le fire cautere
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old blood comes out, and a cough is good, because of the moistness of tears and the heat in the temples and the ancient sore spot and similar things, and it is treated with various kinds of medicine cures, but none of them benefit him, so we have to extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterized areas, as we have previously mentioned.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the sick person makes his hair behind their temples, and listens to where the artery opens in the temple, because it opens well by its pulsing, and is not much swollen like in some people who are too cold; and if it is swollen, he strains off the skin of the patient with certain draperies, then flogs him with a rough cloth, and raises him from a hot water as long as the artery becomes clearly visible; then takes the spatula which has this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Instruct the patient to scorch the skin lightly until you see the artery, then take it upwards with pinches, and pull well from the skin that is below each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it by the point of the needle, then cut according to the quantity of two bones.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not cut, do not make a movement without pain in all parts.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take blood from the sixth [finger], just two and a half; and if the artery is large, it is fitting that you tie it with two levers of a double-strong thread of silk, so that no pus will appear before the swelling of the wound, and come back repeatedly with blood; then cut the overflow that is between the two levers in the same hour, and then, if you see, since he has been cauterized with cautery cutellaire just up to the bone until the bones are cut, this is the gentle work, if the patient does not have fever and it is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery, it is aid to finish the moistors: because of this, it is more help for moistors.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, he fills it with his own vein of wool and puts on well-made tights; and when they are pulled out, if some medicine is applied that causes inflammation, and tentatively so until it heals; and if you do not have a cut from the artery after you work, then hasten to cover it by fire cautery, or take out the vein with your hand, lest it be unseated; and if you don't have that, put wool on the vein as thick as it can hold, and apply cold water until it stops flowing, and is strained as necessary; for what is pulled too soon and more easily in extracting an artery is to cauterize a vein of this cautery with two parts, but they should be well-spaced to keep its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instruments are too dark, he holds less his heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And he must have two sharp knives, one of great force, and then when you have a bandage on the two areas, hold the hot iron above them until it comes to the bone, cut the vein in two areas; and let be separated between the two joints because there is no soldering of this cautery throughout; and this is the form of cautery:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing into the veins that are on top of the forehead, and he does not benefit from any medical treatment that we do, and you see the face of the sick person reddening, and feel his front feeling as if he is lame; and the oil is cool and moist so that the hair of the scalp is wet, and the scalp is scorched by the heat of the tears, if it requires this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Instruct the patient to be called 'cure contused', and make him cut his hair again, so that he has either a front or two fowls in front, equally according to the length of the front; and let one of them be as if two doves were broken on the front, advancing forward and downward just like a newf; and let the others be like two birds above the papers, and guard yourself from cutting the arteries which are at those places above the papers; and hold back your hand from continuing the two mandibles, and make each wound the quantity of three doves across; and bring an apple sponge with a lot of rags to absorb the blood, then bathe it in a good spatumile with two parts of its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the cut at the temple just above the second incision; scorch all the bleeding that is between the two wounds until you reach the syphac which is on the bone, then make another part from the main incision just above the other second, and then pull out that spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you prick in the first cut with the instrument called "culterial", and it is very sharp from one side and soft from the other, not sharp at all, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife cutting towards the raw flesh at the wound, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut off all the vessels that flow from the head through the eyes until the incision is continuous, just as far as the opening of the wound; then make another cut in the middle, just up to the other edge; and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the liquid from the wound; then put a linen strip over each cut, and place over it damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and spices, and keep away from spreading abscesses; on the third day, untie the bandage, and administer great quantities of watered-down plantain juice, then apply the Basilicon salve with olive oil, and other remedies for wounds, until he is cured.
dou reume des eulz	Do something to the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any vein becomes swollen due to custom, and you see the eyes cloudy and small, and weak the sight, and the eyelids burn; and the skin is pulled back, and the pain is in the forehead, and the patient sneezes; then know from these accidents that those materials and that catarrh come only from many veins, and what this medicine is for, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to touch their forehead, then make a great cut in the middle of the forehead, and another small one.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and make an incision just until the bone; and keep your hand away from the skin of the temples that move more at the pain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the incision and put cotton wool and linen threads there; then tie wet cloth strips in wine and oil, and be careful not to puncture the abscess; when it is cauterized, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it starts to come out, then treat with excising things which make it heal.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of powdered coal, and mix them together; and administer to these wounds for fear of fire throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear-bleeding
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of four things: grains, or beast, or stone from the mine, or similar thing like metal; or seed, like poppy, fennel, and weeds; or fluid, like water and ash, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes out of the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not attach itself to the ear, nor grows in the ear, if you put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill some small amount of violet oil or silex oil, and administer extraction. Then make it vomit condisions, and stop the nose when vomiting comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and make the ear lie above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	A lot of times comes force by this treatment; and if it does not come quickly, then they must apply extractions with subtle fingers, because there is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it falls by the fingers, that is good; if not, then apply extractions with a small pinching at the root; and if it does not fall by that, make an application of resin and pour the head into the canna or ear passage very strongly, so that what is near the canna can be blocked with wax so that no needle can enter with the canna; then break off the force, because often comes to be like we said; and if it does not come to be in this manner, take glue of which you catch the birds, and put some on some instrument which has a point for this purpose, and put cotton inside; then press the glue onto any stone or thing, and break off the force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot escape from all those things that we have said, so hasten to pierce the ear thus before incising the abscess and spasm; and the manner of piercing is such that you first make the patient healthy of the head, and extract the blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small piercing in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends; and let the piercing be as a moon, until you come to the bone, then break it according to your power, and suck it hasteningly into your mouth; and the cure shall be complete when they are healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that has settled and it swells, extract the infection; and if it cannot come out, then administer a small spot of poultice according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not cut it when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, so many times that you have cut away pieces; then take out small pinches and at the root, as we have said, so that the extraction may be smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In water then it is appropriate that the patient coughs into the ear; and fill the ear with woolen cloth.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be placed above the same ear or in water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If that happens because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not happen because of this, then pierce many pieces according to the length that you must hold and light ones, and let them sit over the fire; and put a piece of bone in the ear, and set foot on the other part, and feel from one bone on top of another bone on the ear; and do not cease to make this movement of bone on bone until the water is all gone, and so will it be all gone; and if you see, pierce the joint, and push one of the bones into the ear, and the other foot gets set over fire until the joint is ardent; then redo another part of joints as long as the water is all gone, just as we have said in the bone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the vein, if it is small like an insect and similar things, cure as we have said in division; but if it is large so that you can feel it, take out the pinchers extraction; and this is the lighter thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms, take out the ears as we have said in division and when treating swellings; if the cure does not profit, it is necessary to look at the ear towards the sun: if no worms are seen, use subtle pins, and if they are not found, take the chain, for this is the shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it can be narrow under and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle pin in the ear according to the quantity of pain in the patient, then follow it to the root. Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, so they are stopped within the cotton tube as I said in the vein; and if they do not burst like we have said, administer enemas as the ancients have proven in the operation of worms, and you will find or treat for enemas; and if you pour your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, so that it is in the form that you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if it is of silver or lead poured into the small openings, and over them for distillation; and to press within the distillation with the well-made instrument of lead, and if you see the razor and enveloped in the point of the cotton, then pour your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the tube, so that the tube is in the ear; then put the razor into everything the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost coming out of the ear; and it feels to the patient inside, and if the distillations are heated a little as when we distill in the ear; and guard that they do not get too cold, for the medicine would be bad.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the bursting of the ears.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have some defect in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults by bursting of a wound, or by chipping something inside the ear, and this bursting comes sometimes through the bottom of the ear if you can't see it; and sometimes there is no defect at all, but they see very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	This one that comes through from the inside if you can't see it is due to an internal disorder in many cases, and in this case, it's necessary to put the ear of the sick person in sunlight; and look inside: if you see any opilation (whiteness), then the cause has a form like this
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And whether it is pus and swelling in front and behind all of the pain, if you do not bleed the ear; or if the opilation comes from a bone or part of the ear, if you have subtle pinpricks and carefully strike it lightly, until that bone is entirely broken.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the prickles are in the ear, take a fine snarer and apply it to the inner part of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the prickling in the ear, which patients feel as great pain in the ear, cut slightly and keep from over-treating the ears; then put into the ear a tent of some size according to the width of the perforation, and apply Egypt's ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do this on any day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and apply its ointment in rosewater, and powder over it with vitriol powdered; and if you see that the ear has swollen, cover it so that you treat the tent and move another wet tent made of olive oil and beeswax, until the swelling subsides; then cure as long as it is sane.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If blood accumulates in the ear, plunge an sponge into it and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments to remove the accumulation of blood that are used for treating discharges.
de la char des papieres	of the charcoal of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Cover the eyes with a mixture of moist and dry paper when they are wet, so that you should stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and cut off one root with a spatula; then put on vitriol solution.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without cutting off, the cautery is done with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cautery is applied after the incision is made, and it takes several times to repair it, so that none of its roots remain; and when they are cauterized by fire, their roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	From the flea
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Often come in paper some things that resemble lice in form and hardness, and because of this, is this disease called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the symptoms are such: take care if the grandine moves from one side and another, and it's an easy thing to know; do therefore the large cuts, then scorch each part lightly, then take them with pincers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it with a small cut in the paper, so that nothing hurts the patient; and if the fissure is large, if the assembly has a seam, and treat as long as it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply any force, for the ointments restore it at once and irritate the skin.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	Et se li grandine is falling down into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, so turn the paper, and hold the dust in one pinches, and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it brings no harm; and when the dust is pressed, take off the salty water oil and cure the patient as long as they are sick.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyelids
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	In that fat is a grease that gets tangled in threads of paper above, and it happens to children with no one to care for them, and causes great pain to their eyes, and they come to have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look towards the light of the sun because the tears run into their eyes; and for this reason they lie on their faces afterwards, and sleep on, and are their paper above their eyebrows moistened that the inflow and appearance change from the exinach which opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the lever to your right hand and feel it sticking inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of its work is that the patient puts his head in your hands; and then take a linen strip, and tie a tourniquet around it according to the quantity of the sticking inside each part, then put it on; press with one hand from the other side until the sticking becomes assembled inside the circle; then cut at the midpoint of the swelling near the spur of cutting an artery of a vein; and be no greater than the wound you made in the vein; and make the leather in proportion as long as you reach to the sticking; and in various positions, the sticking comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Instruct the patient to tie with one piece of cloth gauze between the two bones without fail, and turn his hand in both right and left until it is spread out; and guard that you do not add anything to the wound, lest you become like a full-grown gnat stuck in oil.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open in the beginning of the wound, tie with a little cloth around it lightly until it appears; then cut as we have said, then moisten with soft cloth and water, and bind it.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if some such men who are breaking ropes and laying on it to corrupt that remaining moisture.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer so long as he remains sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the joint of the arm hot, so that the healer gives it emplastries soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper are born, and are wilted, such that they hurt the eyes, and cause various maladies, as accustomed tears and swellings of the papers, so that it is a cause of destruction to the eyes; and it's a cure in four ways: either by cautery with fire together, or by aqua according to what is before or in the chapter of cautery, and done either by incision and stitching, or by bandages, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person on your healthy one; then turn the paper with oil in your left hand; if it's turned, it's good; if not, take an awl and cut through the thread above it. Either cut along the edge of the paper or where the hairs are growing from the edges of these hairs, cut the thread upwards on both sides of the paper, and turn it with a razor; then make in the underside of the paper, beneath the hairs that adhere, up to the length of the small margin, cutting all along the seam from the big to the small. Then pull out the thread, and place under the paper a small tent made of linen and fabric, then sew on the paper an image of an enche, as with the mite of myrtle, and whatever you see take in proportion the quantity that is written on all papers so devised.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Instruct the patient to apply a certain quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then make it all over the skin on the two lines you have signed, and start with a large needle just after a small one; and sew one of the incisions close to the natural hairs in the size of a finger, then pour something in one of the two corners, then scrape it whole; then assemble the two lips to a sewing with an anchor-shaped needle with all the fine thread of linen, and wipe out the blood, and make the skin dry on the two eyebrows at any sticky thing; if you have seen this done, then do so; and if not, just leave the stitching and the threads just after three days or four; then treat the wound with a drying and tightening thing, because the paper lives in the moment of the wound and the assembly of it, but the sewing is worn (as the ancients said), and this is work done with fear; and if you have another method: and thus sews the skin according to the figure that is similar to the fuel of myrtle, as we have told, three inches away from each other according to the form which is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off that which overhangs equally, according to its shape.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are not able to hold the tongs, and what is cut off is not even, then prick an awl or it has a thread, and sew into its shape; and sew the other thread around the big seam, and the small one around the little, and assemble them evenly between your two fingers; then secure your hand evenly, and secure all the skin above where you have stitched, as we have said before, and sew the two lips of the wound by stitching, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes to your incision, then cauterize it with cerote and similar ointment soothing; but at times happens that the hair of the papilla are converted: so it is fitting that you use what we have said about cutting; but the suturing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the knees is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and the flesh inside according to what I have said, and then make two hinges by art, and two subtle ligatures as long as the paper and the widened space of the spatula are; and cut at two hinge bones where you hold the strings; then assemble one and the other subtly above what surmounts from the oil paper, and strain the two hinges from the two parts formed; and let it be in this way for some days, and the ligament that is tightened will die and turn and heal, as much as it will feel by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late and the cut has some force, then treat it until it is sane; and when the wound is sewn, and if there is raised paper, and no longer will the hairs grow; and this is the form of the two hinges that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Instruct the head of the chase to be treated so that the hairs do not come forth with it, if you treat the head of the chase thus, then treat it below at all the filaments that you have ordered, until the chase comes forth from the perturbations above and you see it by means of the vision of oil; then treat the chase and the filaments, and close the oil and let the other one close II days or III, so that the hairs grow in their place and bring forth a char on top; and if small hairs are present, accompany I long hair from the cheekbones, nature is drawn towards them, and lift it with that one which you leave, until they become elongated and then let it be.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's corruption
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	How this illness, which is called "aleacratis" or corruption of the oil, comes to be, there are two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden wound, or incision, or cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treating this wound is that you cut through the sutures, and dress the lips, and put in linen tents, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not advisable to use in the treatment of wounds those things that dry out and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than it was at first; but working with softening things, like fenugreek; and the rose of water or oil, or seed of flax are cooked, and ointments made from diyaquilon melted in any of the oils, and a tent is wrapped around, and thus the cure.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	The treasures of your cure are that you guard yourself so they do not change shape according to the original form; and this work we have said does not bring harm but only in a similar manner to this disease, which it returns according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the charcoal that comes into the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is outside what truly is called "axacrati", and is natural in origin.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the view of the work in it is such that you pierce with an arrow, because it has two filaments, and the point in the charcoal, and make it pierce from the left side to the right shoulder so that the filaments come out in two joints of the charcoal; then put the charcoal on top over all the arrow, and strike with one span wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et if the sickness comes from cutting or sewing or cautery, so it is fitting that you cut a plain incision below the hairs of the papers; and according to what was said before; then sew between the two fingers of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters take great care that by some power or skill he makes the figure return to its natural shape; and the sick ones themselves, according to what they need treatment and incisions of many kinds.
dou soudement de la papiere	When a piece of paper suddenly cuts
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	So that the cut piece of paper can be smoothed out with the white of oil and will not move or do its natural work, if it so happens then you must put a razor point on the paper, and lift it up; and make a stitch as carefully, as you copy what is fine at the stylus penile subtle, which should not be too harsh nor too sharp, so that the sick person cannot suffer from the stylus being too harsh or staining the oil; and let your incision, where you scrape off that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape; and it is healed whole that assembly, and it happens never again in the oily sauce, and washes with a gentle water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil larded mutton fat in abundance of udder; and after three days use the vinegar and such swift things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the oil of the hog
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two kinds of hog fat: one is nervous and resembles dried, thick skin, and another that isn't nervous but looks like pale, frozen moisture, when touched with iron it causes pain; while both have a similar appearance near the great vein, they gradually fill up and cover the entire eye and all its light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of cutting is that the patient puts their head on a clean cloth, then opens the eyes; lifts the paper to their hand, then cuts the hog fat into small double folds and makes a stab above; takes an needle and fills it with horse hair, or wool, or bull skin, and makes a strong thread; doubles the point of the needle slightly and stabs the hog fat, piercing all the way through the needle, ties the hog fat to a thread and makes a stab above, then scrapes off all the hairs on the cost of the hog fat which lead to the spot where the blood vessel opens up to the skin, just at the top of the head, then chops off the remaining part at the root of the vein until it reaches the fine and subtle veins; leaving the natural color or the vein alone, if there is no bleeding from the vein as used to be. And sometimes the hog fat is only tied on, and to the thread, as we have said; then scrapes off all the skin so soft that this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the physician to take care that the scab not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the purpleness is not perceived; and after the incision, grieve in oil a little bit of chopped silk, and on the neck make it sit for until the next day; then the physician should deal with what is required so that he may be healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the ingrown nail is not numb and you cannot push the needle in, and the nail can't enter, this condition is often cured with medicines; and as I have explained in the division, and if you see a covering on it, apply oil to the patient, and take the scab lightly and good according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And if you take out the ingrown nail subtlety, and if you see that it does not decrease at all and the reason is pressing it, then distill from your mouth into the oil made with litarge and red vinegar, and put in oil on the neck; apply the oil until the next day; then resume work as of this same operation, until it is completely hollowed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no trouble is found in the eye, like a boil on the eyelid, then apply cold and cure the boil so that it heals, then resume the work as before until it heals.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin around the eyelid is swollen at night due to great disturbance, and you press it with an onion slice, and only cut a little part, so that no blood comes out; then distill in the eye coriander juice red which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows above the eyelid.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	If some men do not get any red flesh, and cover the eyelid and restrain it on bandages and torn parts away from it, and it seems like a rose of balsam; then if the wound is made such that the patient puts his head on a safe one, then open the eyes, and cut all that flesh with convenient lines as we have shown in the incision of the ulcer and with small forces so that the form appears after this chapter as it demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, apply the oil of silymarin or distill coriander juice red and similar medicines corrosives, and put on the eye cotton with vinegar, so that it be certain of an ulcerous boil; and if it does not remain anything, and the patient gets up without being able to walk, and you doubt about an ulcerous boil, then leave the oil and cure the ulcer with soothing medicines for ulcers; then return to your work until it heals, and do so when all the wounds are cleaned in the eye by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adjust the treatment for each type of weakness of the body through natural means, and through accidental means, in the presence of iron; and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see if this member will suffer from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	But these eyes are red ones that cover the skin, and they take away their sight and weaken them every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore to be done first that you look at the skin, in what manner it is, because if it is inflamed, and there is no other disease of fire than the inflammation; then the treatment is thus: instruct the patient to place his head on a healthy one, then suspend those eyes for as long as possible according to his wisdom, and let the subtle eyelids double in that form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two points by degree in the joint according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil around the veins with gentle forces, and suck out the blood hour after hour, until you see remove the flowing force of the oil; and keep that you do not prick the oil with the points of scalpels, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only pull out those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil colic vert and rouge to corrupt what remains of the devil.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you have not power to coil all that in one hour, then do a plaster on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some days until the pains are eased, and be sure that there is an abscess hot, then resume according to this form until he is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the boil of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The arrow is called "arissati" boil: when you cure it with cautery and medicine hot according to what I've said before, and it's not healed, then there is a disease in it that you pierce under the abscess, where it must die, and take out all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackening, if it's in that shape, and they call it "aspère chef", and it's made from a certain iron to fit that form; and pointed as sharp as a lime so as it is now in that present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the bone of the corrupted os, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand until you know that this corruption is healed; and do not do that again, then restore to the leg with medicinal extracts.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the swellings are hot and painful, and the body of the bowel is hot and remains so for 40 days, and does not discharge or swell again, and no accidents happen, it seems that he is healthy; if this is not so, then there is no other engine than to return the fistula to its perforation according to this shape: and when you uncover the bone for the second time with iron, and with medicines sharp, and as soon as it heals uncovered like this, take care of the nails of iron three times at an angle, and let the fist be reduced a little towards the head so that you see well.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put the bone over the shoulder, and withdraw your hand from the oil for a little while, then turn to the whole forest until you pierce the bone and feel that the patient is coming in because he has his hand on his neck; and after restoring the level of dry medicines as I have taught you, if the swelling comes back with the pain, it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Of the oil's issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are cut wide open, and nothing comes out of the nose or is loosened up, it is advisable to let the patient alone; then apply poultices, then put on bandages with hot wax and herbs to treat, then drain the oil, and apply plaster made of pitch and tar to bind over with strips and cloths; and do so in a manner that you take cloth soft enough, each one doubled four times, and then place one over another according to how much it needs; then strain over a stiff bandage, and reapply the poultices to suck out again; then remove the poultice and let the oil bind tight day and night, and if it gets tied up too tightly, so be it, for now; after a day and a night, oste (remove) the bandages and, if you see the eye healing, this is good; but if not, reapply the poultices and bandages and the bandage again with the poultice until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A piece of torn fabric has fallen out
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the torn fabric comes out, then tears, and brings forth papers like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; therefore if you cover your eyes, it is a bad sign that you should insert an needle into the root of the damaged area below what we have discussed above, and then insert another needle with two threads from the side of the skin; pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut off the thread double and tie one part of the torn edge tightly, and tighten well, then pull out the needle, and put on a moist linen cloth soaked in oil, until the thread cuts with the wound, and then treat the wound with soothing things until it is healed; and sometimes the wound is tied by the torn edge each side of a circle of fabric, so that it may be healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes do great appearance, so he must prick at the spot on the nail that comes forth from under the nail, and drive out the moisture with the alum, and descend the eye, and let it enter soon after; then draw it out until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of oil from the nail
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but an oil-filled bow that resembles cold water flowing down, and it's not actually water; and the way of its appearance is such that you must sit the patient upright on a prepared bed and straight, then take hold of the head with both hands two parts, and keep moving it until you see the bow come up to your eyes; then tie it in place, do not let it descend, and if it does not get untangled, know that it's cold water, and if the discharge from the bow is not described as being assembled, as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and put it above the hairy part by the continuation of the conjunctive with the hairy part and the crown, until the bow; and when it is drawn out, then distill into hot oil mixed with honey, or fenugreek boiled with honey, or else be cured with another cure until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	we have similar signs of the waters in separation, and that which it is necessary to pierce; if in operation according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary to sit the patient between your hands crossed, with fires of light in front of the sun, and tie up tight the clean oil; then put on one's hand the paper of the oil to one's left hand if their eyes are to the left, or to one's right hand if their eyes are to the right; then take in one's right hand, if their eyes are to the left, the instrument called "almagda", or to one's left hand, if their eyes are to the right; then put the tip of the instrument close to the crown by the thickness of a nail in that paper of oil at the inner side of the smaller armillary sphere, and blow the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so that it pierces into the paper of oil, and feel that almagda comes to the void; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the end of the measure of the space which is from the plum's joint to the end of the horn; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the hairy part, then put the instrument just there as it is, or near where the oil is, then press out with one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the pain has come down now, so he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument on his side.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the pain moves down again, put with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and does not move, extract all lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the oil a little bit of wool gemstone, and clean from within that oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put the oil in a stopper or linen wet with rose oil and plenty of beef fat, and tie it up with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	And so, and for those of our time, let us apply a comfrey brier with plenty of beef fat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the armpit cannot enter into the fat because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, so you must take the instrument which is called "alberit", because this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctiva alone, and do not cut too deeply, but make it subtle, then pour in fat, as we have said; and when you finish the work, instruct the patient to lie down on his back in the dark room; and let him be moved only gently, and give light meals, and do not move his head or arm or hand, and tie him according to his disposition for three days. Then release him from that same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then release him again after seven days; and it is not advisable to do this in the house of treatment or after the incision now, but it is advisable to ease it because the swelling rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the abscessed cauls come, you must free the oil on the seventh day, and the advice of one who sooths an abscess; and when it is eased, then free the eye and put a bandage over it for a day, to be admitted in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then they leave the house a little at a time, and it converts into its case; and you know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Erythraean land, who told us that in some far-off places people made alchemical precipitates, because of which they succeeded with water, but I never saw or knew of it in our land, nor do I find it mentioned in the books of the ancients; and by chance, this may be a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almadah, for those who do not know them will see; and they are of clean wool properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head of pus from this same subtlety, and the backside in three angles of anguish.
de la char sor le neis	of gall on the neck.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	There is no time when gall-like masses are born or appear in various ways, for there are some that resemble scorpions almost like flies; and if they have such (gall), it has been thickened with fatty color, and then has yellowish gall.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Therefore, in case of those gall-like masses that are yellow and not thickened, it is necessary to place the patient on your hands against the sun; open his nostrils, and put the onion on these masses, and draw forth the fumes; for whenever you can sustain that force, take it up at a subtle distance from one part until you know that those gall-like masses are all dried.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that cannot be covered, then if you have all the subtle signs and gentle marks present, leave nothing; and if it does not take root, or an abscess forms, cut off as much as is necessary; and if it's malignant pus, hasten to cauterize so that they are not infected and all the bones are properly set, then clean or anoint with wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the pus overflows and moistors come to the face just like to the palace, then know that it is cleansed; and if moistors do not penetrate as it needs, know that there is no marrow in the bone above, by which the signs do not come to bite: therefore it is convenient to put a thread of flax into him in some place, and be careful with hands now, and have between each one some space I must or less; and place the malady's head on the thread as much as possible, and treat smelling until it comes down through the nose into the mouth; and children often do this at schools, and it is a light thing to those who wish to try it; then hold the head that comes by the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after the other as we are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Instruct that you do what you know is right for the flesh of the newborn, then take care of the wound, and moisten the child in Egyptian oil, and place them directly under the linen as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments rot all that remains of the flesh; and then put on a linen bandage some days until they are healed, and if it has need of dried medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, because one distills oils and medicines in it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is of silver or lead, like a lantern over, just as a bandage, and conduct it similarly; and if you see one, do so too: make a closed bandage, and let the instruments be ready to purge the head; and hold the hand on the head while we heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the shoulder's cartilage, let the sick one leave it be
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often the head of the new nose grows into a disease called "telul", and it swells and becomes large sores, until it is visible to see; and therefore you should copy at the beginning, and cut through the bone, then apply cautery or hot medicine on it; and if one delays in doing this for too long, when it has become large, if it is hard, he takes a violent cough, of poor smell, of painful breath: do not touch him with iron because it is an enchanted wound, because whenever you cut it once, it brings great evil to the patient; and if the wound is soft by touch, but not by color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then open the sick one and apply the treatment of dried things and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nails are struck and crushed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Seeing how much benefit comes from continuing to these worn-out joints, in no case for any man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to consider this if it happens to anyone, when he looks at whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adds two layers of flesh to a scar, and cures until he is healed; and if the lips are completely cut off on one side and the other, it is necessary that you burn every part of their hurt until they heal, then reassemble the two lips to a scar, and tie them, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and frankincense crushed; and apply the powders a piece of plaster, hard or any other plaster binding, and let him be until he peels off by himself, and cure with ointment until he is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to stitch is that you assemble the suture: or by needles, just as we said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	With the naked hand it goes into the lips abscess, like grains of sand, and small as well as large; therefore you must return to the lips, and cut through each one, and take out with tweezers and clip into each part; then apply the liquid after the vitriol incision breaks, until they are drained; and then wash away the abscess, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	For many times the nose swells when it is closed up, which they call "albulus"; you must hold it in place with the tweezers, and cut at its root, and let the bowel or the wound drain; then put on the patient a vitreous splinter, or other powder constricting and drying; and if that one comes back after the incision, and this happens many times, if you cut it again, and cauterize: if it does not come back after the cautery; and these are the forms of oozing to cover.
des sordens	from the dirt
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	There are no times that the teeth are assembled at the top of the bones, inside the mouth between the gums, warts that are ugly and painful; and there is no time when a black and yellow tooth and worm appear, until corruption comes to the gum, and it becomes putrid; you must sit the patient in your hands, so his wounds may be visible, until nothing remains; and thus do white and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is at first sight, it's good; but if not, it resumes on the second day and the third time, until you have all; and know that teeth need different forms of oozing to clean, according to what the work shows, because the rasps for cleaning teeth have different shapes than those for teeth between the gums; and these forms and others should be prepared by you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay the treatment as long as you can, for this should not be done in no way; because it is a very high substance, therefore we have no excuse to fear.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you are certain about the state of the tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain is in the patient, and consider it to be or of a good tooth, and treat the good tooth; and see that they do not depart from the pain for this reason, until the bad one is removed, because we have never wanted to do so by these physicians; and when you are certain about the state of the tooth, it is necessary that you scorch around the tooth on all sides with a sharp instrument very strongly to ward off the gums from all parts; then you should mow it down with your teeth or use fine pincers at the first point and point, until it is well cleaned, and then firmly fix the pincers; and tie the patient's teeth between your own shoulders, and their good tooth so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth directly towards the broken side, and if it does not jump forth, take out any of these instruments and gently pour it into each part lightly, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are perforated and infected, it is fitting that you fill them with cloths, to where the holes are; and if you tighten them subtly with forceps, so that they do not break when tightening; and it is good to be cautious over the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And carefully watch so that you do not break it, and leave some of it behind, and tell the patient by the illness of the root for greater pains at first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And watch that you do not make it as the ignorant doctors do, who by their haste and boldness break a chariot every time, and bring in nothing like what we have told you; but sometimes they come by the ointment of this great sickness because of the roots that remain, or because they break the chariot, just as has happened to us often; and when the tooth is strong, wash it with wine or ash or vinegar; and if blood comes, which happens often, apply a splinter of vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the splinters, when they are not pulled out with the tooth first, should be long points and thick handles, so that they do not double back when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should be thick members that do not bend when pulled out, and are made of iron well made, and have teeth to hold them in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after pulling out, it is necessary to put a moist cotton on the wound with butter once or twice.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is moistened, because then you put on the tongs called "algefri", for which the cut seems like a bee sting; and they are made thus as a file, and it's this form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to emerge at all these tenacious attachments, it is fitting that you uncover the whole chariot around the root, and place the instrument which is called "althali", namely plainer, so that this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And so even if it is great and severe, and the root does not break, but rather jumps through it, that's good; but if that's not the case, then help with all the instruments, for the forms will come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you assist from this instrument that has two roots, for it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front of the root of the teeth, and from this instrument which resembles great pincers, for it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be used so that it will not break, and you know that many instruments of bone are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtle try for themselves their own instrument, according to what his works and the illness show him, because he has found in some cases illnesses where the ancient do not teach an instrument for the diversity of these things and since it will break on the chariot or on another bone if you do not search for instruments that are necessary, as I have told you, and help with gestures, because this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-fitting, in order to hold the bone firmly, but not so tightly that it can't be removed; and then put back in the patient as much medicine as is fitting for him, and if there is decay in the bone, which is small, so that the instrument will reach into it.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not as it should be according to its natural body form, and its shape is ugly, and in young girls so much so that you must know if the teeth are new after the tooth, and they are not in their right place, and you cannot adjust or bind them: then take a rasp; and if it's around with the tooth, take this instrument which has the form described here, and it is similar to a small beak, and it is made of good iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the rasp is a small, small tool in your hands each day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the other teeth; if it appears that we can bind it, take some powdered lime, as is its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the lime from which we make needles; and in lime the tooth is pounded a little bit each day lightly in your hands, so that it does not move until it breaks; then the plane is at the end of all the rasps, and if the teeth are too pointed, then it is binding the roughness so that it becomes even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt the words.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth are loose, or by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press up on that which it hurts so much that it will break, and you cure them with medicines restricting, but it is not effective; if they must be restrained with a thread of gold, because the threads of silver turn green and rot, but the gold does not move at all; and if the thread is neither too thin nor too thick, nor too small, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are falling out, take the thread and put it double between two healthy teeth, then put the pins between the teeth of yours, if there are one or more, until you see correctly to the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering from where you started, and strain your hand carefully and gently, until it does not move at all; and let your tie be gentle to the root of the tooth so that it will not escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Instruct the head of the shoulder to be cut with a thread at a pair of pliers, and assemble it, and put it between the healthy teeth, and set it so that it does not hurt the tongue; and then let it stay thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, take hold of another thread; if it remains and serves thus for its time, and this is the shape of the dens and the figure of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, as fresh as fresh, just like we have said; and do not let anyone else touch who is not skilled and experienced, because at no time should you make a form of a bone-like tooth, and put it in the place where it is missing, and hold it tight as we have said; and keep it there and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Cover the joint of the tongue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is no joint that comes from under the tongue or is born that way; rather it happens so. Either by accident of a wound healed; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, put their head on your healthy one, and lift their tongue; then cut the nerve around the large part until the tongue is loosed from its place, and if it has hardened or not, and this happens due to sudden bleeding, insert the needle and cut around the large joint; and be careful that the wound not be too deep by the artery below; and when you have done so, put the injured one in warm rosewater and ash, or cold water, then put a piece of linen under the tongue; and bind each night with a bandage until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And when the vein comes open, if it is covered with vitriol, break on the arm; and if not, cauterize at the fire cautery, which is good for this; then apply another remedy until he becomes healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it to be in the shape of pus, whether yellow or black or hard, because if he does not feel pain and you do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it inclines towards blisters, and there is moisture, then remove the ulcer, and let them make one with a small spatula, and deliver from both sides; and if he does not feel pain at your work, put vitriol on the area so that he becomes stained, then return to his work until all is done; then lift the limb gently and carefully, and apply other remedies until he becomes healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	there is no time inside the throat called "godath", and they are properly called amandres, and when you cure them, just as we said in division, if they are not healed, be cautious: if it is a hard abscess of small sensation and red flesh, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is red and the root is big, do not touch with iron, because of the worsening of blood loss; but let it be so long as it does not die, and then you will cut it off, or it would break on its own; and if it has a white color, and the root is subtle, tie the instrument to cover it, but first look carefully whether the abscesses are closed and have subsided.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And then instruct the patient to sit in front of the sun, and their joints should be healthy, and he will operate the mouth and the surgeon will press the serjeant between his hands, and push the tongue downward towards all the instrument, for this is the form; and it shall be made either from silver or fine gold just like our scales:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue towards all this instrument, and see the abscess, if one takes the onion and pokes it in the honeycomb, and pulls the thread up higher than you can; and pull no other thing from the cloth, then cut at the instrument, for this is the form that looks like force; and look at how the head is curved, and one point bent towards another, and are very good, and made of iron or tin:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, then grab the tongs, because it is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And so cutting from one side and the other side; and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after incising gargarize the patient with hot cold water, and hot and easy, and if blood has come out, then gargarize the patient with vinegar or pomace of pomegranates cooked or infusions of myrtle, and similar things, until the veins are tied off; then do the cure until he is cured; and sometimes new abscesses appear in the throat beyond the two almonds, so cut them now as you did the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was nestled in the throat, to wit, the small abscess; and I had tightly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked conduit, nor eat or drink, and she died if she stayed like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the swellings were high enough that two poultices had been applied twice to each of the two wounds near the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Therefore I gave him a poultice and applied one to each of the two wounds near the neck, then he was burned with fire, and a large portion of a bow was used. Then another poultice was applied to the other wound, and his throat was closed and his tongue pressed; after that a poultice was placed on the swelling, and a part of it was cut away, and only a little blood came out; and so I opened up the conduct of the throat for the woman, and since then she began to drink cold water and wine, and did not stop cutting at the swelling for a long time; and the swelling kept recurring, and filled with pus that had been emptied from me, until it became quite large; therefore I inserted and cauterized inside the throat: thus he remained still for some time, and I departed from these parts, and left God to care for him after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the humors descend to the eye and it is pulled down and lengthened, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is too large and rounded, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the pus is healed, and it is subtle, so it is fitting to copy it; and the one that is rounded and not long, will not assemble and is not suitable for an incision; and if it is red or of flesh color or black, then it is necessary to remove the incision from it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	Because there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have told, of its bluntness and length, that you set the patient on his side in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then poke a needle into the eye, and remove it from under, and cut at both ends as I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Instruct the physician to cut no more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves your voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until she is sane.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being cut, it is advisable to use an instrument at the cautery of their fearful senses.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is cool water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head on your sound one, and then presses the tongue with the instrument we have said in the cautery chapter, and mixes it with cool running water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and using the tip of this instrument, as it forms:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to let a hair or nail on his head be touched with the medicine, like the servants of a spoon, and place the instrument on top of the nose; and if the patient sits on his chest, so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, which does not fall down the throat, nor the breath; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the nose, for half the quantity of an hour, until you see the blood come out and the bites of the medicine be stopped; and if you see, take cotton and wipe it above any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into a can with cotton inside, until the cotton is on the nose; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and after four days or five, if you have need to restart the cauterization of the medicine, so restart it, and after the cautery clean it with vinegar water, and cure gargling until he is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the cautery, whether it's done with incision or fire; if it's cured according to this manner, take camphor and myrrh and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them together in a pot, and put it on easily, and boil; and the pots should be well-glazed with hot earth, and with instruments of the head according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And if it is of silver or lead, and one of the nails is inserted into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is numbed; afterwards, repeat often, until the eye dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess hot, for many things happen, and do it only at the declination of the abscess hot.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a nail and put it inside the head with a small piece of iron, so that the patient's mouth does not feel too hot; because the iron does not weigh down the vapor in the mouth, and this is a good cure for salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often when a sword is pressed against the throat of a person or an arrow of fish, or anything else; so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue on the sun until all the instrument, so that you can see what is being done; and if something does not come out and returns to the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit so that the meat will be cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing gets burned from vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cloth, or a root of lettuce, or a dry piece of bread; and tie it with the string, and then apply glue; and when it comes to life again, you will extract the venom; and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument from the plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Instruct the patient to let the strumens curve upwards at the head if it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head up higher; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it comes alive, or do not force the bone inside; and make sure that the patient is willing to swallow the instrument, for this will prevent them from having an ulcer, or pushing the bone into their throat; if they swallow, or take it for all the instrument at once, so that it is evenly distributed.
de la sansue de la gorge	Concerning the strumens of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the strumens of the throat medicated, as I have said in division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit, then look into the patient's throat in the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see an abscess, if it has one small ulcer, or have fine nails that are worth the same.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If it's not worth it, take a hot iron shank and plunge it into the neck of the sick person, then swallow or cut off some of the iron.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient has fever every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full draught of cold water, and cover the mouth, and swallow in that direction, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the abscess feels the pain, he vomits.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if he does not vomit as we have said, then perfume the sick person with asafoetida in the instrument that I have mentioned for the inhalation of the wound; do this many times, because it will cause him to pass tar-like.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Instruct the patient to put a pot with charcoal and wood chips in the middle, and let the instrument's nails protrude from it. Then, make a fumigation, and have the patient put the head of the cane in their mouth, close the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to there; and now the cough will come, and if she doesn't cough, then repeat the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient with thirst, and eat foul things and ashes, and do not drink water at all; and thus the disease will be overcome by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument for treating an abscess is such that when you can see it, it looks like curved tongs with nails entering into the neck; and has the appearance of a beak, and has roughness of lime, so that what she takes, it cannot be loosened; and thus it appears:
li chapistres des apostemes	The medical practitioners of this art
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is remembered afterwards in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways of doing it, one of which is in its own likeness, and because of moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for them to be inside or in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses on the head are different from those on the chest, and the abscesses on the liver are different from those that occur in joints, each having its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses where one should not pierce until the bowel is fully dead according to its completion; and if some have them that it must be pierced when they seem cured, but do not die according to their completion, such as those near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For in the abscess when it comes from the joints and is left until it is swollen, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, because that is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is at the main limb and if you delay the perforation until it dries up, so that it does not harm the principal limb; or if it is at the foundation, if you pierce it so that it dies; and it should not be done to pierce an abscess when one thinks the digestion is completed, because fires in which there is a wound from the foundation, will make it worse by bursting into more, and forming a fistula; and cannot be cured with great delay.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is fitting that you know the size of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to the completion, and this is when the pain is assuaged, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the diminishment of the swelling and the quickening of the head of the abscess, and all the other signs; it is fitting that you make the perforation as far down as possible from the abscess, depending on where it opens up, and so the perforation be long in the body, and if the abscesses are at hands or feet, or joints, nerves, arteries, or at those places which are equalized with no pain.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When these are swollen, according to the state of the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the charnel cavity, if it must be cut so that you leave the perforation until confirmed to be completed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it in front, the body will be filled with the poison from it, and it is full of much filth; and by chance, the lips and the soles of your feet may become hardened.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that must be cut according to the size of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is fitting to treat small abscesses with small perforations; and large abscesses with large perforations, and many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is suitable to stitch them up, and cover them, when they have become as soft as a cloth, and are softened, then it is fitting to do so as we make for the baby: and if there are those that are cut into three angles, and those whose perforation is like the beak of myrtle, like abscesses of angles; and if there are others where one makes a round size, and other sizes and shapes of perforations.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	In those who do not have a head, as with an abscess that is superficial, it is necessary to pierce them plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much blood, and you pierce, if you take out all of the blood in that hour, but take only one part; then stop the abscess just at dawn on the next day, then do not touch anything underneath; do this many times with great care, until the bowels are all cleaned out; meanwhile, if the patient has weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a child, or an old man who is decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	But the expectation is that there will be no great recovery either with the issue of the blood, so that by chance the patient may die, and you should not despair.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instructs then this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if it is a wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is an open cut, then attempt to close it with linen or old cotton; and if there are great wounds, and many are punctured, then it is advisable that you insert one tent in each so that they come into contact with each other; and if you have pierced the abscess a part of the skin, and you have tied it around, then it is advisable to fill it up with old cotton or rasps of linen soaked in moisture, and tie it up just as often; then apply, and treat with ointment until it is sane.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood comes from your wound, then apply cold and clear water, and moisten it with a cloth, and cover the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to persevere with bloodletting if they do not succumb, and follow the government and treatment, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book, if it is during winter, and if the poultices are applied to the abscesses, take care to put on wet tents and drapes made of wine and oil; and if it is dry, and the poultices are applied, take care to apply wet drapes made of water and oil, or in wine and oil boiled, just one day after, as we have said; and then uncover the abscesses and wash and cure, as it seems necessary, until they are sane.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is true, universally in the treatment of abscesses: where you have said how to apply before the treatments for abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For those who come from the head with small abscesses, and are many of the kind that are in cloth, just as the jarter of a goat, and much so there is similar appearance.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also grasses and things like which there is moisture just as with feet; and some of the kinds that are hard and stone-like to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause them harm.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the wounds of the groin if you are experienced with all instruments that are called "entromissoire", because the form comes after this, what kind of thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	Because if it contains moisture, they cut from above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, so scorch without leaving any of that skin which contains the moisture, for it will return again when you leave nothing; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise, in water and cloth, apply to the wound, and let it rest on the other day; and those who are left overnight will be cured.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, if you continue the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the linen, until you know well that it will not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for him, so he becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscesses hold tightly within no meat, if you cut according to this form, long and straight; then take your knife, and scrape all over, and apply all your cure of treating for the place where it is; and if the arteries cause a contrary effect, do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And as for the abscess if it is a stone, and on cutting and on treating so as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut above the stone abscess and the moisture, if it is lighter, because it has little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or joints have no moisture, and such as I copied or cut in the chest of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a hard stone rough and white, which could not be broken; and if anyone had struck it with fire, one would have done equally well to make a wound like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come or joints, whether those which come on the chest or near the children's ears and their rootlets, cut them open so they always go out to the nose; and treat as it requires.
des scrophules	There are swellings
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	This occurs frequently in the neck, and under the armpits, and inside the groin, and sometimes occur elsewhere on the body, and are very painful, and are joined together one by another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each swelling is properly located in its own place, as if the lump and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the signs of these swellings are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are swellings that contain moisture, and those that are malignant and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one then, where you see a good disposition in the groin area, and it resembles the color of the body, and is silent from all parts and is not reddened around the neck or artery or vein, and is not deep; it is fitting to copy it from above, and scorch from each part, and make the two lips red like wounds, if you have need, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and cut little by little, and be sure that you will not copy the nerve or vein, and do not scratch with sharp instruments, lest your hand gets injured, and you see too far ahead, that you may copy only what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	Instruct the patient to let the vein or artery be opened, and if it will not stay open, put vitriol in the wound, or some powder that stays blood, and bind up the wound; and leave it until the abscess is eased and the pain is mellowed, and begin to cauterize.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is not bled, so that it returns to your body, complete as much as you can; then see if there are no small swellings, if cut them and lance.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a great quantity of blood in the root of the swelling vein, it is not advisable to cut that vein at its root, but tie with a strong double thread, and let fall as much as possible without pain; then apply the wound with Egyptian ointment, and cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you strike the entire skull, it is fitting that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and the sutures now, so that there is no remaining swelling from the great size of the skull.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is fitting that you understand to strike the root of the nail, and to treat the flesh, and the sutures as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those skulls that hold superfluous matter, pierce at the top or it bursts open; and pierce as previously stated, in dependence, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that what remains of corruption is eradicated; and when the wound is well cleaned, the treatment of ointment will heal until it is fully recovered.
de squinance	of squamousness
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old people spoke and said about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	It is necessary for those who have laryngitis that the cut of the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided; and one should not give aid to this because all veins and the flesh are swollen in the patient where there is an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the lungs.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the flesh, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below three circles or four small cuts across the middle, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut through the cartilage; and that is convenient because there is no cartilage and the vessels are long to be inquired.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Instruct the masters to extend the skin of the neck to its full extent, then cut through the vein until it comes to the jugular; and release the vasa sanguinis, if you see anything, and then strike at the sac, as we have said; and this will be proven by the section of the femoral vein that springs from the broken limb, and by the failure of the voice; and leave the wound covered with a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and one doubts strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound of the vein, and clean the entire surface to the cartilage; then administer medicines that make urine flow, until it is purified.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Bleeding from the nostrils should not be attempted unless the throat is completely frozen, and the patient is pronounced dead, and the abscess has broken.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Adonques cope on the epiglote because the patient cannot bear, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four, then they ordered that the wound be sewn up and cured, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took a knife and struck it against her throat, and cut some of the fatty tissue on her neck; and I was called to cure her, and found her dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found out that blood had come from it, and I realized she had not cut the vein or a vein was forced to do so through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I have fallen ill and sewn up the wound and treated it until it was healed; and it did not happen to the young woman that she would be red in her throat, and return after her disposition; therefore I say that there is no fear of strangulation in the epiglottis sewing.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts or abscesses are called "hernia of the throat", and they are large cysts in the color of a jet, and are often found in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; where the natural one has no inflammation.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is in two forms, because one is like fat tissue, and the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear of it, and should not be treated with fire, only for those who are small, and examine him carefully from head to toe: if you find it also as fat tissue, and have no sign or reason, cut it out just like one cuts us, and remove all its cover, if there's nothing left; and search thoroughly, and treat it as needed, until he is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of us, and I will say all the similarities; and it is necessary that I tell you the whole difference between us and the opposite.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever is when and inflammation remains, as long as the heat has not passed and it has been accomplished to purify; then rests the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	The opposite does not have heat or fever or pain, and contains the spleen, which is its own sac and resembles its body color, and begins to swell like a bladder, and becomes of similar size and consistency; and has colors, or thicknesses, or moistness, and much in it like what I have said in division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the opposite, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument called "entremissoire", according to its form whether it is a chapter or after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Instruct the manner of extracting pus from an abscess is to take up more moist than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs a little by little until you know that the contents have pierced the vein, then extract the intervening stuff, and be careful so it doesn't burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture from the cut is as clear as when you extracted pus from other abscesses; and if there is no more moisture coming out after removing the intervening stuff, then know that it is fatty, so mark it with a cross, and take it by pinches, and lightly scrape off each part, watching where you go to clean the wound so you can bring it back to health with the nail; and if you cannot bring it back to health, extract it in pieces, as long as there is nothing left behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays in place, it will return to its previous state many times; and if it remains for a little while without causing harm, then apply the wound with some corrosive powders, bind the wound, and put on soothing substances over the abscessed area, and cure with other cures until he is healed; and if the joint is swollen, cut off two fingers from the wound, and cure the one who is causing inflammation.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is inflamed against this or another thing, which you hasten and apply with the vitriol solution, and let it remain for two days or three, until the wound is clean, then return to cover what was left untouched.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of internal strumous interjections, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and among them there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistulas; and they are also like the needles used for suturing the suture, made of citron wood, iron, or silver, which are yellow in color, and more effective at plugging deep black holes for closing corsets of fistulas; and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the lacerations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of ulcers are of much resemblance, as you see here: great, medium-sized, and small; and so too have ulcers with two heads in three different manners; and so too have ulcers with three heads, and are also of three manners; and so too have ulcers with two heads, and a single head only, and are of three manners; and all this is necessary for their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these (wounds) are cut in such a way that they are sharp-edged, and there are some that do not cut through more than one side, because of which the skin is scorched, so that you do not cut into the vein or the nerve; and these deep-seated ones have ulcers returned to their original place in the palm of the hand, so that the patient does not lose any limb at the opening of the abscess; and they come in three manners: great, small, and medium-sized, as you see; and one should not use more than necessary just for the wooden splint, such as legs, arms, breasts, and groin, and similar limbs; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the scabs of fistulas, according to this shape, because bloodletting is done.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and place it in no case on a limb that is whole, which has been bled and has arteries, and sometimes they return according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much so that they resemble the breasts of a woman; and they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if he thinks it is fitting according to this form, follows this line from .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and apply the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound on a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if the breast droops down, and becomes small like those of women, so that it hangs from two seams like torn flesh: because one might stay attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from .b. to .g.; then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powder, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or if the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the corruption of blood, if it seems fitting that you fill the wound with wet cotton in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it finishes the remaining fat, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	The evacuation of blood when opening a vein
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	There are cysts that come from the armpits which are hard and have boils or cracks, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those which contain moisture should be closed according to this form, from the line b to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bow (tissue) inside the abscess is emptied, apply the treatment of old cloth to the wound and leave it on for the next day, then remove all the cloth, and treat with ointment as needed until the wound heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to boils, then cut as we have said in cutting boils, and if the wound is closed with tissue, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the artery's cutting
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin is sewn up on top, if it often comes to an abscess, then also it happens that a vein is swollen and an abscess; and if one constrains in such a way as to be for the artery, then it has long abscesses because of it; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel strangulation; and when it's for the vein, it is difficult to find; and it's foolishness to cover this abscess, and especially when it is in the lower parts such as the groin and the armpits and near the neck and full of other foul things, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to cure with iron, and one who has a head must also be cured in the same way, and for one who has swelling of an artery make it above the skin; then work on the chest as much as possible, and cut open the vein so that it is visible; then insert an arrow into the vein below where the arrow was inserted, and tie off the vein with a double thread in two fingers, according to what I have taught you when extracting two arteries from the temples; then tie the patient with a strap around his neck until he no longer has any swelling; and cure him as is fitting for that, so long as he is healthy; and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, it is necessary to sew it up by hand as much as you can from one end to the other; then insert a new arrow into the place where you are sewing, and tie the thread on both sides in four fingers; then cut off the swelling so that there may be some issue; then cut off the swelling with care and leave what is tied; then put up a soft bandage soaked in wine and oil, and thus cure him with tentes and ointments until he is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	The movement of pus from a boil
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	And when pus comes into an artery and a vein, it comes from boils when they are dry, or because of excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows, where there are joints, and it's a source of pus, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and is associated with many deaths; and when it's strained, it feels pain to the patient, and isn't entirely absent from the body, but rather under the skin; and it mutates in all parts, and doesn't move forward or backward, neither above nor below, and those who have joints cannot cover them with iron: by chance they may contract the disease; and those who are on their head or forehead, apply the cupping to the spatulate.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if you have a pair of tongs, and cut it at its root; and if it is large, if you suspend it on an onion, and scorch it, then clean and remove the bone, and assemble the wound to the shoulder, and the cure until he is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of great mouths hanging downwards.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There is no time for the intestines and it has no other part affected, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has subtle roots, and large stones; and there are small ones and large ones; I saw one person who had two intestines that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were partially split open, and decayed due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I have copied them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI., and the wounds in the incision are such that you should look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthritic joint is pale and moist with subtle root; then cut at the spatulate large, and be present with the cautery on fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	But when cutting comes many times with large bleeding from the cut, and if you do not wait for the cautery, then hasten then; and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision on fire, take a well-made thread and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it two days; and then bind it, and cease to strain the thread until it cuts the joint, and work with it bit by bit; and if the roots are thick, then fear cutting yourself for the belly, but you can cut half of it, then cautery that he does not bleed again; then cure the wound, and make sure that you do not cut the tendons which are of fleshy color and poor sense and eye-red.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an enchanted abscess, and I have come to this treatment of canker after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the swollen lump swells up.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the lump comes from cauterizing an open wound or cutting through a split in a vein, and it is on the belly with some boils, as it happens in other kinds of wounds, such as when veins are cut or arteries are pricked according to what lies ahead, or due to windiness; and if this is due to the cut through the vein and from the swelling, then the color of the abscess looks like the color of the body, and it's a light-colored thing with pain, and opens up in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's from the intestines, then it's more diverse, and when you press on both sides, but it comes back again, and by chance it is hardened, and becomes much larger at the entrance of the bath and due to great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is fitting that you leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Because of doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is concerning the intestine or the gallbladder, then it is fitting to instruct the patient to tie his ankle, and have him lie straight down, then stitch all around the wound; then command him to lie in your hands, then go towards the place you marked earlier with a splint; then make half of the incision on top of the entire inch; then tie it around with a strong thread or cord firmly, and leave loose like that; then open the upper part of the incision and pour in your thumb's index, and look at the intestine; if you find the thread caught, release it, and pour the intestine into the empty stomach; and if you find the gallbladder, tie it up with an inch, and cut its superfluity; and if the vein makes a contrary effect, or the vein, then go straight in, and return to your work and take two sharp needles, and pierce them through as we made before; then strain the incision for four leus on top of the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the patient until it heals itself; or tie that dead thing back with a thread when it is close to death; or when it happens to die suddenly, cut it according to what is needed, and stitch the incision as we have said; and take out the sanc or moisture that you find, then cure the patient of what he needs, and heal his wound.
dou chancre	There is a sore.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the similarities of chancre, and how to treat it with medicines, and how not to use iron treatment; and we say that chancre is contagious in the nipple, and there is great care in its cure; and the ancients said that when chancres are on you or can be scraped off like chancer on a nipple, and in similar places, and all these must be removed when it begins to start; and when they become large and old, it does not seem wise to approach them, because I have never found anyone who has been cured by me, nor has any one ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is in the place where you can remove it, as we have said, it is that you do not purify the patient of black bile once; then make the patient healthy if he has manifest signs of repletion; then make the patient well for making an ulcer; then apply your poultices or chancre, and wash off all parts, and leave nothing on the bone; and let the wound heal completely, and expect that the patient will be safe to your hands or with anything; but if the blood flows from the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until it is stained, then cure with another treatment until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	For we have said in the division of these symptoms of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and the one that is cured by iron: if only it is cut; and you should not touch with iron in these two symptoms: this is to say, tympanites and yposarche, because they are a deadly thing; therefore when you treat the medicine for this symptom of dropsy which is called "eclites" from medicines, and the cure does not profit, look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as constipation and solution of the stomach and similar things; do not touch with iron because there is doubt; and if you see the patient very robust and only suffers from dropsy alone, and he is neither too old nor too young, do thus: lift the patient straight up onto your hands, and the ministers press the belly towards the bottom of the feet, then take the spatumile with thorny ends according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so we turn to two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Pointing and cutting must be done carefully so that he does not penetrate the intestine when it is inserted; and you cannot stop bleeding. Then examine if the drooping (of blood) has been attached to the intestines: if it is advisable, cut under the third joint of the bowels downward on the outer side of the nail; and if the drooping is due to liver disease, then cut on the left side of the third joint; and if it is for the muscles, then on the right side; but it must not be that the patient lies on the wound so that the humors flow to the weak part; then puncture all the skin with the instrument, and insert it, and raise your hand to the length of the sheath between the skin and the scabbard just as you are scraping when reaching the quantity of an acorn or less in passing; then puncture the scabbard until the sheath comes to life for him, that is the measure of the water, then remove it, and insert this instrument which is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it appears like a silver chain with subtle rings, and is made of iron or horseshoe leather, and has small holes in that area; on one side there are three holes; on the other side two holes; and on another side one hole; and the nails are cut as thin as a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes shape like a pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	On the top of it is a small nail, so that when instruments come to water, now take them up from there; empty then half or one-third of it, because if you empty more than it needs in that hour, by chance he may die from the release of his spirit of the weapon, or he will throw his hands or he will approach death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue signify for the sick person, and their pulse; then take up the instrument and hold back the water, because it is now held by the nail that is on the syphilitic spot, as I have said, so you must pierce according to this manner; then resume the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering such, and take off a small quantity of water; do not do this on any one day, and be cautious not to go mad until he does not stay but for a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you are in doubt about the patient, and let them drink much water, so that the cure makes a poultice of earth or hot sand, and stays with it for a long time or takes a bath and stands under the sun, and if they drink of wine; and the cure gives to medicines desiccative until the patient is healthy, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There are no children born without a wart on the penis, or if there is one it's small, or if not it's out of place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If they want it to pierce immediately, so that they can penetrate anywhere in the short span of time with such subtlety:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Instruct the patient to put on a cloth soaked in onion over their nose and mouth, and tie it tightly three times a day or four times a day, and when they wish to urinate, do not open the wound, but rather let the urine come out, and then remove the dressing; and by chance, if no discharge comes, because the urine that arrives does not allow the wounds to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If this is an opening in the foot, treat it with onion, as we have said, and it will spread.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the opening in their own foot are afflicted, because those who have an opening in the head of the penis cannot urinate until they lift their penis up high; and they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come down to the anus, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to lie on his back, then stretch out his arm and strike it with the end of a spear as long as that of an arrow, in such a way that the wound is inflicted in the middle. And be careful not to cause excessive bleeding which comes many times, and if there is bleeding, then bandage the one who bleeds so that they do not bleed again, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	from boils of the arm
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times boils come to the arm, and it is an ugly appearance; and some are malignant and not malignant; if you wish to prick them at once with a needle, strike them and lance all of them, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure with a fine knife until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the skin is malignant, of purple color and swollen, then it is fitting that you apply cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you cut it, and if the skin is in a swollen state, both inside and outside the flesh, then it is fitting to remove the swelling that is inside first, and when it is heated, if the cure heals.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	But when you cure it together, if you are not certain that the swollen part of the vein will be cut out, and blackness and corruption appear in its place, and at what time; then it is fitting to take away all that which is black and corrupted, and cover it with a plaster made from honey and flour, made from the rind of green pomegranates and vinegar, and cure other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a bloody purulence comes, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is applied in two ways: this means that when there is discharge and corruption, and if the head of the vein has dried up and contracted, it is advisable to cut out or remove some part of the vein, and let the patient pass urine; and when the hair grows again on the head of the vein which has not been circumcised, either because of a wound or an abscess, it is then advisable to burn with a sharp instrument the skin around the neck, until the ligaments are released, and the head of the vein is delivered from all parts; and if this is painful to devise, then it is advisable to burn it at the upper end of the vein and the hair, with a spatumile (a small flat tool) soaked in vinegar and oil, in between two layers, so that it does not become inflamed again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not free from further complications if it were to continue like other wounds; every way we do this work of our willpower, and specifically on children, because it is a necessary task that we must perform the better work, and the more gentle for safety.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	They did not tell the ancient people about circumcision for their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and doctors who performed circumcision in order to learn from them, and gained experience, but the authorities were opposed because it involved two tools, and by chance some people died from above and others below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery covers it, and the pain is double, and at the purification which is done with a great deal of uncertainty about the point of the member; and at the purification of the ulcer by chance escapes the iron, and runs over the wound, and often comes to this as if they needed no further purification and I have seen that.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification that is made with force, I have found the good fortune of the experiment, because the forces cut exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, it cuts exactly the same way in both direction; but if the thread is not very tight around the skin; and so happens that the first operation should be done as if you were thinking of a child, so that you do not make any further movements than to tie the thread around the horn just enough, and then let it go in all kinds of ways that you can; then take it straight into your hands, and keep the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see, nor any other symptoms; then put your hand on the horn and blow on it, and take it up high until the cut is made; then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled there; then tie the second thread around it with a double string; then tie it under both at once; and hold it tight as much as you can for two fingers' length, then take the head off the horn's end; then let the blood flow little by little because it’s drying; and put powder on top and on the powder that is glued to the ointment of a rose-water mixed with oil roasted well, and confit with good olive oil and fresh, and leave it up to the other day, and cure him again for as long as he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force at purification is this: the two shoulders are joined and must be tightened and shortened, and the shoulder is as large as the other equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the edges within are split at the incision; therefore it must be extended to your joint, so that they make an opening; and it is done equally, and if you cannot hold to your joint, then take your nails, and then strike.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it is three days and the thing below the vein is swollen, leave it until the edges of the wound are smoothed out and lightly scrape it; strike as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the vein, for it will not harm a bit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the wounded limb of sudden pain with powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if one strikes out of measure over it, and it goes to the top, so that it does not harm; cure then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	And retention of urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stone, or blood congealed, or bowels, or stones, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that it is blocked by a stone which is stuck or wedged at the junction of the bladder and the colon, so that it is advisable to lower the patient's knees. And place their feet on their back, and stretch out their belly from above the back, and constrain the patient as much as possible; and afterwards the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone upwards, because the urine flows freely; and if not, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is advisable to administer extraction for all the instruments called "siringue", which are made like this: they should be made of fine silver, light, and delicate, like a bird's feather; and should be cylindrical, half a palm long, and subtle in shape.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Instruct the patient to take twice as much fil (likely a medicinal powder or ointment), and tie a piece of linen cloth or cotton around their head; then pour the fil into the vein. Then cut off the excess linen and pour it back into the head of the vein, afterwards anoint the vein with oil or butter and juniper berries; put the patient on the couch, and lift up the bladder and the uterus with olive oil moistened and olive oil and cold water; then gently insert the vein into the uterus, until it reaches the root of the uterus, then double the vein upwards towards the bowels; afterwards pour the vein before reaching the bladder, and listen to the patient feeling it coming out through a void place, because if the conduit is twisted there, that’s not done according to this order, but due to the way it moves in there. Then tie the thread with all the linen cloth little by little, and let the urine follow the linen, afterwards take it out, and pour the urine; and reinsert the vein until the bladder is empty, and relieve the patient's pain.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcers or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is assembled, and you see the water and medicine distill, do this to all the instrument called "clepsedre", and it's in this shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	She is closed, and if it has three punctures: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the medicinal powder is put close to the tip so that it cools well the urethral passage, if possible to treat moisture, and push when necessary. When you see pouring your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the container in the moisture, and pull out what is inside; pulling out the moisture from the container, then push the container hard again; if the moisture enters again, it will be in the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the subtle form of a cystoscope which they use to clog the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et is of silver or iron and the nails are higher; and below it in the groin where the ligaments split; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see clumping up the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat it over the fire; then pour the head into the blister in the neck, then strain your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the clot has come to the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle and puncture it round about; then pour the strong thread into those wounds, then assemble the circle as one would assemble the nail, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie in the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division how to cut stones and extract medicines; and I have told the difference between stone jasper and rainstones, and all the signs, and when which stone one should operate on with scaling; and in the vessel and phallus; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone jasper in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that urine suddenly escapes from the bladder like water escaping in its subtlety; and it opens up the veins, and scratches the patient's phallus, and he pricks him many times, and then becomes inflamed; and because of this, there are many openings; and lightens up the children until they are 4 years old; is very heavy in the elderly, and is like being middle-aged, for those who are between middle age and old age; and is easier to cure for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we arrive at the cure, it is necessary to first clean the patient with lye, for to remove all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	But it is not necessary every time to cut into stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the arms, and push down and move away from below, so that the stone comes out to the bottom of the bladder, and does not fall again up into him; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be below his knees, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then take it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, immediately hasten now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not come out at the touchstone to its entirety, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, since the patient is diseased or in your left side, since the patient is a youth unfulfilled; and pour it into his fundament, and take the stone, and when you feel it on your right, if it clings to the neck of the bladder; then press on your right finger, and pour it out at the void where you see cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to stretch out his right hand fingers towards the top, and his left hand palm the skin below the fingers in the part where one makes the incision; then pour the spatulate mixture, for this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Make it between the tendons and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the nail; and it should be straight under the stone, and both ends towards the foundation, and it should make an incision to traverse if it is wide by chance, without being too big; inside it is narrow, according to the size of the stone, neither too great; in case the pressure hits one that is on the foundation, it may jump out for lack of work; and know that there are pieces of stone or angles, and edges: if they are rough to come out; and if there's some that are low, like a splinter, and rounded, from which the exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it must be covered, and a greater wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out again because of the pain that the pain relievers cannot alleviate; but strive with effort to treat, or to cauterize with tongs, until you have removed it by pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply the wound ointment of enchanter's plant and dragon's blood, and bind, and put above a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water cold and hot, to calm the inflammation; then revive the patient under his neck, and do not untie the band for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, give him much oil and water to drink; then apply the oil of defenicon and basilicon, until he is cured.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Et if the abscesses come into the wound and cause corrosion, and congealment of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without urination: put then your fingers into the wound, and extract that wound, because if they remain, the bladder will corrode and rot; then lift the wound with water and oil and cloth, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed; and it is fitting that all the wounds you cure, you tie up the two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, and fixed there, and the urine cannot come out; then, if you are told this by another, that you measure the height often, you excuse yourself from this measurement for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Before I apply iron according to this form and fix it at three angles in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the string and put it around the vein below the stone, if it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the iron into the vein lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the iron to your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if it comes soon afterwards, then press your hand on that which is left behind of the stone inside the vein.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then put the string below the stone and the other above, then make the vein straight to the stone between the two strings, then pull it out, and release the string, and clean the wound frozen up in the injury; and cure until he is well.
de la piere des femmes	Of stones from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is no chance that stones are found in women, and if they occur once, the cure will be troubled, and is prohibited for three reasons: one is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that we cannot find any woman who knows how to shave her stones herself, especially when she is cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the fourth reason is that in this art of hands you cannot find a woman who knows; and the fifth reason is that the stones from women are more embedded than those from men, because it can be made into a deeper pit, and great fear there is. And if necessity arises for this, it is necessary to take a midwife well knowing, and at pains to reach it, and if you do not find her, do not choose a subtle deceit; and present the maiden well-versed in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to make what you command from the inquiry of the stone; and look very carefully whether she is a virgin: then it is necessary to put on the seal or foundation and seek for the stone; and if she finds it, she will constrain herself under the seal, and demand that she pour the seal into the patient, and force her hand to press against the belly in the form of a cup.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	She finds it, if it is right, that you must move it from great to great in the entrance of the bladder up to the knee; until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone, where it is most exposed, and feel the bone in that part; and do not move your fingers above or below the stone, and let them fit the first joint a little; then pour warm liquid into the joint, if you feel the bone so close to the wound as it can come out, and see how many kinds of stones are: which is to know, small and large, hard and soft, long and rounded, and those that have cracks.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you see the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if he does not swell, put vitriol on the wound, and hold it for an hour until it is stained; then return to your work, as long as the stone comes out, and have strappings that I told you about in the extraction of stones for your help in your work; and if he does not swell, and this is from the artery that was cut, put powder on the wound and linen strips and do not resume again, lest the patient dies, then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound is appeased, and the pus has passed, it returns to your work, until the stone breaks.
de hernie carnouse	of a hare's intestine
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Saltwater is nothing but a collection of moisture or pus, which lies under the skin, where it contains egg white; and it's called "syfac", and it's not actually in the yolk, if one thinks that there's another yolk; and this is the leather of the ovary between the white syfac that we have said; and such things do not happen unless they are.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this saltwater is from weakness, and it comes to the ovary, and spreads out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	In such cases if it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or the color is declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or white as snow, and this happens more often; and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then there are abscesses inside, like a cow's stomach, and it does not open at all, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the own flesh, then abscesses are found with a part of the toe, and for that reason one thinks it's another cow; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and white as snow, then it feels swollen; therefore when you see, know the color of the moisture, if you examine all the surrounding area, because the form was before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to those who come after the intrusive one, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cut with iron, it is advisable to make the patient healthy according to one's power and the replenishment of his body; then sit on top of him on something high, and place above him a great quantity of cloths; then sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two horns of the knife; then take the stylus of lead, and cut the flesh of the horse by its length from there down to the nail, and make the incision straight as possible in the flesh of the horse just so white, and burn it subtly according to my power; then perforate the white flesh plain with water until a large hole is made, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers, and extend the flesh upwards; and do not touch the heart of the horse, but only the flesh; cut him through equally in pieces, as much so that you should not cut him well, he will return to the blood; and if the fluid falls on your hand, put it back into his own place when you have completed the work on the white flesh; then assemble the two horns of the horse's skin to one joint, then cure him as with other wounds, until he is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find the corrupted vein infected with another disease, then it is suitable that you tie the strips which are suspended above, in doubt about the worsening of blood; then strike the vein at all the suspension, and extract the vein, and treat as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, knowing that they are two branches; then strike the other part in the same way as you have done the first equally, then wipe out the blood, and put a linen moistened with rose oil in the wound; and put over another linen moistened with wine and oil on top of both veins, and cover with doubled drapes, and tie up above all the bandage according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the two drapes, and sew them of wool fleece according to this resemblance and assemble them with stitching in the neckband of the braies; and one of the shoulders pinning down at the fundament just under the back, and the other on the part of the finger; and the third pinning above both sinews, and so all assembled the restreinture in the knot of the braiser; and once is medicated this branch with cautery for the size of iron, and that you take a subtle cautery knife, and strike at the skin of the veins, and be scalded as we have said, until the white stuff contained in the blood is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white stuff with nails, and burn it with this subtle cautery hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	Instruct the patient to treat it in all manners that you can, as long as you are examining everything; and keep the fire from touching the eyes; and know that this work is more healing; and be careful of the consequence of bleeding, and beware of the wounds of cutting; and if no thing causes you harm or an abscess or wound or any other thing, cure what causes you harm according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	But if the patient is afraid and will not undergo this work because of its horror, perforate as I told you, for it is when you are certain by the meanings we have said that water flows into a vein; so place the patient on the bed elevated with a stool; then penetrate the abscess in the part below, all over the wide surface, and make the perforation deep in the body; and if the wound is large enough, so that all the blood flows out; then put cotton on the wound, tie it, and let it flow until the remaining blood comes out, and then cure until the wound is healed; and if the poultice does not allow the blood to come out of the mouth of the wound, it is wise to insert a needle or the instrument used to treat dropsy, because its form is as described before; and expand the wound a little more, and know that the blood returns, and is assembled after six months or whenever it enters, and when it is assembled as before, and so will pass away the patient's days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that when the cut is made in this part, there are often many deaths, because it seems to be worth leaving alone; and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from the body and also from the joints, and it is a very frequent case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to say that the abscesses are spread due to acidity and water that spreads into the joints or by percussion; and its color is according to the color of the body; and it does not feel pain, but is an abscess. Occasionally there are abscesses that are heavy and hard, with a rough color, and sometimes they come from nowhere and form around an artery or swell in the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is caused by no artery, it is known by the shape of an abscess when you press on your two fingers; and it is not fitting to touch there.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is caused by swelling of a vein is known by its shape at the point of touch on your two fingers, and it can be easily identified by making the mark on this appearance, as well as others; and you must cut with the right finger at the wound's edge, then remove the gauze from above, and release the suspended (or inflamed) part from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is already inflamed with these marks, then it is fitting to treat the vein and cut at it; and if it is swollen in the space above the marks, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is fitting to remove all that part and cut around it.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the navel is located at the back of the body, then it is recommended that you copy it entirely, and extract the umbilicus, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are completed, apply the wound of flaxen cloth moistened in rose oil and wine, then the cure of other cures until they are healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the joints.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess that has been enveloped by a swelling similar to the shoulder joint, with softening of the joints, and the patient suffers greatly when it ruptures; and the cure for this disease is very close to what was done before, and we will tell you about the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Instruct the patient to sit upright on the elevated bed, then lift his shoulders up and down as much as possible, towards all the vessels which are near the veins, and stretch out with great effort; then strike at the spine with a broad motion cutting through the ribs, until they are visible, and then scorch from each part, just as we have said in the extraction of arteries located in temples; then insert an arrow or a double thread into the first place where the vein appears, and tie it to the other side of the head directly; then strike straight down, according to the length of the body, and take out the corrupting moistures; then treat the wound as we have said for all others, so that no single vessel is blocked; because through this there comes no harm, and if all vessels come back with it, then it is necessary to tie the vessels on every vessel; in such a way that the arteries do not lose their movement due to the incision of the vessels, dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the cautery with fire
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Now the consequences of this cut are caused by cutting or sectioning, or when they extend on the belly in the area of the intestines; because the intestines fall away from that injury to one of the extremities; and this injury is either through cutting or stretching, or through percussion, jumping, burning, or lifting a painful injury, similar to these things; for the signs when there is an extension of the cut on the syphus, are that it comes on little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal in size up to the point, because the syphus presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when there is sectioning of the cut, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning; and the abscesses appear in different ways under the skin, near the flesh, because it comes from the intestines and escapes through the cut.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it is bound with the intestines, and retained in the wound, causing great pain to suffer the patient, particularly when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments because of fear, why it is necessary to evacuate them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method for cutting is that you command the patient to tie his intestine to a finger inside the wound if it can return; then sew above his neck between your hands, and tighten the joints; then make the wound from top to bottom, and cut all the skin around the joints, long enough so that the skin can be pulled out; then pour into the incision the intestines according to what you have need for to open the wound, so that they can come out; and make sure they are full so that it cannot come back into the flesh; then wipe off the clean part from below the skin of the joints, until the white parts are uncovered from all sides; then pour your index finger into the one that points towards the joint, between the white part which is under the skin of the shoulder, and between the second white part, and between the one behind the shoulder, and between the second white part; and pull to the right hand inside the wound, and tighten the joints as high up as your left hand; and command the minister to stretch the joint upwards, and release that which is behind the binding; and ask if you find any intestine wrapped around or a hard white part, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the belly from below; then take an awl with a large thread made of 10 threads, and pour it in the back part of the skin, next to the joints; next cut the cords that appear on the thread, until there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other like a cross, and tie the skin from under the joints, which we have said is behind the skin of the joints, with a strong binding of 2 parts; then wrap the strings around the intestines, and tighten them in 2 parts, so that none of the servants who suckle on you can enter into you, unless there are no chafes from outside; and put the first binding according to the second one for 2 times of the length, and after that, leave the skin which is under the joint a double bow, like we said before; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the joints, until it does not have any core, and tie the bow as we have told; then put wet wool in oil into the wounds, and put them in, and tie the binding that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes we cauterize the white flesh after we have said so, by doubt of the continued bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens and leaves the bandage in place until it sticks to him; and if it takes too long for the wound to heal, whether from a hot bath, or apply what we have said, so that it heals; then treat the wound with another treatment, until he is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia in the groin.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this book I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done in this way: as the ram is wrapped around the bone, in this manner that you tie the belts, after the height, lightly above the lower part; then cut into me, and treat the abscess as we have said, until the belts begin to swell; and cure so that he be completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the hairs, so that the muffiee and cures the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is stretched and has no appearance in the cut, and the cautery is made more precise in this location, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Sometimes the skin of the joints is softened in some people, because the flesh that is inside is softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin on the soft skin naturally; then sew the two sides together with a bandage, until you see, first sew three layers of the soft skin over three layers or four tightly, then cut between the layers, and the cure like other wounds, until it is healed, and sew the thread.
dou chastrement	One cautery of fire commands the sick man to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	We know how cauterizations are done according to our law, and I would rather not speak of it in this book; for there is only two ways: one way is that the surgeons should be able to answer when they are asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we have often had need of cauterization in some beasts to help us.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauterizations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one we make by attraction, we sit the patient best in warm water, until their wounds are softened and dried up; then we pierce them with our fingers, as soon as they are relaxed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: it is to be understood that you should mark the best, and press the skin of the elbow with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike on each one as long as you have scoured them; and leave no small space where the flesh will suck, and the subtle sucker which is under the vespers; and this manner of chastrement is milder than that which is done by attraction, for because it attracts, by chance there may be some thing from the nails, for which the best desires luxury; then cure the wound as long as it is clean.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is according to two manners of home: one is that between the two testicles are open like the figure of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes in his groin there is no urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way it is also done in women, with a pointed object just like a splinter.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure for hunger and thirst is that you copy the marks arranged all together, and the treatment like other wounds; in the second manner, those men from whom the urine leaps out through the skin of the fingers, have no cure.
de la tentigene	of the toothache
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The toothache is a marked spot on the natural part, until it becomes too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a finger, and that's the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is fitting that you paint the overflow of the toothache on your hand or finger, and lightly scrape it off; and do not press too hard, lest there be bleeding, then the cure of another remedy until it is healed; and another mark that appears in the mouth, on the gums, and by chance it bursts forth, and it's according to the shape of a cow, and for that they called it the ancient "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is fitting to copy it, as we have said the method, and the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic occurs when the nature of woman is not perceived, or when it is lost; and is born by nature, or by accident by illness that comes upon it, or because of chariot accidents, or deep stab wounds, or stab wounds on the face, neck, chest, back, or in any place; and prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes flower blooming; and knowledge of this is by means of observation of the pulse.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If swelling appears near an injury, choose whether it is on the right or left side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is swollen subcutaneously and it comes close to the two fingers, hasten, and so on: put your two fingers together, and have the woman sit on her back, spread out her legs; then stretch the two fingers, as long as the subtle swelling is, and cover with the lint, in oil, and apply it to the finger, and have the woman lie down at home every day, until it will not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and dense, it is advisable that you cut with a spoon-like instrument similar to mint leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is of the flesh and it comes to a single point, cut there and apply; and with tied-up medicines, as one would use honey, dragon's blood, incense, together many times; then bring in a large poultice of onions, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus be long, and bring in a tent of dry linen; then cure with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a charnel house is found near, then you must cover it according to this manner, if not for the enchantments of the abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is in the charnel house, one should not touch fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually do not occur by chance, and when old hemorrhoids develop they become tumors; and we have said in the division the similarities of warts, and the signs, and I will say here which ones receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and the tumor when they are swollen in the charnel house, and do not appear by smell, if it is not cured with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the mare can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then stand the altar with tongs, and cut at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining bleeding, such as aloe and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour her feet into boiling water for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if she bleeds afterwards, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall and similar things, and then mix with wheat flour, and moisten with honey and easily, and then apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he bleeds, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this is not so, if they make the patient inhale hot vapors on the back and at the breasts; then take linseed, and the poultice in juice of plantain or in juice of agrimonia with wine vinegar, and make it to breathe on the patient.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is at rest, treat the patient with ointment until he is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and seems like a rough head, so it must be covered as I have said; and then treat him until he is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come from the marrow, such as chancre and a porous abscess and herpes and eczema and fistulas and hemorrhoids and another kind of abscess that I have mentioned in this division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary therefore that I speak of the abscess that comes to the mouth, which is not an abscess as those which grow on a bow; and if you see how the fire cautery works, then look at whether the abscesses are present in its beginning, being full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let him be cooled until the pain is assuaged; and then place the sick person on a bed, and have two petis sieges or he may recline, and support his back and assemble his feet in such a way that they are away from the leg; and his knees should be spread apart, and bind them with good cordage, and put his hands under his girdle, and tie them well; then bring him the ball to the right side, and attach it to the instrument used to treat the mouth of the abscess, because after that comes its form; and it is necessary that when you see attaching this instrument, that you fix the first needle in place to know the depth of the abscess, so that whatever enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloth, so that the instruments do not hurt him; and it is necessary to put a horn on top of the instrument, and tie it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is closed with stitching, then it is advisable to avoid using iron cautery, but treat it in the way we have said when dividing.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The craftman must be the first to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs that you see when you witness a woman going into labor, and having strong desires to push out: therefore hurry on gently with her abdomen, so that the child is quickly born; because when he emerges from her head, she will give birth to the second one too, and her uterus will be cleansed of its superfluities through good purification; and this who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it happens sometimes on his feet, and it comes to the body or joints, and the hands, or where it comes to the stomach, or sovain, and is converted by chance on its neck, and with other bad forms; for it is necessary to the surgeon that they be clever and subtle in these things, and warms himself from error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fever comes upon his head by natural cause, and the woman in childbirth screams loudly, and the virtues of her body are weak, then do this: seat her on a stool, or women hold her; and roast her flesh in oil or fenugreek until it is cooked, and then pour the bale between her two small vessels, which has the form
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the vein, and stab at one of its tendons until the moistures that are burning in it; and press the woman's abdomen so that the fever descends; if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cauterize the woman with musk and fenugreek oil; then let her take food and vomit condisi, and keep her mouth and nostrils closed for an hour: if this happens now, the fever
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out free, it is to be gently loosened little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on the bed, and lift the feet up high; then break down the bed on earth, and take care of the woman, so that she does not slip off the bed; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife which is placed before, and extract the child gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the outcome of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on its feet, so it is to be pushed upwards; and then turn little by little, until they are even; then take hold of the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it cannot jump just as soon as the cubs, so command to take hold, and make it stretch on its hind legs; if it jumps, then God is with us.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, so it takes time to take place, little by little, until it is according to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	So then it happens more easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not happen as we have said, then take musciliauge of alet (alum), and oil of sismant, and gumma melted, and grind all in mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and avoid this ointment, then make her sit in water until down to the ribs; and when she is moistened down, then make her wear a girdle of mirror, and put it on, and let her rest for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and strangle her mouth and nose, and take gently her belly, because now the child leaps within.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the issue of the child above his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if you put oil on his bottom and bring your hands to his belly, and hang his feet down and sit him there; then take your fingers apart slightly, and then put them back onto his chest, until he is fitted together below; and if the child does not jump, grasp his feet and hold firm, then hold the chest up, then dip your hands; and pour in oil slowly; and command the woman to fasten herself tightly as long as the child is still inside.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of a child who comes out with one hand in front
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must engineer to return the hand: if you cannot return it, then make the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed and hold her knees together; then apply the mucus that I have told you about; and if she does not conceive, then make her sit on a stool; then study to bring back the hand again; and pour in oil according to nature, and let it expel, and command the woman to fasten herself tightly as long as the child is inside.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of a child with his neck, and has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back on the mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I believe that the black bile is drawn out of his hand, then it turns a little and a little, and it becomes lighter; and when it is equalized, so put on the musk-like substance from above and oil, as we have said, then command her to move a little and a little; and when you have done this, place her on the chair, and she will restrain herself.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner for all these things.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner for all these things, strike the vein on one's anglebone until the moistures are void; and if the fever sets on his face and on his neck, strike at the root, so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then pour the child into a vessel, until you have put him in such a state as is fitting, and command the woman to restrain herself from any movement: thus he will be made lighter.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It has been observed that twins are born many times, and sometimes they are born in pairs of three or four; and this is not a strange thing, because it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an extraordinary thing, and do not live if they are named; I know that they are multiplied and come forth from the womb, as if by some special power, which is linked to the birth; and sometimes they are born just like all of us, in the same natural way that we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born seriously, then the treatment is as we have said, and it involves subtle balances, and quickly and gently what she does; and it happens in such a way that it is worth taking medicine for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No one is born with the marks I, II, III, IV, V, VI, or VII, or more than fifteen, for they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his body's size, and it must be considered that if the physician believes this, because by chance a similar thing occurs; then follow accordingly what is required.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who has lost her child or uterus, as I said in the division, and she does not come to her senses, and you are constrained by the work of hands; if it is required that you know whether the woman is a person of good health, and has no accident, or has fear of death; if it is required that the woman be upright on her back, with her hair inclined downwards, and raised legs; and the minister apply to the mouth two parts of oil moistened with muscillaige of althe and fenugrec and seed of lin, then rub the hands of the physician with these oils and muscillaiges; then pour them lightly into the mouth of the wound; then if it is required that she drink one or more ounces, whichever are suitable to this, take care that the infant is visible when it descends onto its head; if you apply the onions to her ears, nose, or chin, or on palates, or under the beard, or on the breast or near the sides, and the descent of the infant is towards the feet, then apply an onion to one hand, and put a corselet between his two hands of the left hand, and pour the onions into all the limbs that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Instruct the patient to push his head into another opening, or where he needs to be inserted, so that the extraction is even; and then stretch it equally by moving from one side and the other, until it comes out, and holds the wound closed with stitches as it is in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it stays part of the way, apply some oil to certain of his two joints, and pour them into that part, and treat the other part; and if it doesn't stay at all, place this instrument higher in him, and do so until he comes out entirely flushed.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other and he cannot return to the constriction, so you should cover the upper part with a bandage until it is all dry; then cut into the joint of the foot or knee, and do similarly on the other side, and make two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l'enfant est gros et il est estois en l'issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l'aigue; ou tu la ront a l'estruement qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s'elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s'il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is upon his feet, so that he attracts lightly, and the remedies are applied to the mouth of the marjoram is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if he is swollen in the belly or groin, so that you draw it out with an arrow wrapped around his hand; and make the belly or groin, until the moistures clear up; and if other limbs are swollen, and the joints stick, then give him balm made from marjoram, and rub it just to the mouth of the marjoram; and give one or two ounces, and draw it through; and if the bowels of the marjoram are retracted because of a painful abscess that has come, it is not wise to struggle, but rather to apply soft and moist things; and apply them after plasting in water, and slicing with milky and soothing things.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the fever is on his chest and you can make him even, then follow what we have said about the living child; and if they do not have any power, then lay him on pieces of cloth, and leave nothing of the second skin.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the limbs are straight as we said about the cut arteries that come out of the neck; and if they bleed again, then take him to water, restraining it, and do other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, and then she consulted another one on her, and refused to let the other die.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time the wound came out in the throat, and swelled so much that it burst, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was unable to complete the task as I don't have any further instructions.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed a splint on the broken bone, and after some other days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed at this, because the belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and felt for bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman took many days to recover thus, and suddenly a little bowing of her leg appeared; and I have not remembered this chapter since because when the masters saw an extraordinary thing, they knew how to provide assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Bring back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of pressing, to which one applies the books; and then again at the second joints of the two bones.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	On must be more subtle in applying the corset, and make it of ebony or boxwood; and make the mouth of the tube a foot wide, and the margin of the trees one foot, and a palm and a half long; and for the two joints shall have two pairings of this same wood, which are set firm in both, a half-palm long or slightly more; and these two pairings are closed in the mouth of the corset to open when turning the two corns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in shape, shall be made from ebony or boxwood, following the likeness of the tongs; and it has two joints with pairings, just as you see, a palm long, and two feet wide; when opening the corset to the entire instrument, place the woman on a stool, over her belly, and legs bent, then close the two pairings together in the corset, and hold the head of the instrument between its joints; then open your hand to the entire instrument, as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the quantity that opens the mouth of the corset, until it does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all crowned and have multiple forms; and when the mirrors are brought out, it is faster to work on them, and higher up there by their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare the instrument that you use it, for its need is no excuse.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second tooth is retained in the child, it is advisable to instruct the patient to bring their aline (tooth) forward, and then have them spit out condisi (possibly referring to spitting or ejecting), and hold one's hands to the mouth and nose; and if it falls off while doing so, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it does not fall off, you may try to pierce it or make a wound, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the child, such as calamine, rue, anise, camomile, cassialigne, and centaury; all of these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a poultice or wound-dressing on top of the pot, and the other cheek inside the child's mouth, and hold it until the vapors come out from within the mouth; then have them spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If his second tooth has fallen out immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, instruct the physician to wet his left hand in oil of sesame or musk root, and then pour it on nature, and when he wants the tooth, and as soon as he has found it, take hold of it gently and extend it slowly so that the marrow does not get caught during extraction; but they must move lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes out, it will come out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the jaw of the marrow is tightly closed, we have said to release the treatment and perform fumigation with herbs; and if it is none of what we have said, beware that you do not go mad while treating; but it is necessary that whatever is at the jaw of the marrow, tie it to the chest of a woman, then bind it with ointment tetraformulacon; pour some pepsin and put her back, and she will come out; but all things being equal, when she puts it, if there comes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and blackens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is therefore necessary, then fumigations are suitable for this case: none of the ancients have tried fumigation with cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which you apply the fumigation to the woman, when holding back the flowers and the second nipple if this is so:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen like a bow, and put the subtle head in nature, and the hairs wide on the fire; and so apply the fumigation on the coals, and the worm until it is consumed, and repeat another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	But children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, unless it has been softened by a subtle knife: if this is so, then take to the bath and pierce that knife in its place, and do not pierce it with a sharp needle, and tie the bandage so that she does not touch it; then put on a moist cloth in wine and oil, then apply ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not heal, put on a bandage of onion, and let the hands rest for days, and leave it exposed when the fever has gone to bed in the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no time for this sudden bleeding from a wound or an abscess, if you should cover that suddenness: if it is cured, as we have said of the onion.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula in the root.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come out from under the root are nodules, and those that come out from below the root due to moisture or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or multiple; and when this nodulation is old, it causes ulcers, and encroaches on moistness of the skin, white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas pass; and they are caused by what is ejected or emitted by the patient, and by chance some come out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If it has fistulas which occur at the bladder and at half of the penis, and reach as far as the joint of the thigh, and come out through the navel.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so they call out that the fistula continues down to the fundament, and does not continue; and this is how you put your finger into the fundament, and insert a fine needle with iron or linen in the fistula where it has no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, then put a fine nettle or horsehair tent into the fistula, as far as you feel the nettle or the hair, and if you do not feel anything, and there is no discharge, nor wind, nor opening, just like we said: see that it does not penetrate; for this will hasten the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent until it reaches the bladder or just before the urethra of urine, so the urine bursts out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it occurs at the joint of the crotch, it comes to the testicles; if there is no tortuosity or knowledge of the location of the pain, then it is a constant bowing and does not benefit from medicine or surgery by application; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except for labor, and the folly of foolish remedies that intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not old, there is hope for health by iron, as I have experienced; so that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and lifts his legs up to his groin, and inclines his groins towards his belly; then pours a poultice of ashes or pitch if it has tortuosity, until you know whether the poultice comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foundation, then it is advisable to apply your two fingers there, if you feel this area before something tries to pierce; and if you discover this or sense a swelling or a lump between your thumb and arm, then know that it is swollen; do not work on it anymore unless you cannot cure it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	But we cannot heal everyone, but it happens little; and the aid that is given to them, if it is a cauterization subtle according to the width of the fistula, as has been said; and pour in full at the top of the fistula until it comes from below the foundation; and make this twice or three times, until you know that these swellings must be burned, which resemble like a bird's feather; and then the cure with wet poultices on melted butter, until those swellings disappear, and then the cure with ointment binding flesh and stitching.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus ill, this is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If so, no other remedy can be better than this; and if he attempts to pierce between the joints, and does not penetrate as deeply as is necessary, and puts a thick covering of charcoal or pitch on both sides of the tendon, and you see the fistula opening behind that covering, which appears red with inflammation; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and bleed before the tenting, and then cauterize afterwards, until it comes to the head of the tent, he will be delivered from the pain, and cured; after putting on those charlatans' remedies that resemble a swan's feather, and none of them remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he does not wish you to bleed him, and cuts between you and the wound, so that the cauterization with fire or medicine is applied.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery, there are two things to consider: that is to say, the abrasion of these burnt skin parts, and the contraction of blood and the drying out of moisture; then, cure the swollen belly in butter or raw cheese, until they allow it to bow down, and the fat burns within the bowel; then cure the wound of sudden ointments, which are like a hard char, and so are the medicines that dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is safe and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes just at the bottom of its deepest foundation, and is located far from the body, put two ounces or so in the foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the pressure and between two things, it is either the membrane or the skin, or it is near being pierced, if there are no fires but only a way of hope through the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you pierce just at the bottom, or if you can, you put ointments and cure as first; and do not go too deep, lest you cover the seat that holds the foundation, and come to the egress by chance movement of willingness; then cure it, as we have said; by chance, if it is cured, or if you push away that covering and the wound is pierced from below, or by some other instrument set apart; then remove the unnecessary thing that was in the wound, so much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the abscess in the opposite part of the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And at times, fistulas are created in this manner: and when you put a tent in the fistula, and it is in the groove of the skin above, so that one takes hold of it according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I push the string twisted in two, and put the tent all along the string in the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is stuck in the margin of the skin below, then pull out the string from that puncture, so that you put your two fingers on the underlying foundation; and take the top with the string, and assemble the two joints together, and hold them one to another, and let them be for a day or two; and restrain it no more than as long as the strings separate those marks, and heal the wound until it is dried and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not heal, then pierce it in all manners that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to cover the wound if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny plantain seed from which the fistula is made is much thicker in one part and thinner in another; and on the other side it is not so, for that's why you should not pierce what you should not pierce, as you see:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are in two kinds: either they are inside the fundament, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes they have blood inside the fundament, and some are outside the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture, and are cut with a knife or a bit of salt, and have the color of flesh; and the cure for those who have them in the fundament is to command the patient to lie on their side in the chamber, until the fundament is dry, and you will see the filaments; if they are quick to heal, then take nails or hold it with your finger, and cut at its roots; and if the sinew cannot hold them for their moistures, then take them off a horse's girth, or a piece of cotton, or a piece of camelhide; and pull them out by your two hands, then cut them, and powder on top some hot powders that are in the cautery; or you cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cautery, because the cure of other cures until it is healed; and if the fundament cannot come out, then bind the patient with a strong binding and sharp for lathering what is in the fundament, if it can come out openly; when the patients are aware, and if the filaments have dried out the fundament, then the cure is light; and you take them off by your finger or with nails, and cut, then cure as we have said, until it is healed, and that they do not fear the incision with a knife of iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is fitting that you join the stitches according to this manner: take one thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread up above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two joints with the thread below the needle, and if it is wide; and strain the thread firmly, then no longer, and extract the needle, and do so to all of them, and leave one for correction of excess blood; then put a moistened cloth over the wound or in oil rose or cerote, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then let it be until they stop bleeding, and when they are cured, apply ointment and other cures, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	How tightly or loosely the thread is tied to the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	There are times when severe pain occurs in the intestines, and by the constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset at the point of a splinter or on the nail the scab above, which does not allow moisture; then treat as long as it is healthy if it suits; and if it cannot heal, resume the scraping more strongly than before, until it heals completely and is scabbed over; then treat as long as it is healed.
dou fremit	do not vibrate or shake (the text seems to be incomplete or corrupted)
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	The formic appearance is a false sign that appears near the body, and goes deep into it; and at times the heat of the formic appearance, and the sensation of being cold, like death, come out from within, and spread all over the body, especially to the hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Instruct the patient to take a stick of one goose quill or a strong bird's beak, and place that stick on the flesh, until the red circle appears all over; then turn your hand all around the stick until you cover the whole circle, and put it into its roots, and secure the flesh with its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you see, make such a thing of a thorn or iron according to this form, and be subtle under and above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't pierce it, for you must hold to the two, and press And if you see, cut off the red circle, as you do in front of or near the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a hollow cystor (or possibly "hollowed out")
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	There is no blood evacuated when using silver or lead, or melted tin or cloth; and sometimes one uses these small instruments and large ones, according to which they are suitable.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then one uses in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small or large syringe, if it is too long, or if the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a rupture or the belly is bound, as you see, and the syringe is filled with what appears to be there; and one has an opening on one side, and in the other, there are openings, and it is felt that they have I holes per side, and the belly is sewn up with medicines from a cow's bladder or parchment, and are visible all around with small openings, each having one hole of space, then put in I thread of rope strong as leather into these I holes, tightly twisted, and assemble the belly like an arrow; and when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the instrument at the edge of a cord, then syringe; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And so let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint his head with lard or oil or something similar, then pour it in lightly; then grasp the physician's hands together as if he were dead, till all is well, then pull out the plaster, and lift up the patient's legs to show, and if the medicine comes out as it can, so be it; and if he sleeps a whole night like that, so will there be greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plaster him when he has a disease of slow-moving belly, and the medicine rushes out, so that it comes back as soon as he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament, or abscess, so that the plaster is applied as finely as to a child; and it's this form of the subtle plaster where the skin is stretched.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	For we have already said in the division the cure of wounds; or you will tell us about the cures for hands and medicines, according to what has been completed.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to how they are done, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things are done because wounds are made of piercing with stone, cutting with sword and knife, or lance or stick or net, or similar things; or what is done according to the nature of the body, such as a wound that chokes on the neck, head, shoulder, belly, liver, or other members; and I will tell you about the cure for each wound, and begin with simple wounds on the head, since memory will come back in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I'll translate the text line by line into English.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient if he does not wish to recover, so that his flesh becomes thinner, and he drinks no wine, nor eats meat; and put on the wound, in case an abscess comes out, a wet cloth soaked in olive oil or vinegar solution; and if there is no abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh throughout its depth, and not moved by air, powder, I will say one thing here later; and if he has moved the part, put on some ointments, until he is cured.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be sewn together by stitches, then sew them together by sewing, as I said for wounds in the belly, of the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is uncovered of bone and is torn, and does not stay but falls apart at one point, then be cautious; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore the skin to its original state by applying leather, and instruct the patient to eat large quantities of meat, such as fowl and bread, just like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotting skin or leather that is rotten to the bone, and it tears completely apart, and falls off, then cure it; and if an artery has formed in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines without cutting, then choose to cut the artery, and if you find it constricted with a thread, then tie it with a string; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light; and it is that you put on this powder which unites as well as the arrow has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Instruct the patient to take powder thus: take charcoal one part; dragon’s blood two parts; calcined vinegar three parts, and make the powder subtly, and apply the wound, and tie it tightly, until it has dried well and joined all of its sanc; then bind it well, and let it be tied again, if it swells; for you do not remove medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time is this done alone with calcined charcoal, when one does not have either the charcoal or dragon's blood, but only has the powder of herbs moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the herbs have moved the wound, especially when it was fresh, do not put this powder on it; but place some digestive ointments or poultices made from flour of barley watered with milk and honey until it gels; then let the patient be treated by other remedies until they are healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, so that I put fine stitches upon it; and I will tell you here after about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	But if the wound comes on the neck and it is simple, unless there is no difference between the neck and the head, but if the sinews of the neck or the arteries are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But if it is the sinews, you must not put anything else in the cure, and do not tie anything to restrain it, because it hurts at night and makes them retract; and putting anything on the wound does nothing, because the substance of the sinews is cold, and the continuation of this is with the brain, which is the highest member; but if you have medicine, so that calomel is washed in sweet water, and melted with olive oil, and the calomel is also washed again in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that the cloth and bandages can bind it, then the treatment continues until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are very deep and he has a head and is full of pus, then cut more lower; and if an artery is cut and blood flows in, treat with cauterization; and if the esophagus is cut or the throat, keep the conduit secure because the meat will move, cut the wound on the chain of the neck, but not touch the neck itself, rather follow its natural shape, and immediately bind him, let him rest for some days, then apply treatments with herbs until he is healed; and if the wound has pressed against the bone, treat it as such; and if there are pieces of bone, cut them off with all haste, and those that cannot be removed, leave them so that the wound may heal, dry out, and become clean again; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and it has an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of arrow wounds or sword wounds
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is an arrow or sword wound that has pierced and the patient is dying from loss of blood: then it is understood that the wound is mortal. If not, and if the wound is fresh and all its sinews are intact, do not put powder or bind it with bandages on the wound until the first hour; nor should you bind it to the sinew unless I have said so before, but rather look to the heart, and treat the patient accordingly; but apply soothing ointment, and tie it twice a day. If you don't have ointment, put fine cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if no spasm comes, nor does he show signs of severe pain from the heart, or strangulation: and when you see his bones are recovering, it is understood that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Instruct the patient to apply poultices and other remedies as long as he is healthy; and if she cannot heal or recover, then look carefully to see that there is an abscess; if the treatment is done as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, on the front, back, or sides, when treated for that which is in front; if it is large, sutured; and if small, poulticed; and if pushed into the bone, and there are punctured pieces, whichever suits the wound, and removes the foulness if they exist; and if they do not exist, then allows the wound to dry out, so that the extraction of the pus will ease it, and for other wounds, the judgment is made as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Letting out the contents of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Letting out the contents of the abdomen is great and small; because of the large wound, no intestine can be left, nor the joints of the intestines, for that reason they have to be let out; and the costal area is more painful, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, for this reason we put in fewer stitches on the intestines when we don't put them back up, because they swell quickly and feel pain, so they go back in again, and for that reason it's better to have a clean cut, so that we can put the intestine back in its place like others do; and I will tell you how the operation of letting out the abdomen is done in four ways: two common stitches are used on the belly button, and the stitches for other types of wounds on the body are also common, but there are two other specific stitches that are only used for these types of wounds; and all of them are more suitable for the belly button operation, and I will tell you each one and explain it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I have a small wound and there is no blood coming out from the intestines, and it's not very painful to treat, this is one of two ways: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, treat him in one way: moisten the wound with a sponge or one pound of cloth soaked in water only, or cook in water with vinegar and spices, and then stop the intestines until they are deflated; and do this sometimes, so that he may be cooled down and deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or boil it and boiled meat, because by this the entry is blocked by a little thing; and if it cannot enter, do a small wound at the instrument of which they strike the varicose veins; and first do what reduces the size, so that none should cut him until there is great necessity and he needs it; and these are the instruments to split: pierce inside in the horn and avoid not, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines bulge out, then restore it according to its natural shape in its own place, if you have the power, for this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, if it so happens that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then raise the head and the stomach higher than the lower parts, and similarly consider that when treating large wounds or small ones, you must take this into account.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use the material that has been prepared, and then have a tender and pitiful minister who holds all the bleeding in one hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common way of suturing, where you prick an needle or more, according to the size of the wound's width, and leave two spacers from the top of the wound, two fingers' breadth apart, and then stitch the two layers of skin with the two layers of thread under the skin, so that you pierce them all the way through that part, and gather the four stitches; then tie a double strand of thread around the needle, and gather the two stitches of the wound together, and leave two spacers from the top again, and prick another needle; then stitch with the same needle as before, and do not stop until the wound is tied tight; and it's better that the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because fine needles can pierce through the entire flesh, and coarse ones cannot fit well into it; for this reason they should be medium-sized. And it's not good to push the needles too far from the flesh and under the skin, so that they do not pierce and open the wound in front of the stitches; then cut off the ends of the needles, so that the patient does not bleed while sleeping, and put strips or cloths over the needle ends to keep them from moving, and leave them until the wound is sewn tight; and this way of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it uses a single thread, two and a half fingers' breadth wide, as one stitch, and a similar way is common, where you gather the two layers of skin and the two layers of thread under the skin together to an anchor point, using a strong thread. And when you have pierced all four stitches, then pull the needle back to the starting point in the same manner as cutting the threads; and do not cease until the wound is sewn tight; and this costure is done for seven years by one man, who stitched a wound that was on his belly from a cutlery, which was larger than a palm's width, and it had intestinal parts two palms' wide, and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I have a part of the intestine removed; for it was twenty-four hours old, and the wound had been closed fifteen days, and the cure was successful, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the wound had been dressed with poultices that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not apply any ointment to him, because I was in a place where there was no remedy, nor any medicine found; and I placed cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it in honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you two ways of suturing: take the needle and insert it into the same spot from which it came; when it pierces the wound straight through, if you push the stump or cut in the direction you've sewn, or where you've inserted the needle, and pierce the other side from the same spot as before; and this way of sewing is such that you sew like a tailor sews fur, leaving once the scalp on one side and pressing it on the other, until the suturing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	In the second way of sewing, as the Greeks call it, it is done in this manner: whoever sews them, joins the two parts together naturally and applies one end of a string to another end, in that manner: prick an awl or thread close to the chief with the skin, and pierce only that part; then turn the awl and pierce from the opposite side, inside those two joints; then pierce one and the other from the opposite side, on both sides of the thread, which is on the other side. That is the second way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	The Greeks say this phrase, and no one testifies to it, that you must sew the belly with two needles, if there is thread in each; and you should push one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew seams; and know that when the wound is deep in the belly, the sewing is more painful than for others' bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The jugemen of the wound is such as that of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound whole with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, then remove the intestines, and the cartilage; then put on powder with a cloth to clean, and if the fire has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and thread the needle, and sew the suture, and the mirach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, so put on immediately, as soon as they come to move bowels, cotton wool, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But you do not need other medicine besides these in case of simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound is making infection in the main members, it is fitting to put on a light linen cloth in hot olive oil, or in rose oil, around the wounds, and beneath the scales; and if he feels pain or purulence in bowels, and this happens often, so he will be benefited by clisterization of black wine juice, and similarly when purulence comes to the intestine; and it is lighter to heal the large intestines than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "young" cannot heal when they are rotten and it is because of the nature of veins that they are, and also because of the subtlety of all the body, and its approach to its own nature of darkness.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the wound is discharging pus, if it is brought back again to its own place like the intestines, while it is fresh; and if it becomes old and turned black, it is to be thought that you should cut out the black one which comes from it, because there will come no blood anymore, for there are veins and arteries; then strike what is between the ligature, and let the two fingers hang down from the lower part of the wound until the discharge stops, and the pain subsides.
de la routure dou boueil	of the burn of a hot iron.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I saw that one man was wounded or pierced by a lance; and it was the wound on his right stomach, and became inflamed and developed into an abscess, and there were emissions and venterizement; I applied treatment according to what I know, and didn't cease until he was healed, and the pain ceased.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the sick person had an illness in his stomach; and there was no harm, but he recovered in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimentors said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, one must tie it in this manner: take large threads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has passed over the mouth, put it on both lips so that they constrict the mouth; and then hit the head, and it will stay if he cannot untie it; then insert another thread after in that same manner as before, until the wound is completely healed; and cost the price.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, and there comes no nuisance to the patient, and it can be tied to the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the head of that thread from the intestine which is very desheathed, and then tie to the head of that fine thread twisted linen, then pour the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and then pull it back in the stitch; and this kind of sewing without force except according to the road of expectation and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, equally when it is in one of the intestines' ribs, there will be neither strength nor health, but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Injuries or abscesses that occur when something becomes old and withers away are called "fistulas," and itself when it is swollen and has turned into a bowel.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is according to the nodulation of hard and white flesh that is free from pain and swelling, or it appears when the swellings have turned into a bowel, and sometimes is clear and flat, and at other times swollen; sometimes little, and at other times more so. I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed will suffer, because it has come through seven causes: namely, from the smallness of the blood or flesh; or due to malice; or because it is blocked with hard flesh, inside and on the lips, which prevents fresh blood from flowing out; or there is too much swelling; or the body is weak, and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for healing; or because corruption is a sign of pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow to digest, and late in recovering health, and flees by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have shown all these causes, signs, and cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you about the remedy for fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula has in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that arise from the great veins and arteries, and muscles, or at the scrotum, or in the intestine, or bladder, or on some of the ribs, or on the spine of the back, or on any joint of the hands or feet; and if they occur to the property of the principal member, and like symptoms.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all those fistulas that are of this kind are of harm to the constitution, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not arise as I have said, and you have put your faith in the cure, and you see it fail, take a stick or iron rod, depending on whether the fistula is straight or curved; and if the fistula is crooked, try to find a subtle way to pierce it, because sticks will bend in the curvature; and if the fistula has lost its finger and cannot be found by trying to probe with sticks, then pierce through one of the fingers, for the moisture is too short on one of the fingers and muddies; then seek out the correct remedy according to what I have said, knowing whether it is in a bone or nerve, and ask the patient where he feels pain when you press with your hand, and find out where he feels it; and when you know exactly where it is, and if it is far from the joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or any of those things I have told you, copy accordingly as I have said, and cut away the rotten and corrupt flesh that is inside; and then continue with the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in the straight direction, so too pierce to a deeper point whenever possible; then put moistened medicine on the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the remaining superfluity at the bottom; and then apply clean bandages or linen clothes until it is healed; and if it does not heal by this means, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, pierce.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	The patient or his relatives should have no other vein or artery that can cause pain or injury, as we have said. And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and swelling, then they must keep it covered until the corruption is completely removed, then the doctor should do many things to make him whole again; and if he is not whole, and returns to his previous state, such as before, then you will see that you are not far from death: if the bone is exposed and remains so until you are at the bottom, and all the corruption is removed, then restore the limb; and if it is thus whole again, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, then you will see that the corruption has gone too far, and you will not be able to save yourself; if there is no other remedy than to resort to nature's method; and if there are small bones corrupted, and you can treat them with tongs, if the instrument is suitable for this, and if there are many bones, then remove all of them; but if moisture causes trouble, and there is neither error nor fear, then cut and moisten and cure the bones, and deliver the limbs.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If it pricks at its base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	It was the youth who had been in his thirtieth year, who had pain in his leg from within the body, so that the matter came to his leg and he fled from a large abscess, and had no other cause for opening; but the physicians by their folly operated on it so much that they opened the abscesses, and were corroded with many matters, and became fistulas, and there came much pus that everyone cried out over bowels and moist body; and many physicians gave him cure in two years, and there was no sign of skill in the art of hands, until I was called, and I went to see his leg and the medicines used on him, and what corroded by the pus caused great body; and his legs became red with the body's flesh, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of the pus-filled wounds, and then I searched for all the wounds, and found that some came together from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I have hastened and cut into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and infected, and corruption was spreading from the bone inside; I saw what appeared to be the bone corrupted, and thought that there was no other corruption except for what I had removed; and I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, but could not heal it; and then I tried again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and saw it, and then put it back, and thought of soldering the joint; but I couldn’t do so until I cut into one palmful of the bone, and pulled it out to its entire length, and then restored it with medicines; and he was healed and soldered quickly, and did not need to try again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of the fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood is often performed, but it is always successful and the person recovers completely, and a hard cartilage forms in place of the bone, and he becomes of good disposition and has no discomfort or opposition in all things, whether at rest or coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, if it seems proper to do this: take a ligature and tie around the head of the bone which opens up, and command that they stretch it upwards; and take another ligature of linen thicker than the first one, and tie it above the cartilage that has uncovered the bone, and so fix it, as long as you feel the cartilage come undone, and uncover the cartilage on top where you see healing, lest the bone is discolored by the corruption; and place a splint or a board below the bone to cover up the corrupted cartilage; and let it heal as long as you can see and feel the corruption, and then let it heal again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et se li os est corrumpus, and n’apert mie, and li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;
dou feu	From fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	When the limbs are infected from within or from without, and when you have medicine applied to that corruption by the treatment of medicines, if it does not profit at all, it is necessary to cover that limb up to the point where the corruption begins, so that the patient escapes death by that means or by the malice which is greater, from the fault of the limb; and this sign is such that the limbs become blackened, as if they were burned with fire, and afterwards the corrosion spreads to other members, taking over all the body; if you hasten to cover it, but if it is due to the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like scorpions from the sea and wry necks, if there is a corruption at the head of the two, then they will strike again and will not give him space before he comes near with his hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s’elle vient jusques à la main, si la coupe a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne venue jusques bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le coupe au coude; et s’elle passe le coude, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amener fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la coupe après l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si coupe à la jointure du genouil; et s’elle vient desus le genouil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre lien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descouverte; puis le coupe ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'ils soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'ils naissent.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, and demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; and puis ront et perce, and en saut li bowe, and demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en tel maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sur le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein i poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sous I autre drapel selonc la quantitee dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent pour oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en tel maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the breasts are swollen with wind after many days, know that the breasts do not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle veins are cut after long time, do not despair of your health, for healing is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some who take a long time to recover from the effects of bloodletting in their wounds, and those that do the opposite; and if they have a swelling in the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not heal; and if they swell with gas, and are far away, add dry medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment defined by its properties, because it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the back medicine; take ointment defined and mix it with olive oil, and rosewater equal in substance; then apply and use. The same thing makes cooked honey swollen, when ointments defined are not present, or you take mirror and aloes and incense, and grind them, and make powder over the honey when it is on fire; and then wrap it around the breast, and do it once a day, and if an apothecary long time does not administer this remedy, and roots of celestial lilies, which are as fine flour and centaury; and use simple or composite remedies: grind them, and make powder, and apply to the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, know that corruption has reached its end, and made an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in ligaments; then take treatment for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the elephant
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	An abscess forms under the skin of an elephant in the pouch of the hand, or the foot, or perhaps it occurs elsewhere; and when it is small, and no care is taken for it, if it becomes a swollen abscess, and runs and inflames so much as to reach the root of the elephant’s trunk, and possibly even the entire trunk; and comes forth corrosive pus, so that it causes great pain, and there are large swellings on both sides, and a foul odor.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the section on division, and if the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary to copy onto the wound all the remaining superflueness that has remained from the elephant’s skin, and afterwards cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is a great help when the bones are sound and the joint is healthy; and if the joint presses on the spine, and begins to pierce it, so that blood comes out, you should put the weight under the joint so that the spine touches nothing but the joint, and push against the back of the joint, and strike with a gentle and light blow, and apply the remaining part of the joint medicines sharp and corrosive to remove all; then treat the limbs until it is sound.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosive is in the bone, when you strike it and pull out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it will not heal; and if you see the tendon corroding, strike it in the joint, just like it was said before, then treat the limbs until they are sound; and if it is rusty and hardened, and it causes great pain, it is necessary to heal it first; then strike the joint with a sharp blow at a short distance above, so that the cut does not come through the bone below, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if there is something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from a bad ear
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some swellings that form in the hands of some men by chance are entirely charnel, and sometimes there is a bone or an angle, and never do they appear in any joint or at the root of a joint, where it does not come from some other source.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those that form swellings in no other part than the hand do not move, and those that form at the joint of the hand sometimes move; a man who is charnel in size is lighter, in this manner: his size at the root of a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that form at the root of a joint are crippled to be cured: if they stay under the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born or must at the rear, it is advisable to first copy around the curvature just at the bone, then cut the bone at a suitable thread for that one, then treat until it be safe.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sound that comes forth when something is assembled comes by birth, or from a sudden injury, or from fireburning, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it must be sewn, so that they repair according to their natural forms; then put between two pieces of moist linen soaked in rose oil, lest they stick together; or put between subtle pieces of cloth, until it sticks, as it seems fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the sound comes to one of its joints with the palm, cut the wound as it seems fitting.
des vils	the old ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	They are great veins swollen and congested with melancholic flux that come into many limbs of the body; and more often happen to those in legs who go barefoot or work and carry loads, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer no purging of gall and then the balm of the basilic.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment is done in two ways: one is to cut them and treat the black vein; and the other way is to tie the vein and apply force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting treatment is done in this manner: first he rises the leg to hot water very strongly until the great vein becomes subtle; then he strains the swollen leg of the sick from above the cistern just to the lower part near the knee; then he cuts the vein either at one, two, or three places with a broad stroke; then he lifts and treats the black vein by hand, from head to toe, as long as not enough blood can come out so that the virtues of the sick person can endure; and then he ties it up and commands him to eat meat, excluding black gall; and he repeats the evacuation and treatment whenever the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The alevemens of the limb is according to this manner: take the leg of the patient, if it has much hair, then put it in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and swollen; and if you don't have vinegar, heat it over fire, and then cut directly into the vein at the length of the knee bone or near the ankle; then sew the skin tight, and scrape the vein from each side, till it appears when one feels it; and it looks like a white thread; then pour out the fluid downwards, till it is raised from the skin, and then put it back into place lightly, as you have done, and cut again in another place following three; then sew the skin above the vein till it appears; then raise it to the knee, as you did before; then pull and raise joint by joint, till it is all straightened, and then cut.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the joint is crooked and twisted and has been pulled out of place along with it, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it roughly, but do not cover it up; and pull it in the way that we have previously instructed.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron that is used to cut the joint when cutting a crooked joint should not be twisted, but rather straight; and it is thick for this purpose, because if it were fine, it would pierce the vein.
de la voinne civile	of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is tied off in the leg, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and sometimes it springs up elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of corruption that comes from beneath the skin, just as serpents come inside the body towards the flesh, tying between skin and bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein cut are such that there comes a great inflammation in the leg, then hold the fleshy parts and begin to cut forth the vein, just like one would cut out a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the cut opens, it is wise to envelop a piece of linen around the area from one and a half fingers to two and a half, and the vein, and leave the linen on the leg, and whenever you are not in the path, envelop the linen over the vein, and the new skin; and if it is too long, cut off part of it, and envelop the remaining part, but do not cover its root, until it is all healed. For if you cut it, it will come back into the flesh, and lead to infection and rot or pus at that place, and a bad illness; therefore it is wise to treat it little by little, just up to the shoulder, and leave nothing behind in the body; for sometimes this vein heals after four pounds of time, or ten, and one hand has come to me, to whom it emerged from ten feet long, and when you cut it, there will be a loss of one pound or more, and the root will sink into the bone, so that all the substance is gone; and clean out the material inside, and apply new medicines every day to prevent rot, then treat the cure as the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein the blood flows, and even when it opens up in the joint of the foot or the foot, and a lot of pus comes out, and so does the rain; then cure them as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between leather and skin
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "maladie de buef" in our land because it often affects cows, and it's a small worm that is born between leather and skin, and moves all over the body, up and down, causing pain everywhere, from member to member, until it bursts through the skin or escapes, and causes foul odor; and it is filled with putrid humors, like serpents, lice, and worms in the belly; and there's doubt about its malice, because when it moves around the body, and it rises to the head, and sometimes enters the ear, it can cause destruction, and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the cure and treatment, so that he can walk again: then it is necessary to cut the limb above and below with a strong tight bandage, then strike above and treat him, and if his veins are filled into the flesh and you do not find them, then cauterize with fire on top, until he dies; and the greater harm he does, so is that he runs out of oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming towards your eye or close to the oil, then bind below him the sorcery form, then strike above, and treat him; and it is necessary to use the patient with the purification of the body by soluble medicines for the bad humors that are poured in, and he should be cured of putrid waste through meats overcooked.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, moving from member to member; and I have seen this, which I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of one of her arms; and after a while, I saw it move like a worm on her shoulder, faster than any other thing, as if it were alive when it cut through her to another place; the pain moved from that place, and settled on her shoulder, and then it ran all over her body, so much that she came to the other arm; and then she told me that she was tormented around the body, just like I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly astonished how it moved from member to member, because I had never seen this illness in that manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I have wanted to say that it is not good for anyone who has much pain from their joints to move around with another, but I did not want to do so, just as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because of this that women had hard bodies, and uncovered breasts, and because of this appeared to be a windy constraint; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are full of life, and have moist bodies and uncovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see how to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if they open themselves as we have said, bind tightly both above and below, then strike them so that the windy constraint goes away from their body; and cauterize the wound; and if you do not see it in your eyes, if the doctor of those who are tied up by the winds, such as fetid pills, and serpent pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse in their forms and according to the shapes of the bodies or where they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is that there are those with large points, small, pointed tips, and blunt ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and pieces; and of those that pierce into any member, they penetrate according to two manners: either in the principal member piercing through the brain, liver, heart, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	So that when it pierces into any one of these members and shows the signs of death which I will tell you about later, you must take care to extract that arrow, for death comes after in many different dispositions; and if this sign does not appear, and the arrow is not stuck fast, then throw it away and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, and the signs of the brain when blood comes out and wounds the bone, and a seizure occurs above the brain, is when there is a stroke, epilepsy, and insanity, and redness and inflammation of the eyes, and a burning sensation in the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it may occur without force of the nose, or the ears; and by chance it affects the speech and the voice; and it appears as if there is pus forming on the white, moist wound, like blood from a chariot; and when this sign appears to you, then take care of the patient, and remove the wound since it has not set in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the vein when it bleeds or blood comes out is that it is near the left groin, and feels like it has been struck with a hard object; but not empty. And by chance, the vein may be silent like the worms, and with cold sweat and cold fever, and fainting: these signs then indicate that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrowhead is that it does not stay on the surface when blood does not flow out from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs high and feels cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead falls into the covering of the chest, it is located near the small ribs; and it brings a great blow and great pain, and he sighs; and all his limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead falls into the stomach, by chance it stirs up from the wound any indigestible thing of the flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead falls into the belly, and there is no stirring of flatulence through the intestine by the passage of the bowels, then he has no hope in the cure or in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead is discharged into the bladder, and urine flows out suddenly and comes forth from the wound, and the patient feels great pain: note that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arm and shoulder and neck and elbow and shoulder joint and spine on his back and fists and chest and elbows and legs and limbs, are saved according to their specific types.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is stuck in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because of that I advise you to do so.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened in one house with an arrow stuck deep into the neck or throat root, I tried to remove it, and pulled from the other side of the ear fat, and it was quickly healed.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	Instruct the patient to tie a cloth around a stick inserted into the fat of oil under the parchment, and the cloth is stretched out, and no more than the tip should touch the fist, and it was a large Turkish bow made from all iron until now; the game was cured, and there were no further bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And tie a cloth around the neck of a Christian, and it was an Arab cloth around the ears: I shaved the beard, and made very subtle incisions until I tied it, and the Christian was cured.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And tie a cloth around the belly of an old man who was lying there or on the ground, and I thought he was dying; but then after 30 days passed without any change in his condition, I cut into the cloth, inserted it, and tied it, and there were no further bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If you see a man who has been shot with an arrow to the shoulder or back, and the wound was sewn shut; and the arrow remained inside for a long time, without interfering with his natural disposition, nor causing any trouble in any of his bodily works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man who has been shot in the face with an arrow and had the wound sewn shut; and it remained like that for a long time, causing him great pain; and much like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And saw an arrow stuck in the king's servant, who had been shot in the neck and was leaning to one side; and the arrow remained embedded for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound to be very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I have no idea what you're talking about.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I tried to cut off the swollen part of the intestine with a needle, and placed it under the left lung, thinking that it would help deflate the swelling, and it seemed like the swelling on the side of the belly.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the swollen part under my hands for some days, and solved the wound directly, and kept it that way until the patient felt the swelling in his nose, and he said to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put medicine on the wound that was corrosive and caused it to open, and tried it, and felt the head of the swelling which dried up in the lung; then I adjusted with care through the opening of the wound using that medicine until the swelling became visible; and after four months, it burst badly, and I burned out all of them on one side and the other, and could not escape; therefore I did not stop trying to be subtle and ingenious with tools, until I got it one day with well-made tongs, in accordance with what its shape came to at the end of this chapter, until I did so, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of extracting arrows: so that you place your cure on what I do not say, because books cannot grasp everything; but wise masters comprehend little and a great deal, and take good care and new work, and new instruments, for removing strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows only come out of the members where they are inserted in two ways: either by going through them as if they were clean, or from another side; and when it happens so that it breaks through and enters, that is an arrow entering the sinew, and now it never comes out.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't break now, let it be until the flesh is rotten, and come out in an issue; and similarly if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot come out, then let it be so for some days, and move a little each day; and then it comes out, and if it does not break, then pierce into every part inside, until the swelling subsides, and then take it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and stays just near one of the swellings of the brain, and any of the accidents I mentioned to the patient: if you do not treat it, but let it be until they become even after some days, because if the arrow comes just near a certain spot, that's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	In case the arrow is only fixed to the bone alone and does not come out immediately, and the patient stays in bed for some days after this, then he will soon have another accident.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very tightly fixed in this way and cannot come out for long, I have told you to take tapers inside, as I have said; then cure the patient until he is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned to the inside of the body, even though it cannot be seen, and you have no way to feel for it; and if you don't know whether the bowstring has any suitable instrument; and if you cannot reach the wound due to the tightness of the arrow and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then search as long as the wound is great; and try to remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears so that they hold something, cut off the ear that is stuck in two parts, until you can get out of the way that you want, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you may be able to remove it more carefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it once, so that the pain reaches to the nerves until they burst, then take it, because extraction is pleasant.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the symptoms of bloodletting are contrary, if you follow what we have said in this chapter for the cure; and be careful with the incision to the nerve and vein, and put on a remedy as follows so that you can treat the arrow wound safely, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form they were in when they shot the arrow, because it is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot, follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow comes from another side, or it is opening something inside, or if the skin is swollen in that place so that you can see or feel it, then take up your weight, as much as the tongs can hold, and then pull it out: now if it hurts.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is held fast in the bone, turn your hand roundabout, until it enters into the bone, and expand the bone, then pull.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be extracted, leave it alone for a while, and then continue the extraction until it comes out; and if it is still stuck in the arrow, pour the contents of the arrow into its shaft; and if it has been cut, and you see that you must administer an ointment, do so with an instrument of the head, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then pour out, and if the arrow is stuck, pour the instrument in with a point inserted in order to relieve the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is stuck, it is advantageous that you copy all the flesh around or where the venom is, if possible, and then treat the wound as it should.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If they are shot or pierced or in the stomach or bladder or on the side, and it is close to a vein or a nerve, and you cover up if you prick them; and you must avoid covering the vein and the nerve, and then take out, and then bind the wound, if it is necessary; and the treatment until they are healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and thus are:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the hair holder at the end is similar to the feathers of a bird, in order to push onto the tip of the arrow.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of nails to press down on and to apply a poultice is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins on the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Veins from which one is cured are XXXI, because there is sixteen, namely: two branches that are after the ears, called "doug herbech"; and two arteries in two temples appearing; and two veins that are in two cheekbones of two eyes, called "aspire"; and the vein at the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and the two jugulars that are around the neck; and the two veins above the lips of the mouth, which are called "augeherich"; and the two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are cured commonly are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is located on the left side of the body, called by the common people "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast", composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it by the common people "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is located on the right side, called by the common people "vein of the belly", and is above the diaphragm, and that is the one that cures, which opens clearly under the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the artery is the one between the auricular and anular bones, and in two places; and in the leg and foot are three veins: one of them is under the wing of the little finger on the left side, and the second vein which is called "nasse" is at the ankle on the right side; and there is a third vein that is called "lesse", which is located on the other side of the other ankle.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins that are after the ears can help with ancient catharses and migraines; and the quality of the sinner is such as I tell you, and it is that you lift up the head of the sick person, and rub the vein or the veins on a rough cloth; then tie the patient's neck to a wooden ring, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places: if they do not work, and you feel the poults under your neck, it is said that enche; then take the lancet, and pierce through below the vein until you see; then drain and tie, until she is cured; and I have already told about the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sickness of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the sickness of the cephalic vein for ancient maladies, and for emigration, and for inflammation; and those qualities are such that the patients turn their necks in twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "foisseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and press upwards of your hand, or with another thing, and let the wound bleed according to how much you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is clean and never again has a sharp edge.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	It is not right that the edges be too sharp; and the healing of something crooked, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the edge when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The patient's head and neck are of little help if the arms are injured, and the chest, and the back, and the side, as well as the disease of the face; and those who suffer from such injuries will strain their neck by twisting any rope, just like before; then they will recover, and so it is said to be the treatment for a wound that goes through the breast, one inch long, one inch wide, because there is no hair.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the splinter is fine, by chance it breaks; then make a cord of the wound, as much as you have need, and then tie it up tightly, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The wound of the vein near the neck is very valuable, and a strong sore, and diseases of the face, such as emigration and redness that comes on the face, and especially when it is old; and those who have suffered from wounds like this are said to strain their neck, then strain their neck with your left hand, and take out the fine splinter, and put it into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and if you do so now, she will start to recover; and don't go too far, and make a cord of the wound according to your need, then tie her up for one night, because she is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the splinter:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Instruct the patient to bind the arm tight, and at the beginning of surgery, and for many illnesses, and emaciation, and corruption, and herpes, and injuries; and the qualities of the disease are such that the patient should remove his neck from both sides, as we have said; and let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient sit in the other side, then cut a vein of long length slightly, then drain the wound temperately, or until it is necessary; then make another incision in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and tie around the veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke; and let him go to bed just at night, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	About the disease of the liver.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sick of the veins on the lips, above so are aided with coal in the mouth, and with corruption of gums, and tearing of lips, and no pain or inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the blood is such that it is to be done by sitting the patient in front of you, and straining his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one being on the right upper lip and the other on the left, and they can be recognized because they are black, and because there are small black veins around them: strike then both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, strike the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the wound below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	When the wound of the veins is below the tongue if helps after the head-wound, and it's at constricting the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth; and if you cut well after such a treatment if the patient dies between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks below each corner one vein black: cure then both sides, and do not go too deep because there are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck are cut in two common ways: either by poking into a large mitten-shaped mark or an olive-shaped subtle point, which is called "anestil"; and they are cut large or subtle according to the size and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The fire cautery has a long history and is very well known, and it is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins on the neck with a large scar from a great wound that contains many wounds and pus; and this is the form of the fire olive.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle in its point, and it is for healing the veins subtly, where there are subtle wounds lemon.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps in healing the diseases that are below the throat, and on the neck, and on the side, and on the abdomen; and it is necessary for the physician to apply a gentle treatment, and to draw out the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he hits the artery, and bleeding comes out, then he must stain it, as I have said; and he should not prick the flame, but cut like an ass.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open up immediately, then it is necessary to extract it, and change another one; or you want any rain in it, or you sew the vein at the root of the arm: it opens up immediately; and cut the flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the pulse of the vein, then it is also necessary to extract the arm, so that you touch the vein until you know the pulse; then mark the place with a bandage, and tie the arm, and cut the vein at the flame as we have said; and beware that you do not prick the artery when you see the swollen vein, for this is an artery: thus avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to look out if it is protruding in a way similar to the urine of an infant, and if they are not red and subtle, it means there is no artery: hasten then, and put on the bandage long enough, then take off the bandage when they do not bleed much, as it happens many times; tie up your arm, and leave it like that, and do not move the patient's limb; and be cautious, and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	But if they do not bleed when cut, and you see that it is coming out, and the medicine does not bring relief, because the artery is open, and the head of the vein is retreated, stop cutting.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of scar tissue and cut it, and take one half and tie well to the other tomorrow; if they do not bleed, this is good; but if so, as we have said, apply the powders that stop bleeding; and the bleeding will not be worse for mortals with smaller wounds, and the power of the tied wrist.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Instruct the patient to let the blood flow freely while treating wounds on the head and body, since it is composed of basilic and cephalic humors, as we have said; and it is fitting for the lord that he warms himself by the nerve beneath, and if he pricks too hard and causes more pain, he will find the nerve, and it will swell and his injuries will worsen, and by chance, it may not heal; and this nerve often opens many times, and if it does not open in any man for its subtlety, it is fitting that you apply oil to the instrument again; and try to remove the nerve with your own strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then let it run to the long end.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic humor is alleviated by treating wounds on the head and assisting with the eyes; and it is fitting to relieve pain in piercing with olive or myrtle flame, because this is the most safe of all veins, since there is neither nerve nor artery below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Everyone should seek the easier treatment first, and do not grieve over anything if it is needed for the first time, and start again; and by chance the swelling may affect some people when it happens for the first time, but it does not cause anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about healing is that healing is not brought on unless for the purpose of preserving health, and to get rid of diseases before they come; and it should be done in one of the three veins: head, elbow, or groin; and it should be done at the beginning of prayer times, especially after Easter and Christmas, when the sign of replenishment appear; and it should be done on either the first day or the third day after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The sick person who is being treated has no certain diagnosis of his illness, but rather depends on the time of day or night in all hours and at all times; and it is not advisable to heal children before they are 14 years old, nor pregnant women unless for four months prior to their delivery.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	It is not advisable to heal those who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be healed in any way, so that it may happen, if one takes the intestinal contents of a light castor oil, if he has much retained feces, if the veins do not draw out the intestinal superfluities with harmful members; nor will he heal who is too salty of meat, or who is sick with fever, in any manner whatsoever, until he be cured, whether by sickness, vomiting, and deterioration of the bowels, and frequent urination, and fatigue, watching, and striving, and all this by virtue, either of arms or of body; then subtle the humors, without being too fat, by foods and drinks and medicines, to see if it has worked well. Then enter a warm bath, unless anything is forbidden, in order to subtle the sickness, and cure you from the pain through the third, as we have said; and beware that day of work, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be careful and cheerful, and let the healers be higher than those who are being healed, and tie your arms twice or three times, because when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot be drawn out without a mistake; then frot the hands with salves, until they swell, and feel on; then press the sainieres firmly with the flame of a bit of old oil, then put on her a strap of your left hand under that vein when she is being healed, so that the vein does not burst and will fail to be touched by the needle.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	There are veins that run just like strings to the veinkeeper, and there are those that are full of windiness, so when you put on the flame, it retracts, and can't open the vein, and is thus treated in this way; and if you cover the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore, wise scribes must be advised about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; but if not, then reapply a little lower or above quickly, if the veins become swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are swollen, and the patient fears, then let them rest one or two days, and don't tie up the arm: perhaps there will be abscesses coming out; nor should they enter the bath, then reapply the treatment when it pleases them; and if the wound is shallow, or if they want to cut through it subtly, then doubt that it will not burst forth as you see, so fear that same hole with the whole flame directly; and open a little quickly, so that the swelling may go away; for this has happened many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the swollen limb, do not restart the dressing again, and put some pouce of oil upon it, for it lightens the body from the wound, and is moistened by the oil; and thus administer pouce of oil in each dressing that you apply to the veins, to stop the flow of the wound's blood; and this same thing does good and serves as a remedy when you put pouce of oil on the limb; so subtlety and sparingness are necessary when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a great abscess comes in which has happened many times, especially when the vein is only open at those times or when the opening of the vein is small, you hasten, and put on the limb a moist sponge soaked in water and with a little salt, and restrain it for an hour; it is to your advantage to do this after the issue of the wound from the vein, and if it stays on the limb for several days without any sign or color, it will not be harmful; and if you see, put on some aloes or mirror juice remade in calamine, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: take your hand up, and if you find it swollen at the point of pressure of the hand, then that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on any of what we have said, for by chance cutting without an artery; but dry the wound first to harden it, then apply another treatment, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each one according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it be left to issue until it is red; and if you see it is large, let it be left until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it be cooled.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	Instruct the one who is strong and robust, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the gashes be wider; and for the weak, do the opposite, and it will be more beneficial and frequent, and you must heal him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing is safe from bleeding out of veins and numbness of nerves, and is worth more than being healed with a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him who needs bleeding to heal his blood, it is beneficial to give a meaty poultice in the juice of green pomegranate; if he is hot, apply it three times or four; if he has a cold temperament, mix the meaty poultice with powdered pain in honey syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a very fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if the hand is bound with a bandage, after much blood has been drawn, it is fitting that he hums broth of vinegar and sweet syrup, and uses other things as we have said in this division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to vent out some of that arm, and make it healthy again, it is fitting, when he is weak from great blood loss, that he heals a little at a time, according to the continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to vent out some of that arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong constitution, will heal in seven hours after the first bleeding, or perhaps at nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to be healed of another side, so that he may heal the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is severed, so let it be left and do not tighten it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a wound needs to be treated the second time, so treat it in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein swells with the arm because it is swollen in place of the vein on the head, for this is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of swathing if it is that the patient pours his hand in hot water, until the swelling subsides; then tie it lightly, so that the vein appears well, and now treat the wound with a strip, not too wide or too long; and if there are large strips, and you sew them well near the joint of the hand, and they do not burst out, then put the hand in hot water again, and let the wound heal in the water, until you have enough; and if it remains like this, do not pour the hand into hot water again, for one puts it more in a state of fever than in a state of calm; and swathing from this vein is safer than any other vein.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sickness of the salvation of the right hand is worth all diseases of the belly, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the wound opens, if you see; and if it opens the wrong way, and if you hit it all around, do not grieve anything; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are quite raw from the bone, and then put the hand in hot water again, if it is not frozen in the wound, and will not come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have cut the wound as necessary, put oil and thread on it to sew hastily, and do so for every one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness in the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do it just as I told you to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the spleen is worth more than all other diseases that are outside the body, such as sickness of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the hips and legs old, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of his spleen are such that if the patient drinks hot water and puts a stone in it, and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and puts above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and through the foot they go much blood; so it heals then or becomes larger at the ankle, or is made larger.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you save the joint above the foot, so beware of the nails that are below, and the healing through as it would be like cutting; and may the wounds heal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be removed, he must put his foot into water, and let the vein be well cleansed.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the suture is not good the first time, he must reattach it above a little piece because the foot is salt; do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and do so with the sponge of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle and its pain is like that of the calf when it's inflamed.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the quality of its pain is such that the patient is in the bath, and he strains above the ankle for four days, because otherwise the vein does not open; and when it opens, tie him with all the means you can, and cross him over; and make sure that you copy what has been written, because the skin is tight, and they are very much swollen at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find it true, then the man will have pain in his head or in his back on one foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the swelling; and make as much care with the wound that you see, and then release the bandage, and put on cotton and bind it; he is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wind sickness
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Wind sickness is made of horns, or thorns, or glass; and wind sickness is done in two manners: either by wounding and drawing out the wound, or by wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this wind sickness which is done by wounding and cutting out the wound is done in twelve places of the body: for some are all in the head; and others in the neck; and two others in each side of the neck; and the wind-sickness under the chin; and under the shoulders; and under the eyebrows; and on both arms; and on both legs; and on both ankles; and it does not treat wounds, except for small cuts scattered throughout the flesh, as is done with a vein bleed, because it weakens no one, just like when one bleeds from a vein; and it should be avoided, neither hot nor cold, in any disease that comes from overeating, until all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it's swelling in the morning, we order that he be ventilated after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The inflammation of the tonsils relieves the distress of the head… when it comes to the eyes, and should not be after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in place of the inflammation of the cephalic region, and should not be used by those who have cold complexion or constipation, because it causes great harm; and therefore, do not use it on those who have watchful vigilance, or those with head colds or fever.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become blind, and therefore should put the ventilation device a little lower by the doubt of blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The wound on the neck is in place of the vein of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it must be constricted at the waist, and cut open of the channel of the pomegranate, and swollen, and replenished; and one must not push too much, because if she holds too tightly, so it will lead to an obstruction or a twisting of the stomach or the liver.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wound on the neck is in place of both the breasts of the neck if it causes pain to the head, eyelids and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is near the vein of the basilica; therefore one must command the lord that he presses his hand so that he does not cut the artery, and does not come in contact with the blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wound under the chin is in place of diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is near the veins of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders value a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the sides are worth as much as three veins in the arm, because they bring forth blood from these large veins; and instruct the lord that he should not pierce too deeply, for the nerves and arteries are bare there.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The wound on the backside is worth as bruises of the fundament, and of diseases there; it is necessary that the wound be great and of earth, to well treat it; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and thus it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The wounds on the legs heal widely because they draw forth blood from all the body, and are worth ancient pains of the rain, and of gout, and of bladder, and reduce swellings; and are equal to two groins, and two knees; and they weaken the body after a long time, and make come fever in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Instruct the patient to put on a ventouse first when it is empty and well-tempered, and hold it in place firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease this until you see the vein turn red and swollen, and bleed from the wound; then stop, and remove the ventouses, and be careful with the body, because there are many who have such a serious case, and you can use clerestory (holes) to gaze at them: it is necessary to cut once only, and it is wise to make large wounds, and deep ones as well; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is small, so cut again twice: once to subtlety the way of the large wound.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is wise to cut a third time; and when we want to treat the small wound little by little, we should strike only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	Instruct us if you wish to draw much blood, so often we will repeat it; and if the wound is deep, take two fingers inside, and press hard until the edges are perceived suddenly, and cover that which has thick skin and firm flesh, for they have more pores, apply oil of apricot, or sweet almond oil, or oil from the seeds of cucumber, and if it's in yver, then use oil of cresson, or of lye, or camomille, or any similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If the ecchymosis is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balsam, or aneth oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If that person has healthy skin and large pores, do not put oil on them, but rather wash with water from a rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain berry water, or any similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, so lifts himself up from this place, or from water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And he who has large superfluences rises up from old wine, or from water of sycamore, or from aniseed decoction, or from camomile, and similar things; and does not take medicine beforehand with vinegar before the bath nor after the bath for one hour or two; and does not sleep afterwards when he has been bled and when he is bleeding.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And therefore if one who is cured has colic, and his belly is not too swollen and inflamed; then it is suitable for him to take cold things, such as apples, grapes, endives, and lettuce at rest, and similar things; and pure broths, and charcuterie of chestnuts, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	Et cil qui a froide complexion, so he should drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and little meat, and eat small and small fowl and birds and pie; and the day it gets loose, he must drink more than eat; and it's fitting to give some people vinegar or mustard once a year before loosing wind, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let subtlety be without, but it's not fitting that those who are stout should drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The ventouses that are placed to inflame are those placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and on the gout, and on the belly and the groin, because this member does not suffer from being struck at, and is only forced when there is an attraction of blood from one part to another, just as we put ventouses on the breasts when they are sore; to loosen the viscosity that is in the limb, just as we put ventouses on the belly and on the groin to soften the limb; and to relieve pain, when there is inflammation or piercing, relieving it by its attractive power by chance, or stopping the piercing of its place; and thus done when placing a ventouse on the liver and on the mouse when there is retained swelling, and these ventouses are empty to suck only; and sometimes they are placed with fire, and sometimes plain water, just as in certain diseases that cause pleurisy, and in such a manner that we fill the ventouse with hot or cold water, or with herbs cooked according to it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cautery administered to the patient is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And they should have two fingers of length and half a palm from the root, and one finger inside the middle with a small puncture, as if to put an awl, and it is made of iron, soft towards it so that it does not prick the patient when placing on the limb; and in the middle there should be a cross-bar of iron or steel, to hold a bandage in place, and they are large and small, according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the ventouses of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones are more suitable for weak people than fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one must put this ventouse on the limb: take a bandage of wax or linen and place it inside the ventouse through the cross-bar that is inside the ventouse, so that the light may be at the bottom of the ventouse without burning the patient; then put it on the limb, and let the two fingers we mentioned above, placed on top of the puncture, so that when you want to release it, if there's vapor, you take out the ventouse; and take a bandage as before, and rebind often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case of someone with inflammation of the pleura, who is sick with fever, has no pulse or pericardium, and is brought in only when they are full of fever, and placed on a limb alone, that's how it looks:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suction is only applied to limbs where you cannot put suction on the smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones; and in their nostrils, like two or nails, and other similar ones; because of the quality of the user, if you find that they are in soft, clear water without any injury, take them; and place a nut in clean, soft water, until they become familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be suceded by vein and suction, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the suction; and when they are full, and clear, if that's possible to put suction, do so because this is much after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If it is not so, then lift the limb out of its bed, and then to water, very well, and then inspect; and if the limbs are too healthy after the treatment with poultices, wet the dressings of linen in cold water, and put on them, until they are dried off; and if they dry too much, put vitriol crushed or salt, or similar things, until they are dried; or you put on moist peeling of fava beans onto the limb, and let them be there until they are absorbed by the limb; so it will now heal; and if you have more need, take other poultices.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the poultices do not take effect, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or prick it with an awl until the poultice comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the wound, they will dry; and when you see that they are dripping, then powder some aloes and crushed silver, or cinder, so they will now dry.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	The book of fractures begins.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and its treatment involves restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know well, dear son, that the art of this chapter has never been found in any of the ancient books or letters, and no one can read them; and because of this, the science is lost in our land, for I have not found anything good among them; and I know nothing except by the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied thoroughly and treated, through experience, and by my daily custom; and I have written down here what contains it, condensed at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are needed, just as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in this prologue of this book the matters of the word and the chapters which the wise men put their understanding on, and to keep silent, so that those who have experienced it will learn and acquire this noble art, and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a break or dislocation or twisting or cutting comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick person from one side and the other, so that no one thing hinders you, due to weakness of body, or illness, or old age; or if the joints are too loose, or too cold; and do not give them hot foods, such as chilled soups, and charred meat of fowl and deer, and do not drink wine, and do not eat any fatty meats, and do not stuff yourself too much with viands that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain that there is an open abscess or spread of material on the limb; if the patient returns to their previous behavior.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bones start to restore themselves, it is fitting that you nourish the patient with foods that produce great swelling, or where there has been viscosity, such as when bread is cooked in water, and broth, and milk, and eggs, and pork fat, and fish, and fresh beef, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For nourishment produces swelling, which represents the breaking (of bones).
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that old and decrepit bones cannot be well repaired or soldered again according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children; but there is no cure, for you will place a large splint over the broken bone, which holds together the joint with the member, so that it becomes as before; and do not make them work too much, because for this they must be nourished with great foods, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And so it has been discovered that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the thigh or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that split open, and others that cut in, like the thickness of a goose feather to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And when there is a fracture with an open wound, and also fractures that have just a small split or crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each type has its own instrument and proper tool for restoration, according to what the memory tells in its place; and it is known that fractures of bone occur because of the joint's twist, and are wide open by nature, and sound like a crack when pressed on with the finger; and if there isn't any twisting or crookiness where the joint touches, and the patient doesn't feel great pain, unless there is no fracture; but it can still have some twisting, or splitting, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not fitting to move your hand, but apply the medicine that comes after this, and then bind it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the broken limb that is in the arm, and are two parts joined together, you must now put them to equal point, so that abscesses do not come; and if abscesses come, you should leave it alone for a day or two, until they are healed; then place it at ease as you can, easily and surely; and know that the restoration of this limb is lighter than the restorations where there are pieces; then bind it, as needed.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and you extend two parts, whether it is a great limb or a small limb, or two cords, or one cord and a small limb; and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb are cut short, you should rebuild on all kinds of joints with the help of your art, as much as possible, and take care that through your work, there does not come to the patient any further lesion or pain; and repair well both joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And the patient will feel it well in the hand if you think that it is not right: if the dressing is set up perfectly, and not too tightly strained or pressed, like those who make them come by their work, incising and contraction to the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is put to rest, instruct the patient well that it does not move at all, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and take good care that the limb be so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	But when it feels no pain at all, it is not entirely at rest, and you must put him in a suitable disposition so that he feels no pain; and take care that he is placed correctly, lest twisted movements occur when he is restored to his former state; and the quality of the broken limb will be according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The member is broken in different pieces and in various sizes and forms.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For the small members, like arm and shoulder: cover them with soft, moist cloth; and for the larger ones, like thigh and knee: cover them with a wide and strong bandage. The broad bands encircle the entire limb, constricting it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap. Then tie around the top of the break with light straps, three or four according to the size of the member, and bind your hand tightly on the strap, then go up to the top of the break and tighten less, until the break loosens a bit; and smooth out the bandage gradually, so that you grasp a large portion of the healthy limb; then take another bandage, and turn back towards the broken part; then go down to the lower part of the break and tighten moderately, not too tightly or too loosely, as we have said earlier; then put cloth or rags between the bands until they are evenly spaced; then tie everything up from above with a strong band, and then put your well-made straps on top, if there is an abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, put up a soothing poultice to the abscess, and who cuts out the inflammation, and leaves it for some days; then strain on those arteries, and make a caustic gash of one-eighth inch in circumference, or of wood used to make flails, or palm fronds, and do according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is fitting that the artery which one puts on the break is slightly larger and wider than the others; and be as long as it needs for the limb either small or large; then strain on those arteries just as you did at the first ligature, then tie above with a thread so quickly as in the first ligature; looser is above, tighter below; and it is fitting that the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, but of good flax cloth, for if the thread are thick, as I have wanted to make works from foolish folk who made their ligatures from twine of linen yarn twisted, and this is a great error, because the ligature cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and does not suit that there should be between each artery less than two fingers' breadth.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the arrows of these stars after being restrained in their healthy state, he places over them sores of linen or wool, so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is with a fracture and the bones are broken, I will tell you the cure after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not wise to strain the bones of all the members the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the members are large, it is not wise to put a bow on them every day, except after 4 or 7 days, or more, according to the security of the surrounding area; and see here how the ancient surgeons used to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour from which is held by the walls of the mill, mix with a great quantity of lard, and make this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of restoring fractures in many ways, especially women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering restores the break and dislocation and twisting: take barium and ladanum and myrrh and asafetida and gum arabic and mugwort; 30 parts of mira and aloes; alechil VIIII parts; and make a powder, and mix with honey and vinegar; if their complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it has good composition, and restores the broken bones quickly, and saves many lives.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering that is good for twisting: take mugwort and vismalve, 30 parts; mira and aloes, 70 parts; acacia 6 parts; Armenian boric 30 parts, grind well, mix with water or honey, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of splinting involves joining and binding bones with their joints, and after the injury, applying soothing remedies, and using the bone to make the wound: take a new linen, mix with milk in ease and oil cooked, and place on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plaster wraps do not heal, but they are good for soothing swollen abscesses and properly cleaning the wounds.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of splinting that heals broken bones: take dried leaves of fig and earthy leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of splinting for restoring the break of the bone and to alleviate the swelling of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of vimalve, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, from each one a part; and crush, and mix with wine, and warm the limbs by this mixture, or mix it with moist coriander water, or cold water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of applying plaster more forceful than the first, when an abscess dura at the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the root of vimalve, and the seed of flax, balaustre, melilot, sansuce, and flowers of violet and camomile, from each one a part; and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras writes in his book that one should not put on a broken limb for restoration except the cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it must be between too hard and too soft.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that we must put a linen cloth over the broken limb, to restore, things dry and warm, like mirrors, aloes, and incense, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat a wound and pain is: take horse meat or crushed bones, or goose feathers, or vialle ( likely "violet" but also means  ' violet colored powder used in medicine'), and crush them equally, and put it into the wound, and let it be.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let the swelling go down after a while, and take care that if the patient does not feel any pain, nor does he lose his bone in its place; if not, do not let it be handled by hands for three days. But if pain comes to the limb, or it prurites, with rest or inflammation, haste, and remove it, and now put in a dressing, and take an sponge soaked in moist sea water, and plunge into the water, and lift up the limb, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the member rest for one hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, moistened with water or olive oil rose, and tie it around a nut, until you are sure that no infection has set in; and keep the inflammation away from the member, and let the pain be removed, then resume subtle handling, and not strain the limb too much as before; and handle subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has turned into pus and is red and painful and swollen, I have taken out all of it, and you must fill in and bind again, since it will return, as you did when you first made it even.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb that we have spoken of, do not release or untie it after three days or four or five; and never let it stay for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break is healed, and approaches the joining of the bone above. Then restrain it more tightly than before, and fatten up the flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is drying out more than necessary, know that no other remedies can come to it; so now take away the swelling from the member, and hasten to do what the foolish doctors do, which causes the member to be twisted: this is bad, and there are many painful remedies, and I see nothing else but loosening and over-tightening it.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of breakage
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of breaks, and various forms, and the causes are determined; for there are breaks that are made by striking with a spear, and the collarbone is fractured through the shoulder joint which lies beneath the bone, just as it happens from a blow or a fustigation; and hence this kind of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Where the spear strikes through the bone from above to pierce it, and this kind of break is called "absolute"; and there are two kinds of injuries resulting from these two types of breaks: great ones and small ones.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has a puncture or a wound, or a fracture of the collarbone, or cutting into a stone, or hitting on a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is persistent fracture, which approaches just to the skin on the bone below, or above the bone, and this wound is big or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is covered by a thin layer of skin just like our own flesh, and there is a small crack, and for this reason, such a fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with a piece of stone or falling, or by some similar thing, and the bone fragment enters into the space of the bone, and the bones are so swollen as they would be when the blacksmith heats up the black iron on the anvil; it goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those who have moist bones such as the head of an infant, and it occurs in all these kinds of fractures so that small fragments are separated like stones.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by pulling apart their parts, and investigation has been done, and by the corruption on top of them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of hair is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs it upwards, if it opens up the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be careful about accidents in patients, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, emission of speech, extension, pausing, fever, eyelids swelling and redness, and other similar dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any extraordinary accidents, and you expect salvation, as soon as you begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when it comes to you first for treatment, and it is in winter, so it is fitting to pull out the bone before the fourteenth day at night, that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, so hasten to pull out the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the wound below the bone will be corrupted, and accidents that we have mentioned will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone break comes just next to the covering of the brain, so it is fitting that you split the broken part in this way: and take the head of the patient who is dying, and uncover above the bone in all possible ways, and according to the shape of the wound as best you can, and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or the abscess is exposed, so you should assist with it according to what is needed, and it is that you fill the hollow place with moist cloth soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calm, and be sure of no further bleeding; then begin to extract the bone, and this is done in two ways of work: one way is that you cut at the tight cutting beforehand, and it is like this form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then after this cut, a more thorough cutting is done than before.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have to do several cuts of different sizes, some of three and others of more length, with pointed edges and made of iron, and doing them lightly so as not to strike the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, it is wise that you pierce through it, so that with cuts you administer with tapers, not by piercing too deeply, lest the point go beyond the bone of the skull, and on top of the point, there should be a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, so that each comes in its place according to the measure of the bone, so that you have tapers for all test; and this is the form of the three kinds of tapers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	Injuries that pierce through the bone are such that you place a stick in there on top of the bone, and turn it back to your two hands until you know whether the bone is pierced; then put the stick another time after a little while apart, and do so all around, then cut at the incisions the space between the pertus, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take out the bone from your hand, or from any of the instruments you have, such as tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you pierce the bone and take it out, if some remaining part is left on the bone at all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it should be more subtle and more precise than the others; and if no small bones or scales are found, if the bone can be easily removed from any of the instruments; then cure the wound by applying tenses and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of work is that which Gallien says, who is more skillful; and he speaks very loudly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where or at which the break opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you place below the head of this incision lens-shaped, because this is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut into one part, and the parts are affected in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then using a small hammer above, you should copy lightly the bone all around, and be well guarded of the cloth that is under; if it is rough against the bone, cut lightly, for cutting the bone easily, because one cuts badly with pain, and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone is broken and pierced only just beneath the skin, and the bone is struck so that it has small pieces, then cover again with that roughness, and remove the scales from the subtle rasp which you must have in various quantities, to fit each person as comfortably as possible, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have before many rough rasps, and after finer ones, and do not stop doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, it is fitting to fit according to its direction; and this is something that has not been replied by anyone who put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sutures are exposed, it is fitting to tie a linen strip according to the quantity of the wound, and apply rose oil in it, and place it over the wound; then take another strip doubled into two or three, and anoint it with wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first strip; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you don't bind too tightly the suture, but rather let it heal slowly until the swelling is gone; then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of vinegar, and incense powder, and other similar things; and make a powder from these things, and apply it to the wound, and administer the medicines so that they may be absorbed through mastication; and beware that the wound is completely closed, lest you leave on it the suture or assemble a bow, for when a bow is assembled over the skin of the brain, it gets corrupted and causes great harm to the patient, because when something sharp is placed on top of the suture, it causes necrosis from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Precautions then, if no other accidents come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful with doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a black spot does not come up except by the medicine we have placed on it, which has virtue, then it is fitting that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue I wrapped, and apply it to the wound; then perform the cure with cures as needed, until he becomes sane.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Which of these have been broken into two pieces, or the one alone, for these are two bones; and that which is below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists, and then becomes sound.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is fitting that you pour your small oil or resin into the break, and put it inside your thumb index, and in the pouch so that the bone comes back to its natural figure; and do this gently, so that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If they break in the upper part of the neck and cannot come to life again, so you should place an equal amount at the head of one inch a large rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the break is of two parts, you should do the same thing, and hasten to restore life on the first day if you can; but if not, after the seventh or fifteenth day, when the abscesses are calmed down, then boil with wool wrapped around the neck in order to cover up the break which is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you pour the other into that place, if there is a break; and let the tents be as thick as they fill up the gaps of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said that the restorer said we must moisten the tents in butter, and move each one every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It doesn't seem right to me, but it is likely that they are moist in the making of both of honey and flour, then let the tent stretched out until the bones harden, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at no time put on ointment of onions in its place, and if it has a swollen lump around, and keeps the wound still, then blow into the patient's mouth and see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, put a crust or cotton soaked in rose oil or in a poultice of dung.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come, put plaster on due to before, made of flour of sesame and powder of incense, mixed with honey, then put light strips on it and do not bind the wound; and if the bruise in the neck is small and broken into little pieces, if you take suitable instruments for this, then cut the incision and the treatment for wounds that are hard to clean, and sewing, if he has no wound inside the abscess, then apply plaster and put cainches of plumb, until he be cured.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the tooth extraction of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is cut below, and there is no wound hidden, only a slight fracture without splintering or breaking into multiple pieces, if one notices lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is advisable, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your left index finger inside the patient's mouth; and if it is on the left side of the jaw, put your right index finger into the same place, gently push the fracture inside and apply pressure with the other hand, even though there be hidden.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is twisted to the right side, it is advisable that you stretch out two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth happen, or fracture, so the strain on one thread of gold or silver or silk, then put the broken jaw on the surface and coat it with fat; and put up a double layer; and put up one well-made needle or piece of leather long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the muscle that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, so the dislocation is done three days, and then put it back to what was changing; and apply plaster on top, with powder from ground wheat or sesame, after you have applied the fat; and put on a linen cloth light, and if the plaster sets, and the patient’s disposition does not change, let him remain for as long as he heals; many times he heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes from a wound, so to speak, then do what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, then reward yourself with no piece of bone left after it has been removed; so subtlety in removing the bone is considered acceptable.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then expand it as much as necessary according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces of bone, and it does not stay in place at all, then count the wound, if it is wide, and apply some suitable dressing to it, to heal it so that it becomes sound.
de la forcele	of the swellings.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force is broken multiple times on the shoulder, and there are three ways it can be broken: or it is broken and separated in two parts, with fragments, and it is lighter to restore; or there is a break with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the wounds are in such cases when the break is with an open wound, that you have two ministers: one who applies the balm to where the force is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break on your own, so that the form is as it should be, and there be no appearance or swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to stretch further, put an iron ring over the shoulder of the sick person, round and made of cloth or linen, so large as needed; then stretch the wound and bind the ring with your hand, so that the break is set in its proper form.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If the fire cautery cannot be applied to the forehead because it comes out in full, it is advisable that the patient should lie on his back with his hat over his shoulders, and have a warm drink poured into his shoulder until the bones of the forehead are lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the fracture to your two hands; if you find broken bones, it is advisable that you cut them; and carefully remove the pieces lightly, and if the bones cannot be joined together because of any swelling, cut into one of the incisions you have made; but place the forehead with this instrument, to ward off the syphilitic.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not made of wood, and should be as large as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and have two ends, just as you see, and one should be wide and the other narrow, just as is the routine of the wound that you have made when you broke the bones; and when you are certain of a swelling, cut the wound, and if the routine is small, or you doubt the swelling, then use the wounded area with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes upon it, so that it moistens the dressing in oil of roses and in ash and in wine, and puts it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is sensitive to wounds and swelling, is that you place the bone over the ointment of powder from the mill and of buckwheat and wheat flour, and put light plasters on top, and if necessary, put a spear below the joint; then take a great bandage of one palm's width, and put double plasters on top of the plaster, and the ointment; then take a fine needle of three dobs in length and six in width, and wrap it around that bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the needle above the fracture, and turn the bandage up towards the neck, and below the joint, so that the joint is still, and not painful; and pull each part tight, and when you see that the limb holds the fracture in place, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the limb is conformed, and you release the binding; and make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow below the joint, to lift the assistant up high; so as to alleviate the swelling of the fracture by the tightening of the shoulder, or by tying the arm to the neck, and not releasing if it happens again, for twenty years.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder is broken or displaced, keep it in its place by touch; if the limb appears according to the shape of the break, and straightens itself according to its natural form, in all possible ways that you can. Then put on the limb powder from the mill with a great amount of wine and fine pieces, and tie tight over the limb with a double cloth; then place upon it a large and subtle stake, one piece larger than the shoulder, and carefully remove it from any point of the shoulder, so that you may apply powdered stitches of linen on the stake, so that the stake cuts evenly; and then bind it tightly to its proper place, so that the stake does not move from its place, and examine each joint every day; and whenever he complains, tie tight again, and put an equal amount of bandage over the limb, for the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number has been completed, release it, and be sure, for it will not be legless from being bound too tightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a piece of the bone has burst forth and pointed downwards outside its skin, and below it is not clean, then push upwards and make the bone, and do as we have said for relieving an abscess in a painful place.
de la brisure dou pis	of the broken foot.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The flesh is never broken in its middle, but it happens often, and it breaks frequently outside.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downwards and causes great pain to the patient, and lacks warmth, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the vein on the broken bone, and the feeling in the limb becomes worse.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And restoration is to have the patient lie on his back, and put a cloth between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the two ribs with his hands, and subtly place equal pressure in all ways that he can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply plaster and strips over the subtle part of salt, or of another light material, and tie them tightly around the broken bone, so they do not move; and turn the knot round to the back, and tighten immediately, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it loosens, re-tighten it; and if he wishes to untie, because of corruption or itching that comes to him, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie, and scrape the plaster, and address those who came from this by means of cures; then remove the plaster, and bind tightly until he is healed.
de la brisure des costes	From the breaking of the sides
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	He knows that the breaking of sides comes only from their large back after the spine, and their chest, and bends due to them being swollen; and he feels it very badly at the examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedies are that you set the break equal if possible.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on plaster and bind with a stake if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of sides inclines towards the belly, he feels the patient very great pain and puncturing, like pleurisy, because the bone pokes the membrane; and there is nausea, and vomiting, with great bleeding, and that's from a serious illness, and the old ones have put in great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	If there are those who say it is suitable to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to calm the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, unless an abscess forms in the flesh, if it has come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, to cure it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that no one should put vacuum tubes on the limb, to suck out the humors, and it seems right, but there is doubt that the vacuum tube does not attract the superficial humors of the limb because of its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that no one should cover the limb with a moist linen in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to straighten the curvature of the limb, then either be cured with the cure of pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient if he feels great pain because of a bone that presses on his intestines, and doubt is with him, then it is fitting to break up the bruised area of the broken rib, and it is fitting to put something under the instrument to protect the wound; and thus one must pierce the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound if they are large, and cure the patient with plaster, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess comes forth, then put on moist cloths in rose oil, and put under the patient; cure while the abscess is drawn to the level where it must be incised, and if pus accumulates above the chest or where it needs to be drained, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of a broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is no break in the bone at the neck of the shoulder, and little happens when it bends; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to you and you see whether it will be healed or not, if you prepare yourself so that if you see your hands become soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that these conditions are mortal and occur in many ways; if they are silent and feel well when you strain them and pick at them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient is cured, if medicine is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing occurs at the spine of the back, and you know whether it will heal or not, prepare yourself if the fingers are softened, and if they are affected by accidents, when they fall towards your hands, and your back bends with violent movement and excretion without voluntary effort; and when someone is aware of its presence on his abdomen, it falls with involuntary excretion.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	He knows that death is near: if he does not labor in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident did not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the healer should reward him if he has an abscess cold, if he puts on hot oil or oil of myrrh or butter of beeves, until it is pacified; then puts on a warm compress and ties it with a bandage, and commands the patient to rest; and does not lie down on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones are severed, it is to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if they are great, with a suture, then treat the wound with bandaging wrapped in cloth, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the knees", take out your left hand pouch and put it equal to the other hand's power, then put the compress and splint on, if you have need; then bind him, and if he has a severed bone, cut off, then remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of a bone break of the haunch
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the haunch is broken, and if it has, if not because of a little softening at the head; then let them cut long and decline to the pardentens, and it will come to the patient pain in the same place, point, and swelling where the break was.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, until you are above the break; and see which way the break is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head alone, then tie up that break, so long as it has its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then lie the patient on his belly, so that the restoration of that break becomes clear.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have made it even, then put on the plaster, then put on a stake of wood or iron, and restrain the break, so that it does not move; and apply the plaster under the ribs, until they are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes up, do not touch it, until the abscess is eased, and put on what we have previously said; and then return to restoration, and restrain as needed, without any additional harm; this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder break.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which lies between the shoulder and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of two manners: where one manner is to take a straight stick of bone, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Instruct the patient to bind both shoulders with two bands, and place them high, then tie the bandage around both arms until they are swollen; then put a poultice on the broken arm in the shoulder, so it may be eased, and put a covering of wood under the joint; then put a bandage around any weighty thing, which the servants will stretch out; then put the splint back into place with your hands assembled together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to turn the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck; then command two servants to tie the one who holds above the break to his hands, and the other below all the bindings, and stretch each one out to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then tighten both the lower and upper bindings around the break, and have each of the servants stretch out to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	In case of a shoulder fracture near the head of the shoulder, so that you place one straight thread below the humerus, and another towards the bone, below the break; and if the fracture is towards the elbow, it is so advisable to put one lighter thread gently, with effort, until the break is equal on both the joint and the bone; then set the break, as needed, and bind it, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess comes, and it is not bound for seven days, put a moist cloth on it in ease and in rose oil, until the abscess is eased; then bind it, and the way of binding it is that you place plaster on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or under the breastbone; put a bandage, and bind onto the shoulder joint, and onto the arm, so that the arm is in its own place, unless some thing prevents it, or if the bones are loose.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bones do not move, then use esthetics, and place a larger and stronger stake on top of the break, and have two stakes between each stake, with one stake so large that it passes over the break three times from each part; then strain above the stakes, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on breaks.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the position of the stakes and the straining, as we have said, in the wound where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess, if it does not form within seven days, as we have said; then look at each one of three days the bond, which prurites or swells, neither comes to life, nor brings on inflammation to the member because it is too tightly strained.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if such accidents do not happen, then let him remain still for three days or more, and the patient lies on his back with his hands on his stomach; and he places the shoulder above on one big cushion of equal wool, and looks at each hour of the day whether the figure of the broken member does not move, or is loosened by the ties; so if it adheres by virtue of medicine, and he gives him food that we have previously placed before him in a similar manner, so that the meat be finely ground; and when it comes to take it again, then it is stiff.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reunited after forty days of being in this position; and therefore one must disjoin them and administer a bath and medicine for the joint to set properly.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If the constriction is tied up tightly and blocked, he should wait for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two "fossicles", one small and one large, because the small one contains the pouch; and the other large one is under, towards the small bone; sometimes only the large fossil breaks, or sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fossils are broken, the restoration is light and easy, and healing occurs; but when the large ones break, it is a bad healing, and more grievous than when both together were broken.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small fossil that has been broken alone, then you should gently extend it and put it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If the great swelling is, then they must draw it out more strongly; and stretch upwards in the cussin, and pull up the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the petis lower than the others, so that the patient crosses over himself, and the cussin before him higher, that the patient may not suffer any labor; then extend the minister's hands to the part below his hand, or to the joint, and one other minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no shortage of bone that can fit the joint, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make up for it and put in the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If he has broken his limb, I have already spoken to the singular doctor about it; so take the care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration, there appear swellings on the skin, then if a dressing of rose oil made with olive and white wax is applied to it, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind up the dressing gently, until the swelling subsides.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then apply the rose oil, and put on an ointment of powder from the mill with a lot of vinegar, until you cover it with the splints, and make the splints as strong as possible, and just a little more wide than the others; and see that there should be six splints or more, in one disposition: whether the break is in one bone or two; and tighten more above the break than elsewhere, and every day less when you remove it, as I have said at the beginning of the doctor; and make sure the dressings are soft and moist on top of the break, and not too hard or sharp; and use the thread from which they have strained, either linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accidents happen to the limb, so that it pricks, as when it pricks happens to the limb, then it is advisable to raise the limb in hot water until the prickling stops, and let the limb not be too tightly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the bandage, and if the bonds are loose and the bones are laid bare, and a similar thing happens.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you cannot apply the poultice to the limb because it is too tightly bound, then it is advisable that you loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the inflammation subsides, and then reapply the bandage.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things come to the patient, who does not suffer from it, for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	How long the fingers are bent on his neck, and so that his neck is even, and he guards against movement and numbness, and lies on his back; and you know that this break is restored in thirty days or in forty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the humors and the complexion of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that behind the hand, there are often two fractures, and only pain occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And if the finger of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient should cross his arms and sit up straight always; then he places his hand on an extended back, and extends his broken fingers, and puts them in alignment as best they can; and he applies plaster and casts, so that abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the injury; and it is wrapped up in one fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	In case of a fracture in the padded area within the belly of the foot, make a spear of drapery and instruct the patient to tie it around his broken foot; and then tighten an arched rope, so that the weight is as great as the weight of the foot of the hand, and tighten it, just like it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is in the finger, it is advisable to put an arch on top and another below the foot; so that the fingers are straight and upright, then tie them all around the hand, and anchor the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture comes to either of us on the thumb, if it is swollen, make it even, just like it needs to be; and tighten with the foot, and if you see that putting an arching rope small to lift the fracture doesn't move; and if the fracture is in another finger, whether in the index or one of others, put it even, and tie it to the healthy joint next to it; or tie all of them together at once, as much as you can, or put on an arching rope, just like the swelling; and be careful with restoration and disposition of the abscess site, and heal those who come to you, just like I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the cross breaks
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the cross is often broken, and if it is seen that the joint turns both in front and behind; and the restoration is as one binds above the break, and also below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient swells on his face, then each of these ministers extends his bandage to his equal part; and this is when the break is mended with the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the cross, so that either one of the ligatures towards the finger, and the others towards the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the groin, and then so that either there are ligatures towards the groin, and others above; then put on the splints the bone equal to its two hands, as much as its nature dictates, and then apply the plaster, and the ligature, lest there come infection.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess hot, then let him calm it first, and then return to his work and his treatment; the relief is done in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap up the limb in a bandage for two or three days, and keep the swelling, then turn the leg so that the toes reach to the root of the nail, and pour one long cloth between the thigh and leg, from below, and tie it tightly above; then twist above the leg and above the thigh the bandage, then put on the broken limb stitches, and put a stitch on the bone of the leg; then wrap soft cloth around between the leg and the thigh to tighten equally the ligature, then start to tie in figure three or four times above the break; and as you go up further with the break, and less the straining; then hold two threads of the cloth that you poured between the leg and the thigh, and tie three stitches that are on top, then return below to the head of the cloth, until you see the bone; and the straining, if it does not move from its place, then leave it so, then when no new abscess or swelling or other appearance comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	In case there is one, if the joint is dislocated and addressed as described, so that it is just like we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grip, then it is advisable to keep them, if possible; and if not, then it is advisable to split the limb, and cut away; and treat as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is broken like that when we put in stitches, just as we do in the shoulder and arm; it won't come loose, so by that restoration nothing will happen to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And knows that the skin is restored in a few days, or perhaps less than that, or perhaps more, according to the various differences of complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gouty vein
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	When there is a fracture of the neck, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it's only a tear or separation, and it causes all wounds and pain, and the wound is deep.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put equal that which is torn onto its two ends, until it's assembled again, then apply plaster, and put a round iron nail if necessary, and bind it as needed, then follow all the dispositions we have said about other fractures, just like the abscess and similar things; apply to each accident what is fitting for him, until he's healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	They say that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all other fractures occur when it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done as equally as the arm, and the wound is entirely one. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the big bones are broken, feel great pain and see it well; and turn below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And then apply an extension, and put it equal, and tie the bands equally; but note, if the break is uneven, and there are more pieces, that the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when you have completed your work, so take two faxes of gauze that stain the leg from one side and the other, and are long enough from the knee down to the joints; then wrap them both around the limb, and the bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and no one should give too much gauze to the length of the leg, and if it's stiff, and it's wrapped, and one puts on the leg to ward off movement, and it is properly done in the break where it has been injured; and move each limb every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the bone fracture of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come from any break, but sometimes the bone is broken and has to be put back in its place, and there are no other injuries except for swelling.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it has a bone break and you see the bones overlapping one another, put the malaide's foot on the ground so they do not move, as if they were going to run, and then put your foot on their own, so that the bones are raised, then press them tightly until they come back into place; then apply plaster and poultices on, and put a small wooden splint on both sides of the foot with two pins, then tie it firmly around, and other things as you require.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, you will find the joint loose again, because you will discover that the bones are in place, whether they are broken, or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	Instruct the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if he pricks at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken of them; and cure each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break in the bone at the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if she lays it (flat) and enlarges, then incline her to the back part of the back, and hold her there behind; then fill the wound with cotton as thick as my finger; then tie down the woman, lift up her back little by little, and then sew the cotton, until it comes into the opening of nature, and returns the bone with (the same) thickness; and when she wants to urinate, if she has pulled out the cotton, then put it back in, and thus do this for seven days or more: if she is restored to health, and you see, take a vessel of wool, and tie a rope around the broken joint, and pour all the vessel into nature; then blow into the rope until the vessel is emptied inside: nature will return the break; then fill with cotton, and let it be so for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the thumb, in a man or woman, is broken, restore it as we have said about the os of the hainche; and these nearby fractures are not concealed from one who puts his study and his use there, and takes heed of this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For these breaks signify an increase in more dire dispositions on the right path of restoration; therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take an owl's gizzard and apply it to the wound; then wrap strips around, and let him be wrapped up for three days or more, and he will soon be healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it's large, such that the bones of the scapula or shoulder or similar areas become healed now, so that the remedies we have said testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the wound is sound, then set back the splinter of glass, if you have nothing else, then restart to heal the break in the same hour, or on the next day, unless an abscess comes upon the flesh.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If an abscess comes upon the flesh, then let the restoration on the next day, until the splinter is appeased, and do not touch it or come near for a week, lest you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and appears near the knee uncovered, it is fitting that you put it at a light point with your fingers, to an extent that is small.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not fitted to be put equal with your hands, and the instrument that is made of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width depends on the quantity of the wound; then it is the work of the surgeon to take three or four, according as he needs in each cure of a break, and so it should be strong and one middle finger large, not deforming under compression on the limb at your request, and so the middle finger ahead, and big from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the cuboid bones should be placed above the visible bone of the head; and once a blow, until it returns to its normal state, so that the one corresponds to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the splints cannot well take hold of the bone, so that it is advisable to copy the head of the bone, until the splints have a chance.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot set the bone as we have said, so that it is advisable to copy the head of the bone with a suitable instrument, such as a knife or saw, at your ability; then take back what remains in the bone from harshness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it is known that he is not in his natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its place, then make a hole in the girdle of wine vinegar black, and properly clean it; and do not put anything else on the wound except for oil, lest it come to rot and corruption; then administer remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the break; and many times they have done this like fools, and have brought the patient either death or corruption once; and so the gentleness of the other breaks are softer and more gentle.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is serious or large and you doubt that more accidents will come upon it, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, so it is not wise to apply remedies; but instead cover it with a bandage, stiff, in place of remedies, ties.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two that the wound has healed at the bowels, then check what you have put above on wine, and apply salve to healing wounds, as ointment quadrupharmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is fitting that you should remove the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is softened and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is fitting that the limbs be applied in such a way that the bowels run down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the wound transgresses and it cannot heal but by re-opening of the bowels, see that you know where there are small fragments of bone, because it is fitting that you should treat the wound with cautery, and remove all these small pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the leg, or another kind of corruption, so it is fitting that you cure it, according to what he said in his chapter before this.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and opens up on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar bones in the great members, do not treat it immediately, because many die, but leave it until it purifies; by chance it will heal after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can, and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come on from the supuration.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and what an ugly thing to see: the figure of the limb; and by chance, it cannot do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	One limb which is weak after childbirth.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and stays after the weak limb and subtle movements, so happens for many causes: because one was too tightly bound and did not stay as it should have; or because there are too many ligatures, and cannot come the nourishing power to the member; or for excessive rising; or for great movements, neither in its hour nor otherwise; or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until it is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and ease; then put powder on the member, so that the powder attracts great nourishing to the member, and the blood rises often from the watery flesh, until the nourishing reaches the member; and return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	One limb twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	If the member is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken, and the form of the limb is ugly, it is not advisable to rely on natural healing; do not believe false ones who say that one must break the limb again, for many fools have done this in our land, and these operations are blamed, and lead to great harm, and sometimes death. Unless the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then it is wise to apply an astringent moistened with hot water, or boiled herbs such as violets, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and let it be applied moistened with vinegar well done, and take the muscivage of violets, and confine it with lard or olive oil of sistrum, and apply again; or take greasy figs, and crush them with flour of millet, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is opened by constant and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted one is hardened and hardened, like stone, and needs to be cauterized with iron, so that it may cover just onto the bone at the subtle incision lightly; and add cushioning and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to any of them, so that it must now be reset carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toda voie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters of dislocation of the shoulder joint to be done in a specific order.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jawbones are dislocated in two ways: either they are slightly detached from their places and softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chin, causing the patient to have difficulty keeping their mouth closed, and their tongue can't be kept still with the words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When small dislocations occur, they return to their normal position through multiple procedures.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and fulfilled, it is recommended to reset them immediately, and not delay it; and in such a manner that the ministers show you how to apply pressure to the patient's head, and pour some medicine from one of their hands into the root of the dislocated mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is by II parts; and the other two fingers are reserved, for equalizing; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And then pour equal amounts until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns with inflammation, especially if both mandibles are dislocated together, pour on hot water and oil until they return easily; do not delay returning to normal, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed tightly with molasses made from oil rose and wax, then tie it lightly with soft threads; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his joints be between two cushions, so that he does not move at all in left or right hand, nor does he struggle to break the bone, but receives gentle food until the pains are gone, and the mandibles are numb; and then take what he wants lightly, and do not trouble himself to open the mouth to drink and swallow, until the mandible is well numbed and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be fixed in their place within an hour, and are not converted to their own position, then fever and vomiting come on, and occasionally diarrhea, and sometimes even vomiting blood.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it's a sign of death; and many have died from it in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the fist
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fist cannot be loosened from the chest within it and the finger, and is dislocated every time in spite of all effort, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient stiffens on their back, and extends their arms; and then presses the wrist against his palm, and it returns; then puts on plaster and bandage, and binds it; and the head which was opposite to the shoulder cannot be loosened; unless not, and if it becomes dislocated again, then he is reset to its place, as we have said; then puts on plaster and bandage, and binds it, and commands the patient to rest until they are healed; and so is restored the shoulder joint when it is reduced to its proper place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways the shoulder can be dislocated: one way is that it dislocates at the base of the humerus below; and the second is at the elbow joint; and by chance it sometimes dislocates above, which happens rarely, and does not dislocate either behind the shoulder or inside the arm; but often it slips down towards the bone of the shoulder, just as frequently in those who have little strength, because they quickly become weakened; in those who have some strength, it slips loose at the joints, and returns to the joints.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some people that they hit or crush the shoulder with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary to examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when they slide down towards the shoulder joint, and you will find a difference between the sick and healthy shoulders, and you will find various differences manifest among them; and you will find a depression in the shoulder head, and below the shoulder, the head of the shoulder, just like one another thing; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its normal position, nor can they move from any movement; and also, if it is displaced upwards, it is not hidden, because you will find it manifestly at the shoulder; and this kind of dislocation is not too difficult to treat, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The doctor should lift the hand of the sick man upwards, then put your fingers below the elbow, and lift the joint at force upwards to the level; and the doctor lifts the hand, and stretches it upwards because he is putting it down; if it comes together quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come together as we have said for many days afterwards, it is fitting that the sick man be bathed in hot water; and he should be treated with an immediate soothing and softening, like a decoction of althaea, fenugreek, and meliloton in hot water, and so he should be treated. Then put him on his back, and place a linen bandage under the elbow joint, neither too loose nor too tight, then place the fingers of your other hand on top of the elbow, lift the shoulder joint with virtue, and treat the patient's hand; and another minister applies pressure to the patient's head so it does not move; the shoulder returns perfectly now, and if you see that he recovers according to this manner: and thus you should make him be present before a larger person who is standing straight towards his side, and pour water into the armpit of the sick man, lift the elbow joint up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister treats the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then weigh him with anything heavy, and the dislocation will now return.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And in another way also: and it is as follows: and take a long iron bar and bury it in the ground, so that the joint can be straight like the piston, and not too large nor too small; then put on top of the patient, but only if he has soft skin above, and his joints are straight with the length of the stick; then stretch out his hand towards another part, forming a joint, and the joint will return to its place immediately; and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take an iron bar from two arms long and four fingers wide, which has the head on top to fit into the hollow below the armpit, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Instruct the patient to lie under the head with a cloth wrapped around it so that the wound does not bleed into the face, then place the bandage on the face of the patient; and extend both arms over the body of the fistula, and tie the strap around the body, and the arm at the head of the hand, then lift the arm above the elbow, and let the hands down, and leave the body hanging from another part: now is the time to reset.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, in whatever manner, you should put below the fistula a spear of wool equal, then put on the bandage a poultice made of powdered flour with incense and myrrh on all the shoulder and around, then strain from beneath the fistula immediately, and turn the tie onto the poultice, and wrap the hand around its neck, and so let the hands stay thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is fitting that he moves little, until the members are comforted, for he will be cured faster; and then move more after five days or seven, and he will be healed; and if he is firm and not softened, he is already healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen due to moisture that has occurred, or for another reason, it is fitting that you administer cautery three times, as he is placed in front of the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days he becomes dislocated again, and the joint will not stay in place, and cannot lift even one arm up, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder have been pierced or stretched or softened; and know that the joint has never returned to its proper place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs at the wrist and elbow, or behind, is done by impulse and stretching of hands, and it serves another joint; treatment until he is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes grief to the limb, and slow movement, apply the patient many times to hot water, until that grief is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder cut.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Which joints of the shoulder are displaced at certain times, and again return; and if they are displaced from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocations are not repaired, because it is seen clearly and felt clearly; and each displacement corresponds to a shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, so that you can see it open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset him thus, so that abscesses come out when they do, because if abscesses come out then, it will be pain to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; for this one is worse than others, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And if it is restored, when they can be reset, then, when you extend your hand to both hands; let his arms be spread out, and his hands laid out according to the cut in front, above, and below, and push the joint into its socket or to the root of his palm, until he regains his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is dislocation of the shoulder, so it returns when he doubles his hand to its own hand, and with fear from the root of the palm where it is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, so apply strong extension; and let two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, when you have wrapped a double length and width bandage around it; and when the joint meets the joint in the arm, apply oil to any point for softening the joint, then make the joint firm, until it returns; and when it is in place again, apply plaster hard with a small amount of wine, and tighten the strain, and bend the arm on the neck of the patient, and let it remain for some days, then release.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, so loosen the ligament and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, reapply the plaster and the ligament, and let it be for some days, until it becomes firmly set; then loosen.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels great pain after the joint is moved, and it holds, then bathe him well and rub him gently, and press until he becomes soothed; or put on the joint a sheep's fat mutton wad, then let it be for one day and one night, then pull it, and put the wound in the bath; and when it sweats, then rub the joint temperately, then put back the wad, and then enter him into the bath; and do this two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see, put on a warm moist poultice with fat and bind it around; for it will return to its original place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand becomes dislocated, and the return is lighter than others; therefore it must be returned to its place as soon as possible, in the same spot where it was dislocated, so that the swelling may subside or the abscess form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the remedy is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and stretch out your hands, and straighten your fingers, so that you place your palm on the appearance of the joint, and press it down until it subsides; whenever you notice that it has returned to its normal state, then look carefully whether it is well in its proper place; then have the patient put his elbow on a table while stretching and returning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if there is a dislocation at the back of the hand, so instruct the patient to place his back on his hand on the table, and then look up to that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if it now returns, that is well, for if the tension of pus in the abscesses is calmed and left so, then let him continue to look in that same way again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you can't put him back to health after some days, the joint will remain twisted; and it's not good for the patient to suffer anything as long as his hands are swollen, and no one can press or strain any thing: then see that the nerves have been struck, or the arteries, for if there is no other remedy but to drain with cautery on the case, and by chance it will be better, nothing else seems to help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are straightened, place the dressing we have mentioned on them, then stretch and leave it for a day, then remove and leave in this way.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and it has no wound, then apply a poultice of warm water, and rub it so that it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the thumb of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	They are never re-dislocated at that place, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the belly; therefore, apply the thumb, and pour into its pockets until it returns to normal, then support the head of the thumb, and move it towards the place where it is dislocated; and let it rest for two days, and then put it straight that day. And keep it bound, as we have said, and loosen it one day, and make it move, and bind the joint; do this often, until it tightens, and do so similarly, if it is re-dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals. And do so in the same way, when it is dislocated from another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	A dislocation of the shoulder
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck joint is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, if there is no cure, for the dead man hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that if there is no voluntary movement, nor can it be held in place, and many times a member becomes soft, or both legs or both arms are affected; and often the dislocation occurs in four parts; this one who becomes fixed at the back is called "gilbosite": the healer says so that if gilbosites come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that one which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient practices of cures are told with great words, and it brings no real benefit; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I dis that in the goutiness which comes to the foot in front, there is no cure with a lancet; and so too that which comes straightly on both sides, and cannot be cured with fire alone except that which comes directly to the back, as I said; and it is that the patients are stretched out on their face in one place, and have strain underneath them, so they do not bleed; then strike a small stone at the head into the earth firmly, and another by the ankle, and tie one rope behind the ankles of the sick person, and another around the hams and knees, and the calves; and two ministers watch the ropes, one to the head and the other to the ankle, among the two stones; and they should be well closed, the stone as we have said, and the splint meets its palms on the sharpened stick, until it comes back.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If they do not return by this cure, then take a table of three arms' length in height, and shave off the top of it, and place the patient on his side, and pour wine into the patient's nostrils, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put your fingers on the other end of the table, and press well, until he returns to the table; and if you see this done, do so by the turnet that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should stick two fingers on the top of the patient's head with one arm's length in height, and place two other fingers on his feet, so that there is a space of an inch between each finger, both above and below; and have one finger per cut, or when the turnet moves, so that they are firmly set in the earth, so they do not move; and among the cuts, let there be one finger turning, unless where the ties turn, and let there be two turning fingers of an inch in length for each turn, to make the turnet move; and then tie the ligament that is between the joints to the turnet towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet to the other turnet, and each master turns his turnet all along the ligature, and the masters put the spine in its place as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, 
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the shoulder and the elbow come only with dislocations, not with other joint problems; and the joint of the elbow is divided into four parts: inside and outside, and in front of and behind; and more inside those, less to dislocation in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations is that when one joins the ill leg to the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the patient's knees are more open than the healthy ones, and cannot double their knee joint by fire; and the swelling which is located near the abscess is hot, because the head of the scapula comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign that appears when it is on the outside, is that this accident is against the front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that person who have happened to him in front, are that he stands well with his leg according to the accomplishment; all seeable, do not double trouble his knee with pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and swells the groin, and when he walks, passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that person who have happened behind him, are that he cannot expand his knee, nor double it up, and is that leg twisted more than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the croup at the level of the lower ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	If the resemblance of this dislocation is found to be there again, when you have seen such displacements before, and it remains according to its condition, without any cure; then do not presume that he will recover.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that one where the dislocation is fresh, and it’s of four kinds of dislocation, if you hasten so that you return the joint, and put it inside and outside, and the limb moves with right and left; by chance if it returns, and has no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, so as to have to apply a strong minister and put the leg firmly on two hands, or tied with one bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand up in such a way that he presses down into his belly, then tightens a soft bandage over the crotch; and another tugs at the head of the limb; and they stretch up and down all once, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and stays there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's true.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If it's not so, then one should put treatment to its appearance When the dislocations are on the shoulder muscles, one should lift the patient above his shoulder, then tie him at the root of the collarbone, and the one that is under the angle, then tighten the ties upwards towards the angle, and towards the flesh; then take some other servants and encircle his arm, and embrace the heavy side of the collarbone, and extend it to the outside form: if he returns to his place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tie it in this manner as we have said, then one should bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope on both heels and on both knees; and so that the lame leg is extended twice more than the others; then let them hang from the head of a beam, and above the ground two arms long; then command one minister to embrace the collarbone, and have other ministers bind around with the patient, who form a tight circle, because the joint returns soon.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the surface, so gird the patient as we have said in one who has gout, and strain the limb properly, and on the knee also; then place two hot thorns, one on the head and one on the joint, then insert a hot iron between the cuneiform bones of the patient in the form; and plant moist drapery around it so that the patient does not bleed, then stretch each of these servants to him, and fix the dislocation with an equal grasp on his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not come back, place the patient on a bed, and press as we have said in the gout, and gird the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocations occur in front of it, you should extend the sick leg immediately, and according to what I have said; and put the joints on pain of being above the angry limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch away towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are on the outside, it is not advisable to extend the sick person below, nor lift them up from the ground, but rather to make them lie as if they had been dislocated on the outside, as we have said before, lying face down, and stretching out the limb as we have said earlier, and must press on the joint at the table; and will be when the patient extends their legs, and they are even; then add the pillows, and put an emplastrure, and a strain of a bandage, so that the hunch does not move; and if he rests for three days or four, then he is released, and puts on an emplastrure; and if you see that they are even, as before, then tighten the strain, just like before, and let him rest three days; then release him, and make him walk slowly, until his members are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of a shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The groin area can be dislocated in three ways: inward, outward, and backward; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his knee to his thigh, and if he does not hold onto his thigh, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all these things is that you seat the patient upright, and extend his leg if possible, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on top of your feet; then take hold of his groin with your hands, and press between them, then bend both sides of his groin; and another minister extends his leg, until the groin returns to its place, and the sign is that he holds his knee to his thigh lightly; and apply a plaster to it, and warm the knee with a cloth for three days or four, then lift it; and do not trouble the patient to move, until his limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not at all, then it is treated with great extension, just as we said in the treatment of the hare, until they become safe.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the toe dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The toes are sometimes swollen and sometimes completely dislocated, within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And if the signs are that the ankle is swollen and there is an attempt to pull it away from where it is dislocated: then it is lighter to lift, and one must stretch it lightly with hands only when it is swollen solely.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, it is fitting that you have the patient sit upright, and pull the tendons firmly by the leg, above the ankle; then grasp the foot with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then stretch it up high, and pour the foot into its place fully; and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and grasping the foot; if it returns, it is well; if not, if it recurs, because it returns; and if it cannot return so, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly fix a splint between his thighs, and tie tight drapes around, lest the patient bleed. Then pull the tendons of the thigh, and other ministers stretch the foot in their hands or to its bandage, as far up on the neck of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the splint be firmly fixed between the thighs of the patient so that the patient will not move when one stretches; then put tight girdles around the dislocation at the hands, and other ministers pull the healthy leg downwards, and the dislocation will return soon.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it comes to an injury at that point, so she applies the plaster and splints above, and the binding forms, and ties the foot to the leg, and guards those who are on top of the ankle behind, so that the bandage is not too tight; then let him stay for two days or three, and if he swells, apply a new bandage; then take it off on the fourth day or half-day, and care for the patient for four days; and if he goes beyond that time, it's no safety at all that he will dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes up on the leg, it is fitting to apply a poultice, just as we have said elsewhere, until he is well.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, it is fitting to extend them with work, and it's a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient if dislocations occur in no particular location of the back or foot, so it is appropriate to seat the patient either on a flat table or on an upright table, and place your foot on what appears from these jointures, then press with your foot firmly, until it comes round; and when it is even and there is nothing, place under the sole of the foot a flat table with two keys, then form the lock again, for three days, then release it; and make him rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wounds come with dislocations, and you try to restore them, many patients die: do not be presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have long experience of it, and unless you are pitiful, merciful, and delayed, do not be hard. Use soothing remedies at the beginning of things, especially antiseptics hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, unless you see no hope for recovery; and when you see hope, fix the limb now as soon as the abscess comes to life; and when the limb is fixed, administer soothing remedies again, and treat the wound as it seems fitting, with dry bandages; and if there is a dislocation with fracture, and small bones broken, set the bones, and do what we have said for simple diseases; and beware of entering into the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will be yours, unless your Creator has mercy on you, and gives you wisdom, and armor for your body.
Amen	Amen
